                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             MONEY MARKETS, COLLATERAL AND MONETARY POLICY

                                       Fiorella De Fiore
                                        Marie Hoerova
                                         Harald Uhlig

                                      Working Paper 25319
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25319


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2018




We would like to thank Saki Bigio, Stefano Corradin, Nicolas Crouzet, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, John
Leahy, Enrique Mendoza, Giorgio Primiceri, Vìctor Rìos Rull, Pedro Teles, our discussants
Juliane Begenau, Nicolas Caramp, Ikeda Daisuke, Luigi Paciello, Farzad Saidi, Saverio Simonelli
and Ivan Werning, seminar participants at the Bank of Portugal, European Central Bank, Norges
Bank, University of Heidelberg, Nova University, and participants at the 2018 Summer Institute
on Capital Markets and the Economy, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco conference on
Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy, the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, the CSEF conference
on Macroeconomic Issues after the Crisis, the 2017 Hydra Workshop on Dynamic
Macroeconomics, the ECB workshop on Money Markets, Monetary Policy Implementation and
Central Bank Balance Sheets, ESSIM 2017, SED 2017, and EEA 2016, for useful comments and
discussions. We are grateful to Johannes Pöschl, Luca Rossi and Maksim Bondarenko for
excellent research assistance. The previous version of the paper was circulated under the title
“The Macroeconomic Impact of Money Market Disruptions”. The views expressed here are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Central Bank, the Eurosystem,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Fiorella De Fiore, Marie Hoerova, and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Money Markets, Collateral and Monetary Policy
Fiorella De Fiore, Marie Hoerova, and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 25319
November 2018
JEL No. E44,E58

                                          ABSTRACT

Interbank money markets have been subject to substantial impairments in the recent decade, such
as a decline in unsecured lending and substantial increases in haircuts on posted collateral. This
paper seeks to understand the implications of these developments for the broader economy and
monetary policy. To that end, we develop a novel general equilibrium model featuring
heterogeneous banks, interbank markets for both secured and unsecured credit, and a central
bank. The model features a number of occasionally binding constraints. The interactions between
these constraints - in particular leverage and liquidity constraints - are key in determining
macroeconomic outcomes. We find that both secured and unsecured money market frictions force
banks to either divert resources into unproductive but liquid assets or to de-lever, which leads to
less lending and output. If the liquidity constraint is very tight, the leverage constraint may turn
slack. In this case, there are large declines in lending and output. We show how central bank
policies which increase the size of the central bank balance sheet can attenuate this decline.


Fiorella De Fiore                                Harald Uhlig
European Central Bank                            Dept. of Economics
Sonnemannstrasse 20                              University of Chicago
D-60314 Frankfurt am Main                        1126 E 59th Street
Germany                                          Chicago, IL 60637
and CEPR                                         and NBER
fiorella.De_fiore@ecb.int                        huhlig@uchicago.edu

Marie Hoerova
European Central Bank
Sonnemannstrasse 20
D-60314 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
marie.hoerova@ecb.int
1    Introduction

Interbank money markets are essential to the liquidity management of banks. They are also
important for monetary policy implementation as interbank rates are often central banks’ tar-
get rates. Money market trade is subject to a number of frictions, which displayed themselves
forcefully during the Global Financial Crisis, with the unsecured segment “freezing”(see, e.g.,
Heider et al. (2015)) and the secured segment facing “runs”due to haircut increases on riskier
collateral (see, e.g., Gorton and Metrick (2012)). Yet, the question of what impact the frictions
in bank liquidity management have on the broader economy is largely unaddressed.
    In this paper, we take a step towards understanding the impact of frictions in money
markets on bank lending, real activity and monetary policy. We develop a novel general
equilibrium model featuring heterogeneous banks, interbank money markets for both secured
and unsecured credit, and a central bank that can conduct open market operations as well as
lend to banks against collateral. As a particular advance compared to the existing literature,
banks may both face leverage constraints and liquidity constraints: the interaction of these
constraints is at the heart of our analysis. Each period in the model is sub-divided into
a morning and an afternoon. In the morning, banks choose their assets (loans, bonds and
money) and liabilities (central bank funding and deposits), subject to a leverage constraint as
proposed by Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2011). On the liability side,
central bank funding must be backed by bond collateral. Deposit funding is uncollateralized
but it exposes banks to idiosyncratic withdrawal shocks in the afternoon, as formulated by
Bianchi and Bigio (2013). These withdrawal shocks can be managed by borrowing or lending in
interbank money markets. Banks face an exogenous probability of being “connected,” defined
as the ability to borrow in the unsecured market in the afternoon. Those banks that are unable
to borrow in the unsecured market, the “unconnected” banks, can satisfy withdrawals either
by acquiring bonds in the morning to obtain collateralized funding in the private market in
the afternoon and/or by bringing money into the afternoon (self-insurance). All collateralized
borrowing is subject to a haircut, with haircuts in the private market being potentially different
from haircuts set by the central bank.
    Five inequality constraints on banks emerge as crucial: the “morning” leverage constraint,
a collateral constraint vis-a-vis the central bank and three short-sale constraints. We show that
one cannot a priori impose any of these constraints to bind or to be slack: on the contrary,
each of these may turn on or off and each can be crucial for the macroeconomic outcomes,

                                                1
as we traverse the parameter space and for different monetary policies. We view this as a
novel, intriguing and central contribution of our paper. Usually, a single inequality is studied
and equality is often imposed. By contrast, our five-dimensional inequality space offers a rich
set of interactions. Different parameter values then generate different types of bottlenecks,
which an astute central bank all needs to take into account and which we argue to be key to
understanding the financial system. We investigate the role of these constraints per conducting
a steady-state comparative static analysis, when varying the severity of a particular money
market friction and imposing a particular monetary policy. Given the high dimensionality of
the constraints space, we deliberately chose the steady-state comparative statics as the more
illuminating mode of analysis compared to a fully dynamic and stochastic, but likely opaque
approach. Additionally, with persistent money market frictions, a steady-state comparative
statics appears to be more appropriate in any case.
      Indeed, our modelling framework is motivated by two major and persistent money market
developments that occurred over the past fifteen years: a decline in the unsecured interbank
market and a corresponding increased reliance on the secured market, which consequently ex-
poses banks more substantially to the concurrent increase in collateral haircuts. We document
these developments using data for the euro area, but similar changes have been observed in
the US (see footnote 2 on the next page).
      The first development is documented in Figure 1. While the total turnover was split about
equally between unsecured and secured market segments in 2003, the turnover in the unsecured
market declined five-fold and was just five percent of total by 2017.1 The decline in the relative
importance of the unsecured market started several years before the global financial crisis of
2008, and further steepened with the onset of the financial and sovereign debt crisis in the euro
area.
      The second development is the declining value of assets used as collateral in the secured
market, which had two sources in recent years. First, there were large and abrupt increases
in haircuts on some asset classes. In the euro area, haircuts on government bonds of some
euro area countries increased to 80 percent or higher during the sovereign debt crisis (Table
1). Even outside the period of the sovereign crisis, in a relatively calm year such as 2017,
private market haircuts remained heterogeneous across countries and did not return to the
pre-crisis levels. At the same time, haircuts applied by the European Central Bank (ECB)
on the same collateral were much lower than private market haircuts and remained largely
  1
      By contrast, turnover levels in the secured market actually increased between 2003 and 2017.

                                                       2
stable throughout this period. Second, the stock of safe (AAA-rated) assets fell due to rating
downgrades, which reduced the availability of high-quality collateral that could be pledged in
the secured market. In the euro area, the downgrades also affected sovereign bonds, with the
proportion of AAA-rated government debt falling from 60 percent of total debt outstanding in
2003 to 20 percent in 2017 (Figure 2).2
    Different observers may attribute these two developments to different underlying causes.
For example, perhaps the private sector haircuts and high yields on certain sovereign bonds
reflect a dysfunctional system or a bad equilibrium, which the ECB appropriately seeks to
correct, see e.g. Roch and Uhlig (2018). Conversely, perhaps these haircuts are due to the
the appropriate rational assessment of default risks of the underlying bonds, while the ECB
haircuts are too small. These varying points of view are parts of a heated and contentious
debate in Europe, to which we do not wish to contribute in this paper. Instead, our focus is on
the response of the system, if these private haircuts increase compared to those charged by the
central bank, focusing on the benign branch of events, where no defaults occur. For that reason,
we do not explicitly model how these haircuts arise, but instead treat them as an exogenous
parameter. We view our results as a positive rather than normative analysis, providing an
important piece of an all-encompassing view. We likewise treat the fraction of “unconnected”
banks, which can only use the secured interbank market, as an exogenous parameter in our
analysis.
    We therefore provide two sets of steady state comparative statics scenarios, varying either
the fraction of unconnected banks or varying the private sector haircut on government bonds.
Both types of money market frictions force banks to either divert resources into unproductive
but liquid assets (bonds or money rather than productive capital) or to de-lever (raise fewer
deposits as it is deposit funding that exposes banks to liquidity shocks). This leads to less
lending and output in the economy. If the liquidity constraint is very tight, the leverage
constraint may turn slack. In this case, there are large declines in lending and output, in the
absence of central bank intervention. Policies that increase the size of the central bank balance
sheet (outright purchases or collateralized lending) alleviate the bank liquidity constraint by
expanding the money supply and attenuate the decline in lending and output. They may, of
   2
     In the US, the size of the interbank money market declined from the estimated $100 billion before the
financial crisis to less than $5 billion today (see Kim et al. (2018)). For the US secured market, Gorton and
Metrick (2012) provide evidence of increases in average haircuts on risky collateral from around zero in early
2007 to 50% in late 2008, contributing to the emergence of “repo runs”during the financial crisis.




                                                      3
course, unduly increase the risk exposure by the central bank, but this is outside of our analysis
for the reasons stated.
    A key contribution of our paper is to allow for three different avenues for central bank
liquidity provision. We consider three instruments in particular: central bank holdings of
government bonds, the interest rate on central bank loans, and haircuts on accepted collateral.
We relate these instruments to the stylized versions of monetary policies pursued by central
banks around the world in recent years: i) a pre-crisis policy characterized by a constant balance
sheet; ii) a policy where the balance sheet is expanded via collateralized credit operations (“CO”
henceforth), whereby the central bank stands ready to provide the liquidity demanded by banks
at a given interest rate and haircut level; and iii) a policy of outright asset purchases (“OP”
henceforth), whereby the central bank changes the stock of bonds on its balance sheet to
achieve a certain inflation goal.3
    We calibrate the model to the euro area data and use it to analyze the macroeconomic
impact and central bank policies under the two alternative scenarios.
    In the first scenario, i.e. when the share of connected banks is varied, a constant-balance
sheet policy or collateralized credit operations make no difference, as there is no advantage to
borrow from the central bank compared to borrowing on the private market in the afternoon.
By contrast, open market asset purchases inject much needed liquidity generally, and can
substantially alleviate the negative output effects that would otherwise materialize. In our
benchmark calibration, the difference in output between a steady-state with 0.58 share of
unconnected banks and that with 0.95 share (average pre-2008 versus 2017 share of secured
turnover in total) is around 1.5 percent in the CO case, and 1 percent in the OP case.
    In the second scenario of varying private-sector haircuts and under a constant central bank
balance sheet policy, the difference in output between a steady-state with 3 percent haircuts
and one with 40 percent haircuts is 5 percent. The key to mitigating the reduction in capital
and output is to provide liquidity to the unconnected banks and to prevent their leverage
constraint from turning slack. This can now be achieved both with the CO policy by lending
to banks against collateral at favorable haircuts or per the OP policy of open market purchases
of goverment bonds.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we relate our paper to the existing literature.
In section 3, we describe the model. In section 4, we define the equilibrium. In section 5,
   3
     The CO and OP policies are reminiscent of the ECB’s fixed-rate full allotment policy implemented since
2008 and the Public Sector Purchase Programme implemented since 2015, respectively.


                                                    4
we characterize the system of equilibrium conditions. In section 6, we describe the steady
state and present some analytical results. Section 7 illustrates the model predictions through
a numerical analysis. Section 8 concludes.


2    Related literature

Our paper is related to the broad literature that investigates the implications of financial
frictions for the macroeconomy and for monetary policy as well as to the literature which
focuses on frictions in secured and unsecured interbank trade. We now discuss how various
elements in our analysis relate to these literatures.
    Bank balance sheet constraints and monetary policy
    A number of recent papers emphasize the role of banks’ balance sheet and leverage con-
straints for the provision of credit to the real economy and for the transmission of standard
and non-standard monetary policies (see e.g. Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler and
Kiyotaki (2011)). As in those papers, banks in our model face an enforcement problem and
endogenous balance sheet constraints. Additionally, they solve a liquidity management prob-
lem that further constrains their actions. Another novel feature of our framework is that we
do not impose the various constraints to be binding at all times (as in Brunnermeier and San-
nikov (2014); He and Krishnamurthy (2016); Mendoza (2010); Bocola (2016); Justiniano et al.
(2017)). Typically, however, only one or few occasionally binding constraints are considered.
In our calibrated model, five key constraints can switch from binding to slack and vice versa,
interacting in complex ways and determining the effectiveness of monetary policy.
    Interbank markets and bank liquidity management
    The role of interbank markets in banks’ liquidity management is explored by a large litera-
ture in banking, starting with Bhattacharya and Gale (1987). Several papers analyse frictions
in interbank markets that prevent an efficient distribution of liquidity within the banking
system (Flannery (1996); Freixas and Jorge (2008); Freixas and Holthausen (2005); Repullo
(2005); Freixas et al. (2011); Afonso and Lagos (2015); Atkeson et al. (2015)). Some of these
frictions have played a particularly important role during the Global Financial Crisis. Heider
et al. (2015) build a model where asymmetric information about banks’ assets and counter-
party risk induce banks to hoard liquidity and contribute to generate a “freeze”of the unsecured
money market segment. Martin et al. (2014) characterize when expectations-driven runs in
the secured market are possible.

                                                5
   Macroeconomic impact of money market frictions
   Some recent papers explore the macroeconomic consequences of the money market frictions
that featured prominently during the Global Financial Crisis. Altavilla et al. (2018) provide
evidence that increases in interbank rate uncertainty, as observed during 2007-2009 and again
during the European sovereign crisis, generate a significant deterioration in economic activity.
Using a general equilibrium model, Bruche and Suarez (2010) show that freezes in the unsecured
money market segment can cause large reallocation of capital across regions, with significant
impact on output and welfare. Gertler et al. (2016) point to runs on wholesale banks as a
major source of the breakdown of the financial system in 2007-2009, and show in a general
equilibrium framework that this can have devastating effects on the real economy. Our paper
contributes to this literature by considering both unsecured and secured funding. In our setup,
frictions in the unsecured money market segment may in principle be offset by an increased
recourse to private secured markets or to central bank funding.
   Bank liquidity management and monetary policy
   Frictions in the unsecured or secured money markets interact with the effectiveness of mon-
etary policy. Bianchi and Bigio (2013) build a model where banks are exposed to liquidity risk
and manage it by borrowing unsecured or by holding a precautionary buffer of reserves. Mon-
etary policy affects lending and the real economy by supplying reserves and thus by changing
banks’ trade-off between profiting from lending and incurring greater liquidity risk. In a gen-
eral equilibrium model that features the same search frictions in the interbank market as in
Bianchi and Bigio (2013), Arce et al. (2017) show that a policy of large central bank balance
sheet that uses interest rate policy to react to shocks achieves similar stabilization properties
to a policy of lean balance sheet, where QE is occasionally used when the interest rate hits
the zero-lower bound. Piazzesi and Schneider (2017) build a model in which the use of inside
money by agents for transaction purposes requires banks to handle payments instructions.
Banks thus lend or borrow secured in the interbank market, or use central bank reserves. In
this framework, key to the efficiency of the payment system is the provision and allocation of
collateral. Policies that exchange reserves for lower quality collateral can be beneficial when
high quality collateral is scarce. In our model with both secured and unsecured money mar-
kets and a central bank providing collateralized loans or purchasing assets outright, it is the
interplay between the bank liquidity and leverage constraints that is key in determining the
macroeconomic impact of money market frictions and the effectiveness of central bank policies.


                                               6
    Scarcity of safe assets and the size of central bank balance sheet
    The emergence of a shortage of safe assets has been documented and analyzed in a number
of recent works (see e.g. Caballero et al. (2017), Andolfatto and Williamson (2015) and Gorton
and Laarits (2018)). Some papers discuss the implications of scarcity for monetary policy.
Caballero and Farhi (2017) analyze a situation of a deflationary safety trap and point to policies
of “helicopter drops” of money, safe public debt issuances, or swaps of private risky assets for
safe public debt as possible ways to mitigate the negative impact of safe asset scarcity. Carlson
et al. (2016) argue that the central bank could react to safe asset scarcity by maintaining a large
balance sheet and a floor system, as large holdings of long-term assets are financed by large
amounts of reserves that are safe and liquid assets. Our model enables to compare alternative
policies - outright purchases and collateralized credit operations - that can accommodate the
increased demand for reserves through an expansion of the balance sheet.


3    The model

The economy is inhabited by a continuum of households, firms and banks. There is a govern-
ment and a central bank.
    Time is discrete, t = 0, 1, 2, . . ..   We think of a period as composed of two sub-periods,
“morning” and “afternoon”. Let us describe each in turn.
    At the beginning of each period (in the morning), aggregate shocks occur. Households
receive payments from financial assets and allocate their nominal wealth among money and
deposits at banks. Households also supply labor to firms, receiving wages in return. The
government taxes the labor income of the households, makes payments on its debt and may
change the stock of outstanding debt. Banks accept deposits from households and the central
bank and make dividend payments to households. After accepting deposits, banks learn their
afternoon type in the morning. This latter can be either “connected,” in which case banks can
borrow in the unsecured interbank market, or “not connected,” in which case they cannot, and
the only possibility is to borrow by pledging assets in the secured interbank market. Banks
then lend to firms (more precisely, finance their capital) and they hold government bonds and
reserves (“cash”). The central bank provides funding to banks that wish to borrow against
collateral. As an additional policy tool, the central bank can choose “haircuts” on the collateral
pledged to access those funds.



                                                   7
    During the afternoon, firms use labor and capital to produce a homogeneous output good
which is consumed by households. Banks experience idiosyncratic deposit withdrawal shocks
which average out to zero across all banks. Conceptually, these relate to random idiosyncratic
consumption needs, additional economic activity and immediate payment for these services,
which we shall refrain from modelling.4 Banks can accommodate those shocks by using their
existing reserves, by borrowing from other banks in the unsecured market, or by pledging
bonds and borrowing in the secured market. They can only access the unsecured market,
however, if they are “connected”. Banks are assumed to always position themselves so as
to meet these liquidity withdrawals, i.e., bank failures are considered too costly and not an
option. All banks meet as “one big banker family” at the end of the period. One can think
of it as follows. First, the same bank-individual liquidity shock happens “in reverse”, so that
banks enter the banker-family meeting in the same state they were in at the beginning of the
afternoon. However, there would then still be bank heterogeneity because of different portfolio
decisions by “connected”and “unconnected”banks. We therefore assume that, at the end of
the period, banks all equate their positions and restart the next period with the same portfolio.
Alternatively, and equivalently, one can think that there are securities markets which open at
the end of the period and allow banks to equate their portfolios. Banks during the period
therefore are only concerned with the marginal value of an additional unit of net worth they
can produce for the next period.
    Firms and banks are owned by households. Similar to Gertler and Kiyotaki (2011) and
Gertler and Karadi (2011), banks are operated by bank managers who run a bank on behalf
of their owning households. We deviate from those papers in that we assume that banks pay
a fixed fraction of their net worth to households as a dividend in the morning of every period.

3.1    The household

There is a continuum of identical households. At the beginning of time t, the representative
                                   fh , brought from period t − 1, and receives repayment
household holds an amount of cash, M t−1
                                                                                 D D
from banks of deposits opened in the previous period gross of the due interest, Rt−1 t−1 . The

household allocates the nominal funds at hand among existing nominal assets, namely money,
   4
     We follow a long tradition in the banking literature of focusing on the role of interbank money markets in
smoothing out idiosyncratic liquidity shocks, as in Bhattacharya and Gale (1987) and Allen and Gale (2000).
While analytically convenient, in reality interbank relationships may exhibit more persistent patterns, with some
banks being structural borrowers and others structural lenders (Craig and Ma (2018)).




                                                       8
Mth , and deposits, Dt ,
                                 Dt + Mth = Rt−1
                                             D
                                                 Dt−1 + M h
                                                        ft−1 .                                (1)

During the day, beginning-of-period money balances are increased by the value of households’
revenues and decreased by the value of their expenses. The amount of nominal balances
                                            fh , is thus
brought by the household into period t + 1, M t


                            fth = Mth + (1 − τt ) Wt ht + Zt − Pt ct ,
                            M                                                                 (2)


where Pt is the price of the consumption good, ct is the amount of that good consumed, ht is
hours worked, τt is the labor tax rate, Wt is the nominal wage level, and Zt is the profit payout
(“earnings”) distributed by banks.
   The household then chooses ct > 0, ht > 0, Dt ≥ 0, Mth ≥ 0 to maximize the objective
function
                                       ∞                        h 
                                       X
                                              t                  Mt
                              max Et         β u (ct , ht ) + v                               (3)
                                                                 Pt
                                       t=0

subject to (1) and (2).

3.2   Firms

A representative final-good firm uses capital kt−1 and labor ht to produce a homogeneous final
output good yt according to the production function

                                                   θ
                                          yt = γt kt−1 h1−θ
                                                        t


where γt is a productivity parameter. It receives revenues Pt yt and pays wages Wt ht . Capital
is owned by the firms, which are in turn owned by banks: effectively then, the banks own the
capital, renting it out to firms and extracting a nominal “rental rate” Pt rt per unit of capital.
   Capital-producing firms buy old capital kt−1 from the banks and combine it with final
goods It to produce new capital kt , according to


                                       kt = (1 − δ) kt−1 + It .


New capital is then sold back to banks. Alternatively and equivalently, one may directly
assume that the banks undertake the investments.




                                                   9
3.3    The government

The government has some outstanding debt with face value B t−1 . It needs to purchase goods
Pt gt and pays for it by taxing labor income as well as issuing discount bonds with a face value
∆B t to be added to the outstanding debt next period, obtaining nominal resources Qt ∆B t
for it in period t. We assume that some suitable no-Ponzi condition holds. The government
discount bonds are repaid at a rate κ.
    The outstanding debt at the beginning of period t + 1 will be B t = (1 − κ) B t−1 + ∆B t .
The government budget balance at time t is


                                    Pt gt + κB t−1 = τt Wt ht + Qt ∆B t + St ,                            (4)


where St are seigniorage payments from the central bank and gt is an exogenously given process
for government expenditures.
    The government conducts fiscal policy by adopting a rule for the income tax that stabilizes
                                   B                            ∗
the real stock of debt, b =        Pt ,   at a targeted level b ,
                                                                      
                                                                     ∗
                                            Pt (τt − τ ∗ ) = α Bt − B ,                                   (5)

                                                                                        ∗
where τt increases above its target level τ ∗ , if the real stock of debt is above b . We assume that
α is such that the equilibrium is saddle-path stable and that the fiscal rule ensures a gradual
convergence to the desired stock of debt, following aggregate disturbances. Notice, however,
that in our quantitative section, we provide a comparison of steady state equilibria: in that
analysis, the parameter α plays no role. The target value τ ∗ is the level of the income tax
                                               ∗
necessary to stabilizes the debt at b .5

3.4    The central bank

The central bank chooses the total money supply M t and interacts with banks in the “morn-
ing”, providing them with funds (F=“funds from the central bank”). These funds take the
form of one period loans. In period t, banks obtain loans with face value F t , getting funding
   5
     Notice that τ ∗ can be obtained by combining B t = (1 − κ) B t−1 + ∆B t and equation (4) in steady state,
                             ∗
together with the rule b = b , to get
                                                               ∗        
                                                             b         1    ∗
                               τ ∗ (1 − θ) y = g + κ (1 − Q)     −Q 1−     b − s.
                                                             π         π
           S
Here s =   P
               and π is the steady state inflation rate.



                                                           10
in the amount QFt F t , where QFt is the common price or discount factor, which is a policy
parameter set by the central bank. Banks also repay previous period liabilities, F t−1 .
                                                                               C be the
   The central bank furthermore buys and sells government bonds outright. Let Bt−1
stock of government bonds held by the central bank (“C”) at the beginning of period t. The
government makes payments on a fraction of these bonds, i.e., the central bank receives cash
           C .
payments κBt−1      The remaining government bonds in the hands of the central banks are
         C .
(1 − κ) Bt−1   The central bank then changes its stock to BtC , at current market prices Qt ,
using cash. Thus, BtC = (1 − κ) Bt−1
                                 C + ∆B c
                                       t

   The central bank balance sheet looks as follows at time t:

                               Assets                      Liabilities
                    QFt F t   (loans to banks)   MtH   (currency held by HH)
                    Qt BtC    (bond holdings)          Mt (bank reserves)
                                                        St (seigniorage)

   Let
                                         M t = Mth + Mt

be the total money stock before seigniorage is paid. Note that the seigniorage is paid to the
government at the end of the period and therefore becomes part of the currency in circulation
next period. The flow budget constraint of the central bank is given by:


          M t − M t−1 = St−1 + QFt F t + Qt BtC − (1 − κ) Bt−1
                                                           C                 C
                                                               
                                                                 − F t−1 − κBt−1 .          (6)


   Seigniorage can then be calculated as the residual balance sheet profit,


                                    St = QFt F t + Qt BtC − M t .                           (7)

3.5   Banks

There is a continuum of banks (“Lenders”), indexed by l ∈ (0, 1), which are owned by the
households.
   In the morning, banks receive deposits from households and collateralized loans from the
central bank, and distribute dividends to households. After accepting deposits, banks learn
their afternoon type. With probability ξt , they are of the “connected,” type, and able to
borrow on the unsecured loan market in the afternoon. With probability 1 − ξt , they are of the
“unconnected,” type and can only obtain funding by pledging government bonds as collateral

                                                 11
in the secured market. We assume this probability to be iid across banks and time. Banks then
lend to firms (more precisely, finance their capital) and hold government bonds and reserves
(“cash”).

3.5.1     Assets and liabilities

At the end of the morning, after earning income on its assets, paying interest on its liabilities
and retrading, but just before paying dividends to share holders, a generic bank l holds four
type of assets. It additionally and briefly holds an asset in the afternoon, for a total of five.
As an overview, the end-of-morning balance sheet of that bank is

                                   Assets                      Liabilities
                            Pt kt,l (capital held)        Dt,l (deposits by HH)
                          Qt Bt,l (bond holdings) QFt Ft,l (secured loans)
                           Zt,l (cash dividends)            Nt,l (net worth)
                            Mt,l (cash reserves)

   In detail:

  1. Capital kt,l of firms, or, equivalently, firms, who in turn own the capital. Capital can only
        be acquired and traded in the morning. Capital evolves according to kt,l = (1 − δ) kt−1,l +
        ∆kt,l , where ∆kt,l is the gross investment of bank l in capital.

  2. Bonds with a nominal face value Bt,l . A fraction κ of the government debt will be repaid.
        The bank changes its government bond position per market purchases or sales (“-”) ∆Bt,l
        in the morning, so that Bt,l = (1 − κ) Bt−1,l + ∆Bt,l at the end of the morning. If the
        bank purchases (sells) bonds on the open market, it pays (receives) Qt ∆Bt,l . We allow
        ∆Bt,l to be negative, indicating a sale.

  3. Cash Zt,l earmarked to be distributed to shareholders at the end of the morning. Note
        that this does not mean that the households end up being forced to hold money, as
        everything happens “simultaneously” in the morning. If they want to hold those extra
        earnings as deposits, then Dt would simply already be higher before they receive the
        earnings from the banks, in “anticipation” of these earning payments.

  4. Reserves (M=“money”) Mt,l ≥ 0. They may add to cash (not earmarked for paying
        shareholders) in the morning, Mt,l = Mt−1,l + ∆Mt,l ≥ 0, as well as in the afternoon,
        M             g t,l ≥ 0, and after the reverse liquidity shock hits, Mt,l = M
        ft,l = Mt,l + ∆M                                                            ft,l − ∆M
                                                                                           g t,l .

                                                     12
   Bank l has four types of liabilities:

  1. Deposits Dt,l . This is owed to household and subject to aggregate withdrawals and
                                                        D D
        additions ∆Dt,l in the morning, so that Dt,l = Rt−1                        D
                                                            t−1,l + ∆Dt,l , where Rt−1 is the

        return on one unit of deposits, agreed at time t − 1. Additionally, there are idiosyncratic
        withdrawals and additions in the afternoon, to be described.

  2. Secured loans (F=“funding”) from the central bank at face value Ft,l . Secured loans
        require collateral. A bank l with liabilities Ft,l to the central bank needs to pledge an
                                    F , satisfying the collateral constraint
        amount of government bonds Bt,l

                                                            F
                                              Ft,l ≤ ηt Qt Bt,l                                (8)


        where ηt is a haircut parameter and is set by the central bank. Secured loans from
        the central bank are obtained in the morning. The amount of bonds pledged therefore
                                                                      F ≤ B . The collateral
        cannot exceed the holding of those bonds in the morning, 0 ≤ Bt,l  t,l

        constraints are set in terms of the market value of securities, as is the case in ECB
        monetary policy operations. Secured loans Ft,l provide the banks with liquidity (“cash”)
        QFt Ft,l . Liquidity is needed in the afternoon. Therefore, the discount rate QFt will not
        only relate to an intertemporal trade-off, as is common in most models, but importantly
        also to the intratemporal tradeoff of obtaining potentially costly liquidity in the morning
        in order to secure sufficient funding in the afternoon.

  3. Outstanding unsecured liabilities to other banks issued at the time of the first liquidity
        shock in the afternoon. Only “connected” banks can issue them. They are repaid at zero
        interest rate at the time of the reverse liquidity shock.

  4. Net worth Nt,l .

   The sum of assets equals the sum of liabilities, at any point in time.

3.5.2     Liquidity needs in the afternoon

At the core of our model there is a bank liquidity management problem. At the beginning of
the afternoon, households hold total deposits Dt with banks. We seek to capture the daily
churning of deposits at banks, due to cross-household and firm-household payment activities
with inside money. We use a modelling device introduced by Bianchi and Bigio (2017). At

                                                  13
the start of the afternoon in period t, deposits get reshuffled across banks so that bank l with
pre-shuffle end-of-morning deposits Dt,l experiences a withdrawal ωt,l Dt,l . Negative ωt,l denote
deposits, reflecting random payments from one bank to another. Here, ω = ωt,l ∈ (−∞, ω max ],
with 0 ≤ ω max ≤ 1, is a random variable, which is iid across banks l and is distributed according
to F (ω). The remaining post-shuffle beginning-of-afternoon deposits D
                                                                     e t,l are thus


                                      e t,l = (1 − ωt,l ) Dt,l
                                      D


In order to meet withdrawals, banks need to have enough reserves at hand to cover them. We
assume that banks will always find defaulting on the withdrawals worse than any precaution-
ary measure they can take against it, and thus rule out withdrawal caps and bank runs by
assumption. Reserves can be obtained in the morning by various trades, resulting in bank
holdings Mt,l . In the afternoon, additional reserves can be obtained by new unsecured loans
from other banks, maturing at the end of the afternoon. New unsecured loans can only be ob-
tained by “connected” banks. Alternatively, “unconnected” banks can get funding by pledging
bonds in a secured repo market, vis-a-vis other banks. To that end, it is useful to introduce
haircut parameters 0 ≤ ηet ≤ 1, imposed by other lending banks. The bank then pledges an
       et,l ≤ Bt,l of bonds and receives in return the cash amount ηet Qt B
amount B                                                                  et,l in the first of

two transactions, repaying the same amount in the second. The end bond position is therefore
the one held in the morning, Bt,l . Taken literally, there is no risk here that this haircut could
reasonably insure against, but this is just due to keeping the model simple. The interest rate
on secured private funding is zero. Every bank can lend unsecured, if they so choose.
   Implicitly, we are assuming that the discount window of the central bank is not open in the
afternoon, i.e., that banks need to obtain central bank funding in the morning in precaution
to withdrawal demands in the afternoon. This captures the fact that the discount window
is rarely used for funding liquidity needs and that these liquidity transactions happen “fast”,
compared to central bank liquidity provision.
   The withdrawal shock is exactly reversed with a second reverse liquidity shock, so that
banks exit the period with the original level of deposits Dt,l and can thus repay their unsecured
loans or buy back the government securities originally sold. The same holds if the signs are
reversed. Thus, the first liquidity shock creates only a very temporary liquidity need that
banks must satisfy.



                                                14
   If banks do not have access to the unsecured loan market, they will need to pledge govern-
ment bonds in the private secured market, in case of liquidity needs. They can only do so with
the portion that has not yet been pledged to the central bank. With ω max as the maximal
withdrawal shock, non-connected banks therefore have to hold government securities satisfying


                              ω max Dt,l − Mt,l ≤ ηet Qt Bt,l − Bt,l
                                                                 F
                                                                       
                                                                                             (9)


where 0 ≤ ηet ≤ 1 is the haircut imposed by other lending banks, and where the constraint
                                                                             F . We denote
is in terms of the unpledged portion of the government bond holdings Bt,l − Bt,l
constraint (9) as the bank’s ”afternoon constraint“.
   As all the afternoon transactions are reversed at the end of the afternoon and since all
within-afternoon interest rates are zero, banks will be entirely indifferent between using any
of the available sources of liquidity: what happens in the afternoon stays in the afternoon.
The only impact of these choices and restrictions is that banks need to plan ahead of time in
the morning to make sure that they have enough funding in the afternoon, in the worst case
scenario. If a bank is unconnected, that worse-case scenario is particularly bad, as it needs
to have enough of cash reserves plus unpledged bonds to meet the maximally conceivable
afternoon deposit withdrawal.
   In order to keep heterogeneity tractable, we assume that all banks meet as one big banker
family at the end of the period. At that point, they equate their asset and liability positions.
They also share their net worth that is then redistributed equally to all banks. As a result,
each bank restarts the next period with the same portfolio and allocation of net worth.

3.5.3   Objective function and the leverage constraint

We shall consider only scenarios where bank net worth remains positive and assume that banks
repay a portion φ of their net worth to households each period,


                                           Zt,l = φNt,l .


   The net worth of bank l at the beginning of period t, before payments to shareholders, is
equated across banks, i.e. Nt,l = Nt and satisfies

                                                                         D
Nt = max{0, Pt (rt + 1 − δ) kt−1,l + Mt−1,l + ((1 − κ) Qt + κ) Bt−1,l − Rt−1 Dt−1,l − Ft−1,l }

     = max{0, Pt kt,l + Qt Bt,l + Mt,l − Dt,l − QFt Ft,l + Zt,l }.

                                                15
The first equation is the net worth calculated on the balance of assets and their earnings and
payments before the bank makes its portfolio decision, while the second equation exploits the
equality of assets to liabilities after the portfolio decision.
       The bank’s budget constraint is


                           Pt kt,l + Qt Bt,l + Mt,l + φNt = Dt,l + QFt Ft,l + Nt                              (10)


       As in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2011) and Gertler and Karadi (2011), we assume that there
is a moral hazard constraint in that bank managers may run away with a fraction of their
assets in the morning, after their asset trades are completed and after dividends are paid to
the household. The constraint is


                                       λ (Pt kt,l + Qt Bt,l + Mt,l ) ≤ Vt,l


where 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1 is a leverage parameter. Implicitly, we assume that the same leverage param-
eter holds for all assets, and that bankers can run away with all assets, including government
bonds that may have been pledged as collateral vis-a-vis the central bank.6

3.6      The rest of the world

We assume that a share of the stock of government bonds is held by the rest of the world
and that foreigners have an elastic demand for those bonds.7 Because unconnected banks can
buy or sell bonds to foreigners, they can change their bond holdings independently from the
government’s outstanding stock of debt.
   6
    Alternatively, one may wish to impose that banks cannot run away with assets pledged to the central bank
as collateral. In that case, the collateral constraint would be
                                 h                                     i
                                              F                 F
                               λ Pt kt,l − kt,l   + Qt Bt,l − Bt,l   + Mt,l ≤ Vt,l

or a version in between this and the in-text equation. Since collateral pledged to the central bank typically
remains in the control of banks, we feel that the assumption used in the text is more appropriate.
    7
      We introduce the elastic foreign sector demand for two reasons. First, a large fraction of euro area sovereign
debt is held by non-euro area residents, and these bondholders actively re-balance their bond positions. Koijen
et al. (2016) document that during the Public Sector Purchase Programme implemented by the ECB since
March 2015, for each unit of sovereign bonds purchased by the ECB, the foreign sector sold 0.64 of it. Second,
when solving the model we will focus on the parameter space in which connected banks choose not to hold
bonds. In a closed economy, therefore, unconnected banks would have to absorb whatever amount of bonds is
issued by the government (after deducting the fixed amount held by the central bank). The price of the bond
would have to adjust to clear the market. Such direct link between the bond market and the unconnected banks’
decisions would be quantitatively implausible.




                                                        16
        We do not wish to model the foreign sector explicitly. We simply assume that international
investors have a demand for domestic bonds, Btw , that reacts to movements in the real return
on these bonds,

                                                      Btw
                                                                             
                                                                   1
                                                          =f    κ − log Qt πt
                                                                        e                                               (11)
                                                      Pt           %
                       e −1 =
where % > 0, κ ≥ 0 and Q                              κ
                                                          + (1 − κ) denotes the return from investing one unit of
                         t                            Q

money in bonds. The function f (·) provides a non-linear transformation ensuring that the
foreign demand does not become negative when the net return becomes zero.8 Notice that, if
% = 0, the bond demand is infinitely elastic. In that case, the real return is fixed and foreign
holdings take whatever value is needed to clear the bond market.
        The flow budget constraint of the foreign sector is


                                            Qt Btw + Pt cw                    w
                                                         t = [κ + (1 − κ) Q] Bt−1 .                                     (12)


4        Analysis

In appendix A, we define and characterize the equilibrium. Here, we describe the decision of
households, firms and banks in turn.

4.1        Households and firms

The household maximizes his preferences, equation (3), subject to the budget constraints


                   Dt + Mth ≤ Rt−1
                               D           h
                                   Dt−1 + Mt−1 + (1 − τt−1 ) Wt−1 ht−1 + Zt−l − Pt−1 ct−1                               (13)


Note that there are further restrictions on the choice variables, i .e. ct > 0, ht > 0, Mth > 0
and Dt ≥ 0. We do not list these constraints separately for the following reasons. For ct > 0,
ht > 0, and Mth > 0, we can assure nonnegativity with appropriate choice for preferences and
per the imposition of Inada conditions. We constrain the analysis a priori to Dt > 0, despite
the possibility in principle that it could be zero or negative when allowing for more generality9 .
    8
       More     specifically,
                                  in    our     numerical     analysis,   we   use   the   functional   form   f (·)     =
         1              [arctan(200(1−Qt )+3.14)]
    κ−   %
           log Q
               e t πt
                                   3.14
                                                  .
    9
    We have not analyzed this matter for the dynamic evolution of the economy. It may well be that net worth
of banks temporarily exceeds the funding needed for financing the capital stock, and that therefore deposits
ought to be negative, rather than positive. For now, the attention is on the steady state analysis, however, and
on returns to capital exceeding the returns on deposits.



                                                                  17
    Firms choose labor ht > 0, and capital kt > 0 to maximize their profits. The optimality
conditions for households and firms are reported in appendix B.

4.2    Banks

The value of the ” bank family“ Vt , is given by


                                      Vt = ξt Vt,c + (1 − ξt ) Vt,u ,                        (14)


where the subscripts c and u denote ” connected“ and ” unconnected“ banks, respectively. We
need to calculate Vt,l . In order to do so, we state the following proposition.

Proposition 1 (linearity) The problem of bank l is linear in net worth and


                                              Vt,l = ψt Nt,l                                 (15)


for any bank l and some factor ψt . In particular, Vt,l = 0 if Nt,l = 0.

    Proof: Since there are no fixed costs, a bank with twice as much net worth can invest
twice as much in the assets. Furthermore, if a portfolio is optimal at some scale for net worth,
then doubling every portion of that portfolio is optimal at twice that net worth.       Thus the
value of the bank is twice as large, giving the linearity above.
    The proposition above implies
                                                  Vt = ψt Nt                                 (16)

giving us a valuation of a marginal unit of net worth at the beginning of period t, for a
representative bank.
    Suppose that, at the end of the period, the bank family has various assets, kt , Bt , and Mt ,
brought to it by the various banks as they get together. The end-of-period value Ṽt is
                                                                                  
                                                  uc (ct+1 , ht+1 ) Pt
                         Ṽt = β (1 − φ) Et                            ψt+1 Nt+1             (17)
                                                    uc (ct , ht ) Pt+1

    We guess a functional form for the end-of-period value of the bank family that is linear in
its assets and liabilities,


                      Ṽt = ψ̃t,k Pt kt + ψ̃t,B Bt + ψ̃t,M Mt − ψ̃t,D Dt − ψ̃t,F Ft          (18)




                                                      18
Here ψ̃t,x denote the marginal value (cost) to the bank family of investing (obtaining) one unit
of money in asset (liability) x. Combining (10) and (17), and comparing with (18), we obtain
expressions for ψ̃t,k , ψ̃t,B , ψ̃t,M , ψ̃t,D , and ψ̃t,F , which we report in appendix C.
    For bank of type l, we can write its end of the morning value as


                                              Vt,l = φNt + Ṽt,l                                (19)


    The banks contribute to the end of period value Ṽt per


                    Ṽt,l = ψ̃t,k Pt kt,l + ψ̃t,B Bt,l + ψ̃t,M Mt,l − ψ̃t,D Dt,l − ψ̃t,F Ft,l   (20)


    The leverage constraint for bank l can then be rewritten as


                                φNt + Ṽt,l ≥ λ (Pt kt,l + Qt Bt,l + Mt,l )                     (21)


    Banks will pledge just enough collateral to the central bank to make the collateral constraint
binding, nothing more (even if indifferent between that and pledging more: then, “binding” is
an assumption). For both types of banks,

                                                             F
                                               Ft,l = ηt Qt Bt,l                                (22)


with
                                                    F
                                               0 ≤ Bt,l ≤ Bt,l                                  (23)

    There are also nonnegativity constraints for investing in cash, in bonds, and for financing
from the central bank, for both types of banks:


                                                   0 ≤ Mt,l                                     (24)

                                                   0 ≤ Bt,l                                     (25)

                                                   0 ≤ Ft,l .                                   (26)


    Note that we are interested in cases where banks choose to raise deposits and to extend
loans. The former requirement ensures that banks have liquidity shocks in the afternoon and
thus provides a meaningful role for interbank markets. The latter requirement generates an
active link between financial intermediation and real activity in our economy.



                                                       19
   We can have cases, however, when banks decide not to raise central bank finance, as in the
case of connected banks that can always get afternoon zero-interest rate unsecured loans from
other banks, if the need arises (this is assuming that QFt ≤ 1, otherwise there would be arbitrage
possibilities for banks!). Similarly, banks can decide not to hold bonds, if their liquidity value
is too low and the cost of satisfying the afternoon constraint with cash is sufficiently low.
Alternatively, they can decide not to hold cash, if they have access to afternoon unsecured or
secured finance, and if the expected return on capital is higher than the expected return on
money.
   To simplify the analysis, we restrict our attention to regions of the parameter space such
that the economy is in an interior equilibrium for Dt,l and kt,l in all the cases we consider. In
light of the considerations above, we explicitly allow for corner solutions for Mt,l , Bt,l and Ft,l .
   As for the afternoon, there is no need to keep track of trades, except to make sure that the
afternoon funding constraints for the unconnected banks, equation (9), holds.
   In the morning, banks l = u and l = c maximize (20) subject to the budget constraint (10),
the leverage constraint (21), the collateral constraints (22) and (23), as well as the afternoon
constraint (9) only for the unconnected banks.
   These are linear programming problem, maximizing a linear objective subject to linear
constraints. So, the solution is either a corner solution or there will be indifference between
certain asset classes, resulting in no-arbitrage conditions.
   Let µBC                                                                 RA
        t,l denote the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint (10), µt,l the Lagrange

multiplier on the leverage constraint (21), µCC
                                             t,l the Lagrange multiplier on the collateral

constraint (22), µt,u the Lagrange multiplier on the afternoon funding constraint of the un-
connected banks, µM         F             B
                  t,l ≥ 0, µt,l ≥ 0, and µt,l ≥ 0 the Lagrange multipliers on the constraints

Mt,l ≥ 0, Ft,l ≥ 0 and Bt,l ≥ 0, respectively, and µC
                                                    t,l ≥ 0 the Lagrange multiplier on the
                                            F ≤B
collateral constraint at the central bank, Bt,l  t,l (see 23).

   An important role is played in the model by the Lagrange multiplier on the afternoon
constraint of the unconnected banks, µt,u . From the complementary slackness condition,

                                                                 F
                         µt,u ω max Dt,u − Mt,u − ηet Qt Bt,u − Bt,u
                                                                    
                                                                        = 0,


it follows that µt,u is positive whenever the afternoon constraint is binding. This lagrangean
multiplier therefore measures the severity of the liquidity problem faced by unconnected banks.



                                                 20
    The first-order conditions characterizing the choice of banks l = u and l = c for assets and
liabilities, as well as the complementary slackness conditions, are reported in appendix C.


5     Steady state analysis

We characterize a stochastic steady state where prices grow at the rate π and all shocks are
zero except for the idiosyncratic liquidity shock ω faced by banks. We denote with small letters
all real variables, i.e. the corresponding variables in capital letter divided by the price of the
consumption good, Pt . The steady state is characterized by the set of conditions reported in
Appendix D. In what follows, we provide some analytical results for the bank problem in the
steady state.
    We focus our analysis on the set of parameters such that the return to capital (the pro-
ductive asset) exceeds the cost of deposits so that banks raise outside financing to invest in
capital. This ensures a meaningful role for banks in intermediating deposits into investment.10
    The following proposition provides a sufficient condition for connected and unconnected
banks to raise outside funding to invest in capital.

Proposition 2 If
                                                     ψ̃k > ψ̃D                                                (27)

holds, then both connected and unconnected banks raise outside funding to invest in capital.

    Proof. See Appendix E.
    Banks can raise outside funding in the form of deposits and/or in the form of central bank
funding. The next proposition states a necessary and sufficient conditions for connected banks
to raise outside funding in the form of deposits only.11 It also provides a characterization of
their bond and money holdings.

Proposition 3 Suppose condition (27) holds. A connected bank does not borrow from the
central bank and relies solely on deposit funding if and only if
                                                !                      !
                                          ψ̃B       1      ψ̃F
                                    ψ̃k −             +        − ψ̃D       QF > 0                             (28)
                                           Q        η      QF
  10
     Our numerical analysis in the next Section shows that this set of parameters is non-empty. Note that for
households to deposit with banks, it must be that RD > 1 or, equivalently, πβ > 1.
  11
     Indeed, historically, banks funded themselves at the central bank only during crisis times, when the financial
markets malfunctioned.


                                                          21
holds. A connected bank does not hold money. In addition, if the afternoon constraint of the
unconnected banks binds, then a connected bank does not hold bonds.

   Proof. See Appendix E.
   Under the conditions in the above Proposition, in the morning, connected banks raise
deposits and invest those, together with their net worth, in capital. Condition (28) states that
connected banks do not use central bank funding whenever it is more expensive than deposit
          ψ̃F
funding ( Q F > ψ̃D ) or whenever the collateral cost of obtaining central bank funding, given

                                  ψ̃B
by the collateral premium ψ̃k −    Q ,   is high enough (so that (28) holds).
   In the afternoon, connected banks have access to the unsecured market in which they can
smooth out liquidity shocks. Therefore, they do not hold any precautionary money reserves
since holding money carries an opportunity cost. Whenever the afternoon constraint of the
unconnected banks binds, the collateral premium is strictly positive and the physical return
on bonds is lower than the return on capital. Hence, connected banks prefer to invest solely
in capital since they do not value bonds for their collateral value in the afternoon.
   Unlike the connected banks, the unconnected banks are subject to the afternoon constraint
whenever they raise deposit funding. To cover deposit withdrawals, unconnected banks need to
bring into the afternoon either enough money and/or enough bonds to borrow in the secured
market. The afternoon constraint makes deposit funding relatively less attractive for the
unconnected banks compared to the connected banks. If their afternoon constraint is tight,
they may choose to top up deposit funding with some central bank funding in the morning. The
next proposition provides a sufficient condition for unconnected banks that are unconstrained
in the afternoon to raise outside funding solely in the form of deposits.

Proposition 4 Suppose condition (27) holds and the afternoon constraint of an unconnected
bank is slack. Then an unconnected bank does not borrow from the central bank and relies
solely on deposit funding if and only if condition (28) holds. An unconnected bank does not
hold money in this case.

   Proof. See Appendix E.
   If the afternoon constraint is slack, the decisions of the unconnected banks are similar to
those of the connected banks in Proposition 2: they raise deposits, do not borrow from the
central bank and do not hold money. They must, however, hold some bonds to satisfy the
(slack) afternoon constraint.

                                                  22
    The next Proposition characterizes funding decisions of the unconnected banks that are
constrained by the afternoon constraint. Furthermore, it characterizes how they manage their
afternoon liquidity needs.

Proposition 5 Suppose condition (27) holds and the afternoon constraint of an unconnected
bank binds. Then an unconnected bank raises deposits. Furthermore, if
                                        "                                       !#
                                                    1 + µRA
                                                          u         ψ̃F
                             ηe > ηQF       ω max −                     − ψ̃D              (29)
                                                       µu           QF

holds, then an unconnected bank does not borrow from the central bank. If condition

                                                              ψ̃B
                                                      ψ̃k −    Q
                                               ηe <                                        (30)
                                                      ψ̃k − ψ̃M

holds, then an unconnected bank combines deposits with central bank funding in the morning,
and satisfies its afternoon liquidity needs by holding money. If (29) and (30) fail to hold,
then an unconnected bank may combine deposits with central bank funding in the morning,
and satisfies its afternoon liquidity needs by borrowing in the secured market and/or by holding
money.

    Proof. See Appendix E.
    If the afternoon constraint binds, then unconnected banks may borrow from the central
bank in the morning. Whether or not they do so depends on the functioning of the secured
market in the afternoon. If haircuts in the secured market are low (i.e., (29) holds), then
unconnected banks only raise deposits and do not tap into central bank funding. By contrast,
if haircuts in the secured market are high (i.e., (30) holds), then unconnected bank top up
deposit funding with central bank funding. They pledge their entire bond portfolio with the
central bank in the morning and do not use the secured market in the afternoon. In that case,
they must hold money to satisfy their afternoon liquidity needs.


6    Numerical results

In this section, we calibrate the model to euro area data. We then evaluate the macroeconomic
impact of the observed money market developments and the effectiveness of alternative central
bank policies.



                                                       23
       Our results highlight the complex interactions between various occasionally binding con-
straints, which is a novel feature of our model. There are eleven occasionally binding con-
straints: equations (21) and (23)-(26), for l = u, c, and equation (9) for l = u. To simplify the
numerical analysis, we restrict our attention to regions of the parameter space where conditions
(27)-(28) are satisfied, so that proposition 2 and 3 hold. In those regions, connected banks hold
neither bonds nor money, nor do they borrow at the central bank, i.e. bc = bFc = mc = fc = 0.
This effectively limits the number of interacting occasionally binding constraints to seven: for
both types of banks, l = u, c, the leverage constraint (equations (21 )); for l = u, the afternoon
constraint (equation 9), the non-negativity constraints for bonds pledged at the central bank
and the constraint that those bonds cannot exceed the stock of bonds held in the morning
(summarized in condition (23)), and the non-negativity constraint for money, bonds and loans
from the central bank (conditions (24)-(26)).
       When a single parameter changes, constraints can turn from binding to slack, and then to
binding again, due to the interaction with other constraints. The particular constraint that
binds is typically crucial for determining the effectiveness of policy interventions.

6.1      Calibration

In the model, each period is a quarter. In the numerical analysis, we assume the following
functional form of the utility function:

                                                Mth                            Mh    h1+
                                                     
                                                                         1
                         u (ct , ht ) + v                 = log(ct ) +     log( t ) − t .
                                                Pt                       χ     Pt    1+

       Table 2 summarize the value of all the parameter under the chosen calibration, which we
discuss in turn below.
       We set the discount factor at β = 0.994,12 and the inverse Frisch elasticity at  = 0.4. The
depreciation rate is fixed at δ = 0.02, and the capital income share θ at 0.33. The fraction
of government bonds repaid each period, κ, is 0.042, corresponding to an average maturity of
the outstanding stock of euro area sovereign bonds of 6 years.13 The parameters determining
the value of collateral in the private market and at the central bank reflect the data shown in
  12
      The inverse of the discount factor 1/β determines the real rate on household deposits. This rate has been
very low in the euro area (in fact, it was negative for overnight deposits both before and after the onset of the
financial crisis). To match this stylized fact, we choose a relatively high discount rate β.
   13
      Average maturity is computed as a weighted average of all maturities of euro area government bonds, with
weights given by outstanding amounts in year 2011. Source: Bloomberg, ECB and authors’ calculations. Bond
level data used in Andrade et al. (2016) give a similar average maturity in 2015, pointing to a stable maturity
structure of euro area debt over time.


                                                              24
Table 1. The haircuts on government bonds in private markets and at the central bank are
set equal to each other, at 1 − ηe = 1 − η = 0.03 (corresponding to a 3% haircut). The private
haircut value is taken from LCH Clearnet, a large European-based multi-asset clearing house,
and refers to an average haircut on French, German and Dutch bonds across all maturities
in 2010. The value for the central bank haircut matches the haircut imposed by the ECB on
sovereign bonds with credit quality 1 and 2 (corresponding to a rating AAA to A-) in 2010.
       Two novel parameters of our model, which capture frictions in the funding markets and
are key to determining banks’ choices, are the share of “unconnected” banks, 1 − ξ, and the
maximum fraction of deposits that households can withdraw in the afternoon, ω max .
       We compute the average pre-crisis value of 1 − ξ using data from the Euro Money Market
Survey, which underlie Figure 1. We set 1 − ξ = 0.58, corresponding to the 2003-2007 average
share of cumulative quarterly turnover in the secured market in the total turnover, which sums
up the turnover in the secured and in the unsecured segments (where 2003 is the first available
observation in the survey while 2007 is the last year before the Global Financial Crisis). To
assess the impact of the observed decline in unsecured market access, we compute the same
average over 2008-2017 (where 2017 is the last available observation). The average value for
that period is 0.85.
       We determine ω max using the information embedded in the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR)
- a prudential instrument that requires banks to hold high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) in an
amount that allows them to meet 30-days liquidity outflows under stress. We implicitly assume
here that regulators can estimate with high precision the 30-days outflows in a period of stress.
We therefore calibrate ω max so that the maximum amount of deposit withdrawal in the model,
ω max Dt,u , equates the observed holdings of HQLA.14 More specifically, we use the European
Banking Authority report from December 2013, which provides LCR data for 2012Q4 and
covers 357 EU banks from 21 EU countries. Their total assets sum to EUR 33000 billion, and
the aggregate HQLA to EUR 3739 billion. We take ω max to be the ratio of aggregate HQLA
over total assets so that ω max = 0.1.
  14
     In our model,   whenever the afternoon constraint binds, banks hold liquid assets in the amount of Mu +
ηeQ Bu − BuF to cover afternoon withdrawals ω max D. Since F = 0 in our calibrated steady state, and net worth
               

is a small fraction of total liabilities, we approximate D with total assets. Alternatively, we can approximate
ω max using the run-off rates on deposits, as specified in the LCR regulation (e.g., run-off rate of 10% means
that 10% of the deposits are assumed to possibly leave the bank in 30 days). Run-off rates for deposits range
between 5% for the most stable, fully insured deposits to 15% for less stable deposit funding. Our calibration
of ω max at 0.1 is consistent with these rates.




                                                      25
       We choose the parameter of the foreign demand for bonds, κ, to ensure that, if foreign
bond holdings take a value consistent with their observed share in total debt, then Q
                                                                                    e and π also

take their average value at that steady state (.955 and 1.005, respectively). The steady state
calibration cannot inform us about the elasticity of foreign bond demand %, so we pick a value
that produces an elasticity which is in line with available empirical evidence. We take data
reported by Koijen et al. (2016) on average foreign holdings of euro area government bonds
over the periods 2013Q4-2014Q4 and 2015Q2 to 2015Q4. We compute the percentage change
in foreign holdings between the two periods to be -3.3%. We then calculate the percentage
change between the same periods in the average real return on euro area government bonds
to be -38%.15 We then set % to replicate the observed elasticity of foreign bond holdings with
respect to changes in the real return on bonds, i.e. % = 1.76. We check robustness to alternative
values (not reported) and find little impact on our quantitative analysis.
       We are left with six parameters that we calibrate to match the model-based predictions
on some key variables from their empirical counterparts: the share of net worth distributed
by banks as dividends, φ, the share of assets bankers can run away with, λ, the coefficient
determining the utility from money holdings for households, χ, the expenditure on public
goods, g, the real stock of government bonds purchased by the central bank, bC , and the
                                                     ∗
targeted stock of real debt in the economy, b . The targeted variables are: i) average debt to
GDP; ii) bank leverage; iii) share of banks’ bond holdings in total debt; iv) share of foreign
sector’s bond holdings in total debt; v) government bond spread; and vi) average inflation.
Table 3 reports the value taken by the six variables in the data (computed over the pre-crisis
period, 1999-2006, unless otherwise indicated) and the model prediction under the chosen
parameterization.16
  15
      Notice that the period 2015Q2-2015Q4 coincides with the introduction of the Public Sector Purchase Pro-
gramme, which was implemented by the ECB in March 2015.
   16
      The average debt to GDP is computed using data on debt securities issued by euro area (EU12) governments
from Eurostat (Annual Financial Accounts for General Government). The value of bank leverage is taken from
Andrade et al. (2016). The share of banks’ bond holdings in total debt is set at the value reported in Koijen
et al. (2016) for 2015, 23%. To compute the share of the foreign sector’s bond holdings, we first use data
from SDW (the ECB database) to calculate the share of central bank’s holdings in total government debt. We
impute to this item not only outright purchases of government bonds but also collateralized loans extended in
refinancing operations (the main instrument through which the ECB injects liquidity in normal times). The
ratio to total sovereign debt is 10%. Koijen et al. (2016) report that households hold 3% of government bonds.
We then impute to the foreign sector the remaining share, which amounts to 64%. The government bond spread
is computed using data from SDW. We build average government bond yields by weighting yields of all euro area
government bonds, for all maturities, with the respective amounts in 2011. We then build the spread relative to
the overnight rate, the Eonia. Average inflation is computed using quarterly changes of the HICP index taken
from SDW.




                                                      26
6.2     Macroeconomic impact and central bank policies

We assess the implications of the observed changes in the money market landscape for the
macroeconomy and for central bank policies by means of a comparative statics analysis.
   We consider the following monetary policy instruments: the interest rate on central bank
loans, QF (which we fix at 0.997), the haircut on collateral charged by the central bank,
1 − η, and the stock of government bonds on its balance sheet, bC . We map these central bank
instruments into three types of monetary policies implemented by the ECB in recent years: i) a
pre-financial crisis policy characterized by a constant balance sheet (bC is held constant, banks
do not borrow from the central bank as we set η = 0; inflation is determined endogenously);
ii) a CO policy whereby the size of the balance sheet is determined by the demand for funding
of the banking sector at a given policy rate (bC is held constant, η = 0.97 so that banks
may borrow from the central bank; inflation is determined endogenously); and iii) a OP policy
whereby the central bank changes the stock of bonds on its balance sheet to achieve an inflation
goal of 2% (inflation is fixed in this exercise while bC is endogenous).
   Our benchmark central bank policy is the constant balance sheet policy. We compare
outcomes under the benchmark policy to outcomes under a CO policy and to a OP policy of
maintaining constant inflation.

6.2.1    Reduced access to the unsecured market

The first exercise we conduct aims at analyzing the macroeconomic effects of a shrinking un-
secured money market segment. In this comparative statics exercise, the share of unconnected
banks, 1 − ξ, varies between 0.58 and 0.95. Figures 3 and 4 show the results for the constant
balance sheet policy and for the OP policy, respectively.
   In both figures, the solid red line denotes the share of unconnected banks under our bench-
mark calibration (1 − ξ = 0.58). In Figure 3, the green dashed lines indicate the level of 1 − ξ
at which unconnected banks start holding money so that the multiplier µM
                                                                       u becomes zero. In

addition, in Figure 4, the orange dashed lines indicate the level of 1 − ξ at which unconnected
banks stop holding bonds. As we shall see, these two constraints will play a major role in this
exercise.
   In the calibrated steady-state (at the solid red line), the collateral premium on bonds is
positive and the afternoon constraint binds for unconnected banks. The amount of deposits




                                               27
raised by connected and unconnected banks is of a broadly comparable magnitude. Uncon-
nected banks, however, invest less in capital than connected banks, as they need to invest part
of the funds in bonds to be pledged in the secured market in the afternoon. At this point,
the return on bonds is higher than the return on money (not shown), and unconnected banks
choose not to hold money to satisfy their afternoon liquidity needs.
       If more banks in the economy are unconnected (moving rightward in both figures), a larger
number of banks faces an afternoon withdrawal constraint, which raises the aggregate demand
for bonds and the bond price. In the region where 1 − ξ < 0.79, the real return on bonds
falls for foreign investors, inducing them to sell part of their bond holdings to domestic banks.
The amount of bonds held by each unconnected bank, bu , nonetheless mildly declines, as more
banks need to hold bonds as collateral, and the supply of bonds is fixed. When the share of
unconnected banks increases further, i.e., when 1 − ξ exceeds 0.79, the high price of bonds
lowers the return on bonds to the point when it is equalized with the return on money. From
this point onward (indicated by the green dashed lines), unconnected banks also use money to
self-insure against afternoon withdrawals. That is, their demand for money increases.
       Under the constant balance sheet policy (Figure 3), the supply of money is fixed. Higher
demand for money by unconnected banks is accommodated by an increase in the nominal inter-
est rate (the deposit rate), which induces households to reduce their money holdings. Scarce
money balances are therefore reallocated from households to unconnected banks. A higher
nominal rate requires an increase in inflation,17 which raises the opportunity cost of holding
money for unconnected banks and further tightens their afternoon constraint. Unconnected
banks respond by reducing their deposit intake and, therefore, investment in capital. This puts
downward pressure on aggregate capital and, correspondingly, upward pressure on the return
on capital. As the net worth of unconnected banks decline, and there is an increasing share
of those, the aggregate net worth which is equally distributed to all banks in the morning
declines. This results in a tightening of the run-away constraint of connected banks which
induces them to also reduce their investment in capital and their deposit intake. Therefore,
aggregate deposits and capital fall and so does output. Quantitatively, the decline in output
between a steady-state with 0.58 share of unconnected banks and that with 0.85 share (pre-
to post-2008 average share of secured turnover in total) is around 0.84 percent.
  17
    This is an artefact of our steady-state analysis in which the Fisher equation holds. An alternative way to
think about the adjustment in response to a higher demand for real money balances when the nominal money
supply is fixed is that the price level must decrease so that the real money supply increases. That is, increased
demand for scarce money balances necessitates deflation in the short-run.


                                                       28
   Under the CO policy, the outcome is the same as under the constant balance sheet policy.
This is because central bank funding is not used in this case (and therefore the central bank
balance sheet remains constant) as deposit funding is less expensive than - and therefore
preferred to - central bank funding.
   Under the OP policy (Figure 4), the central bank can expand its balance sheet by pur-
chasing bonds and thus increase the supply of money to help relax the afternoon constraint
of unconnected banks. When 1 − ξ exceeds 0.82 (indicated by the orange dashed lines) and
the price of bonds is high, unconnected banks sell off their entire bond holdings to the central
bank and choose to hold money instead to satisfy the afternoon constraint. As inflation is
kept constant, the opportunity cost of holding money is constant (and low) as well. However,
aggregate capital and output still fall simply because the share of unconnected banks - who
invest less in capital - increases in the economy. As this effect is driven by the change in the
relative share of banks in the economy, it is not something that the central bank can affect.
Quantitatively, the decline in output between a steady-state with 0.58 share of unconnected
banks and that with 0.85 share (pre- to post-2008 average share of secured turnover in total)
is 0.76 percent.
   In sum, reduced access to the unsecured market can reduce investment and output via
two channels. First, since unconnected banks need to satisfy withdrawal shocks by holding
bonds and/or by holding money, they can invest less in capital. Therefore, as the share of
unconnected banks in the economy increases, capital and output decrease. Central bank policy
cannot do anything about this channel. Second, as more banks become unconnected, bonds and
money become more scarce, tightening the withdrawal constraint, reducing aggregate deposits,
investment in capital and, consequently, output. Central bank policy can mitigate the second
channel if it provides money to banks at a low opportunity cost by maintaining a constant low
inflation (OP policy). In the comparison between steady-states with 0.58 versus 0.85 shares of
unconnected banks, the first channel dominates and therefore there is no difference between
policies. However, if we compared steady-states with 0.58 share of unconnected banks to that
with 0.95 (share of secured turnover in total in 2017), then the contraction in output would be
1.48 percent in the constant balance sheet or CO case, and only 1.05 percent in the OP case.

6.2.2   Reductions in collateral value

In this subsection, we analyze the macroeconomic effects of changing collateral value by com-
paring different private haircuts in the secured market. In this comparative statics exercise,

                                              29
the private haircut moves from the benchmark pre-crisis value of 3 percent to 70 percent.
Figures 5, 6 and 7 show the results under the policies of constant balance sheet, CO and OP,
respectively.
   In these figures, the solid red line denotes the secured market haircut under our bench-
mark calibration (1 − ηe = 0.03). The green dashed lines indicate the level of 1 − ηe at which
unconnected banks start holding money so that the multiplier µM
                                                              u becomes zero. The blue

dashed lines indicate the level of 1 − ηe at which the leverage constraint of unconnected banks
turns slack and the multiplier µRA
                                u  becomes zero. The cyan dashed lines indicate the level of
1 − ηe at which unconnected banks start borrowing from the central bank so that the multiplier
µFu becomes zero. The magenta dashed lines indicate the level of 1 − ηe at which unconnected
banks pledge their entire bond holdings at the central bank and no longer use secured market
(bu = bFu and the collateral constraint binds). The orange dashed lines indicate the level of
1 − ηe at which unconnected banks no longer hold bonds. As we shall see, these five constraints
will play a major role in this exercise.
   In the calibrated steady-state (at the solid red line), the collateral premium on bonds is
positive and the afternoon constraint binds for unconnected banks. At higher haircut levels
(moving rightward in all figures), it becomes more difficult for unconnected banks to satisfy
their liquidity needs in the secured market.
   Under the constant balance sheet policy (Figure 5), at higher haircut levels, bond collat-
eral value in the private market decreases and unconnected banks start demanding money to
self-insure against afternoon withdrawal shocks (as of 1 − ηe = 0.09, indicated by the green
dashed lines). As the supply of money is fixed under this policy, higher demand for money by
unconnected banks is accommodated by the decrease of money holdings by households. This is
facilitated by the increase in the deposit rate, which increases the opportunity cost of holding
money for unconnected banks and further tightens their afternoon constraint. Unconnected
banks respond by reducing their deposit intake and, therefore, investment in capital. The
reduction in net worth of unconnected banks induces a reduction in the net worth allocated
also to connected banks. This tightens the run away constraint of connected banks, which
therefore also reduce their investment in capital and deposit intake. When the haircut reaches
0.27, unconnected banks are very constrained in the secured market but they cannot increase
their money holdings any further as households’ money holdings are at a minimum and the
central bank is not ready to increase the supply of money. At this point, unconnected banks


                                               30
become so constrained in the afternoon that they dramatically reduce their deposit intake.
Their leverage constraint turns slack. Bond prices collapse. From here onwards unconnected
banks’ deposit intake and therefore investment in capital continues to fall. Connected banks
are able to pick up some of the deposits from unconnected banks but only up to a limit as they
face a tight leverage constraint. As a result, aggregate deposits, capital and output decline.
Quantitatively, the decline in output between a steady-state with 3% private haircut and one
with 40% haircut is 4.93%.
   Both the CO and OP policies are able to substantially mitigate output contractions by
preventing the leverage constraint of unconnected banks from turning slack.
   Under the CO policy (Figure 6), this is achieved by unconnected banks accessing central
bank funding as haircut in the secured market reaches 0.23 (indicated by the cyan dashed
lines). Unconnected banks reduce their deposit funding (as their afternoon constraint is tight
due to the high secured market haircut) and substitute it with the central bank funding (which
is subject to a much more favorable haircut of 0.03). As the central bank provides funding to
banks, its balance sheet expands and so does the money supply. Therefore, unconnected bank
can further increase their money holdings, without the need for a reallocation of money hold-
ings from households (indeed, households increase their money holdings again as the nominal
interest rate declines). As the private haircut increases above 0.38 (indicated by the magenta
dashed lines), unconnected banks pledge all their bond collateral at the central bank and stop
using the secured market to manage their afternoon liquidity needs, relying solely on money
holdings instead. From this point onwards, the economy is insulated from further increases in
the secured market haircut. Deposits, capital, and output stabilize. Quantitatively, the decline
in output between a steady-state with 3% private haircut and one with 40% haircut is just
0.52%.
   Under the OP policy (Figure 7), the central bank prevents the leverage constraint of un-
connected banks from turning slack by purchasing bonds and thus increasing the supply of
money which helps relax the afternoon constraint of unconnected banks. When private hair-
cut reaches 0.09, unconnected banks start selling bonds to the central banks and - to a much
smaller extent - to foreigners. The bond price decreases. When the private haircut reaches 0.14
(indicated by the orange dashed lines), unconnected banks sell off their entire bond holdings to
the central bank and choose to hold money instead to satisfy the afternoon constraint. From
this point onwards, the economy is insulated from further increases in the secured market


                                              31
haircut. Deposits, capital, and output stabilize. Quantitatively, the decline in output between
a steady-state with 3% private haircut and one with 40% haircut is just 0.06%.
    In sum, the key to stabilizing output when haircuts in the private market increase is to
expand the central bank balance sheet either through a provision of collateralized loans to
banks (using more favorable haircuts and the CO policy) or through bond purchases which
replace bonds that become less valuable as collateral in the private market with money so that
banks can self-insure against liquidity shocks (OP policy). The differential effectiveness of the
OP and CO policies under our calibration in terms of mitigating output reductions is driven
by the fact that these policies operate on different bank constraints. OP work directly towards
relaxing the afternoon liquidity constraint: OP make deposit funding more attractive at the
margin, by providing money to banks at a low opportunity cost. This prevents large declines
in deposits and capital of the unconnected banks which could otherwise occur for high haircut
levels. By contrast, CO offer banks additional (central bank) funding, once the deposits are too
expensive at the margin. In that case, unconnected banks top up deposit funding with central
bank funding, which prevents large declines in capital of the unconnected banks. As central
bank funding is more costly than deposit funding since it requires holding costly collateral,
lending and output decline more under CO policy than under the OP policy.


7    Conclusions

We developed a general equilibrium model featuring heterogeneous banks, interbank markets
for both secured and unsecured credit, and a central bank that can conduct open market oper-
ations as well as lend to banks against collateral. The model features a number of occasionally
binding constraints. The interactions between these constraints - in particular leverage and
liquidity constraints - are key in determining macroeconomic outcomes.
    We use the model to answer three questions: How do money market frictions affect the
macroeconomy? How do bank leverage and liquidity constraints interact? What does this
imply for central bank policies?
    We find that both secured and unsecured money market frictions force banks to either
divert resources into unproductive but liquid assets (bonds or money) or to de-lever (raise
fewer deposits as it is deposit funding that exposes banks to liquidity shocks). This leads to
less lending and output in the economy. If the liquidity constraint is very tight, the leverage
constraint may turn slack. In this case, there are large declines in lending and output (up

                                               32
to 5% in our calibrated example), in the absence of central bank intervention. Central bank
policies that increase the size of the central bank balance sheet (via outright purchases or
credit operations) can prevent the leverage constraint from turning slack and significantly
attenuate the decline in lending and output. The outright purchases are more effective than
credit operations in terms of mitigating output reductions - with the output decline under the
outright purchase policy as small as 0.1% - as they work directly towards relaxing the afternoon
liquidity constraint.




                                              33
References

Afonso, G. and Lagos, R. (2015). Trade dynamics in the market for federal funds. Economet-
  rica, 83(1):263–313.

Allen, F. and Gale, D. (2000). Financial contagion. Journal of Political Economy, 108(1):1–33.

Altavilla, C., Carboni, G., Lenza, M., and Uhlig, H. (2018). Interbank rate uncertainty and
  bank lending. Technical report, ECB and University of Chicago.

Andolfatto, D. and Williamson, S. (2015). Scarcity of safe assets, inflation, and the policy
  trap. Journal of Monetary Economics, 73:70–92.

Andrade, P., Breckenfelder, J., Fiore, F. D., Karadi, P., and Tristani, O. (2016). The role of
  liquidity in financial crises. Ecb working paper series nr 1956.

Arce, O., Nuno, G., Thale, D., and Thomas, C. (2017). Interbank market frictions. Technical
  report, Bankf of Spain.

Atkeson, A., Eisfeldt, A., and Weill, P. (2015). Entry and exit in otc derivatives markets.
  Econometrica, 83(6):2231–2292.

Bhattacharya, S. and Gale, D. (1987). Preference shocks, liquidity, and central bank policy. In
  Barnett, W. and Singleton, K., editors, New Approaches to Monetary Economics. Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.

Bianchi, J. and Bigio, S. (2013). Banks, Liquidity Management, and Monetary Policy. Staff
  Report 503, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department.

Bocola, L. (2016). The pass-through of sovereign risk. Journal of Political Economy, 124(4).

Bruche, M. and Suarez, J. (2010). Deposit insurance and money market freezes. Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 57(1):45–61.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and Sannikov, Y. (2014). A macroeconomic model with a financial sector.
  American Economic Review, 104(2):379–421.

Caballero, R. and Farhi, E. (2017). The safety trap. Review of Economic Studies, 85(1):223–
  274.


                                              34
Caballero, R., Farhi, E., and Gourinchas, P. (2017). The safe asset shortage conundrum.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(3):29–46.

Carlson, M., Duygan-Bump, B., Natalucci, F., Nelson, B., Ochoa, M., Stein, J., and den
  Heuvel, S. V. (2016). The demand for short-term, safe assets and financial stability: Some
  evidence and implications for central bank policies. International Journal of Central Banking,
  12(4):307–333.

Craig, B. and Ma, Y. (2018). Intermediation in the interbank lending market. Technical report,
  Stanford GSB.

Flannery, M. (1996). Financial crises, payment system problems, and discount window lending.
  Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 28:804–824.

Freixas, X. and Holthausen, C. (2005). Interbank market integration under asymmetric infor-
  mation. Review of Financial Studies, 18:459–490.

Freixas, X. and Jorge, J. (2008). The role of interbank markets in monetary policy: A model
  with rationing. Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 40:1151–1176.

Freixas, X., Martin, A., and Skeie, D. (2011). Bank liquidity, interbank markets, and monetary
  policy. Review of Financial Studies, 24:2656–2692.

Gertler, M. and Karadi, P. (2011). A model of unconventional monetary policy. Journal of
  Monetary Economy, 58:17–34.

Gertler, M. and Kiyotaki, N. (2011). Financial intermediation and credit policy in business
  cycle analysis. Handbook of Monetary Economics, 3(A).

Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N., and Prestipino, A. (2016). Wholesale banking and bank runs in
  macroeconomic modeling of financial crises. Handbook of Macroeconomics.

Gorton, G. and Laarits, T. (2018). Collateral damage. Technical report, Yale University.

Gorton, G. and Metrick, A. (2012). Securitized banking and the run on repo. Journal of
  Financial Economics, 104(3):425–451.

He, Z. and Krishnamurthy, A. (2016). A macroeconomic framework for quantifying systemic
  risk. Technical report, NBER Working Paper No. 19885.


                                              35
Heider, F., Hoerova, M., and Holthausen, C. (2015). Liquidity hoarding and interbank market
  rates: The role of counterparty risk. Journal of Financial Economics, 118:336–354.

Justiniano, A., Primiceri, G., and Tambalotti, A. (2017). Credit supply and the housing boom.
  Technical report, Norwesthern University.

Kim, K., Martin, A., and Nosal, E. (2018). Can the us interbank market be revived? Technical
  report, Federal Reserve System.

Koijen, R., Koulischer, F., Nguyen, B., and Yogo, M. (2016). Quantitative easing in the euro
  area: The dynamics of risk exposures and the impact on asset prices. Technical report,
  Banque de France.

Martin, A., Skeie, D., and von Thadden, L. (2014). Repo runs. Review of Financial Studies,
  27(4):957–989.

Mendoza, E. (2010). Sudden stops, financial crises, and leverage. American Economic Review,
  100:1941–1966.

Piazzesi, M. and Schneider, M. (2017). Payments, credit and asset prices. Technical report,
  Stanford University.

Repullo, R. (2005). Liquidity, risk taking, and the lender of last resort. International Journal
  of Central Banking, 1(2):47–80.

Roch, F. and Uhlig, H. (2018). The dynamics of sovereign debt crises and bailouts. Journal
  of International Economics, 114:1–13.




                                              36
                                              unsecured    secured
                   100%
                    90%
                                     Sample based on MMS              Sample based on MMSR
                    80%
                    70%
                    60%
                    50%
                    40%
                    30%
                    20%
                    10%
                     0%




       Figure 1: Quarterly turnover in unsecured and secured interbank money markets

Notes: Cumulative quarterly turnover in the euro area unsecured and secured interbank money market
segments (EUR billion). Source: Euro Area Money Market Survey (MMS) until 2015; Money Market
Statistical Reporting (MMSR) transactions-based data thereafter. The MMS was conducted once a year, with
each data point corresponding to the second quarter of the respective year; the panel comprised 98 euro area
credit institutions. The survey was discontinued in 2015. Sample from the Money Market Statistical
Reporting refers to 38 banks, all of which also participated in the MMS.




                                                     37
                       Table 1: ECB vs private haircuts on sovereign bonds

                                            ECB                      Private
                                   CQS1-2      CQS3          Germany     Portugal
                           2010       2.8         7.8          2.8             7.9
                           2011       2.8         7.8          3.3             38.4
                           2012       2.8         7.8          3.4             79.7
                           2013       2.7         8.2          3.4             80.0
                           2014       2.2         9.4          3.4             80.0
                           2017       2.2         9.4          2.8             28.4


ECB haircuts: CQS1-2 refers to sovereign bonds with credit quality 1 and 2, corresponding to a rating AAA
to A-; CQS3 refers to bonds with credit quality 3, corresponding to a rating BBB+ to BBB-. Private haircuts:
the column ‘Germany’ refers to an average haircut on bonds from Germany, France, and the Netherlands.
Source: ECB and LCH Clearnet.




                                                        38
                                       non‐AAA sovereign bonds outstanding, EA 19
                                       AAA sovereign bonds outstanding, EA 19
                   100%
                    90%
                    80%
                    70%
                    60%
                    50%
                    40%
                    30%
                    20%
                    10%
                     0%
                          2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017




            Figure 2: Share of safe (AAA-rated) euro area government debt in total

Breakdown of euro area government debt outstanding according to the credit rating (percentages of total).
Country is taken as AAA-rated if the country is AAA-rated by at least one of the following three rating
agencies: Moody’s, Fitch, S&P. The kinks in the chart correspond to dates when specific countries moved from
“at least one AAA” to “no AAA”. This happened in 2009 Q3 for Ireland, in 2010 Q3 for Spain, in 2013 Q3 for
France, and in 2016 Q2 for Austria. Source: ECB.




                                                           39
                    Table 2: Parameter values

Parameter                    Description                     Value
    θ                  Capital share in income               0.330
    δ                  Capital depreciation rate             0.020
   β                  Discount rate households               0.994
                      Inverse Frisch elasticity             0.400
   χ−1             Coefficient in households’ utility        0.006
    g                   Government spending                  0.181
   κ−1             Average maturity bonds (years)            6.000
   φ             Fraction net worth paid as dividends        0.038
    ξ       Fraction banks with access to unsecured market   0.420
    ηe              Haircut on bonds set by banks            0.970
    η            Haircut on bonds set by central bank        0.970
    λ         Share of assets bankers can run away with      0.149
  ω max      Max possible withdrawal as share of deposits    0.100
   κ              Intercept foreign demand function          10.122
   BC                Bonds held by central bank              1.200
   B∗                       Stock of debt                    7.500
    %              Parameter foreign bond demand             1.757
   QF                  Price central bank loans              0.997




                                40
         Table 3: Calibration targets

          Variable               Data    Model
         Debt/GDP                 0.68    0.68
        Bank leverage             6.00    6.06
  Govt bond spread (annual)      0.002   0.002
Share bonds unconnected banks     0.23    0.21
  Share bonds foreign sector      0.64    0.63
      Inflation (annual)          0.02    0.02




                        41
      Figure 3: Comparative statics: changing the share of banks with no access to unsecured funding, 1 − ξ, constant balance sheet policy
     Red solid lines denote the calibrated steady state. Green dashed lines denote the share of unconnected banks at which the non-negativity conditions on their
     cash holdings become slack. First row: money holdings of unconnected banks, collateral premium, and money holdings of households. Second row: bonds held
     by unconnected banks, bonds they pledge at the central bank, and bonds held by foreigners. Third row: deposits raised by unconnected and connected banks,
     and aggregate deposits. Fourth row: investment in capital by unconnected and connected banks, and percent deviation of capital from steady-state level. Fifth
     row: bond discount factor, net deposit rate and percent deviation of output from steady-state.




                       3                                            3
                       2                                            2                                        0.02
                       1                                            1                                        0.01
                       0                                            0                                           0
                           0.6     0.7        0.8    0.9                 0.6    0.7        0.8        0.9           0.6    0.7        0.8     0.9
                                         1-                                           1-                                         1-

                       4                                            4                                           5




42
                       2                                            2

                       0                                            0                                           0
                           0.6     0.7        0.8    0.9                 0.6    0.7        0.8        0.9           0.6    0.7        0.8     0.9
                                         1-                                           1-                                         1-


                      25                                           25                                          25


                      20                                           20                                          20
                           0.6     0.7        0.8    0.9                 0.6    0.7        0.8        0.9           0.6    0.7        0.8     0.9
                                         1-                                           1-                                         1-

                                                                                                                0
                      30                                           30

                      25                                           25                                          -5
                           0.6     0.7        0.8    0.9                 0.6    0.7        0.8        0.9           0.6    0.7        0.8     0.9
                                         1-                                           1-                                         1-

                       1                                           0.1                                          0

                    0.95                                          0.05                                         -1

                                                                    0                                          -2
                           0.6     0.7        0.8    0.9                 0.6    0.7        0.8        0.9           0.6    0.7        0.8     0.9
                                         1-                                           1-                                         1-
                 Figure 4: Comparative statics: changing the share of banks with no access to unsecured funding, 1 − ξ, OP policy
     Red solid lines denote the calibrated steady state. Green and orange dashed lines denote the stock of government bonds at which the non-negativity condition on
     cash holdings of unconnected banks becomes slack and the one on their bond holdings becomes binding, respectively. First row: money holdings of unconnected
     banks, collateral premium, and money holdings of households. Second row: bonds held by unconnected banks, bonds they pledge at the central bank, and bonds
     held by foreigners. Third row: deposits raised by unconnected and connected banks, and aggregate deposits. Fourth row: investment in capital by unconnected
     and connected banks, and percent deviation of capital from steady-state level. Fifth row: bond discount factor, central bank bond holdings, and percent deviation
     of output from steady-state.




                       3                                             3
                       2                                             2                                          0.02
                       1                                             1                                          0.01
                       0                                             0                                            0
                           0.6      0.7     0.8       0.9                0.6     0.7      0.8      0.9                 0.6    0.7       0.8      0.9




43
                       4                                             4                                            5

                       2                                             2

                       0                                             0                                            0
                           0.6      0.7     0.8       0.9                0.6     0.7      0.8      0.9                 0.6    0.7       0.8      0.9




                      25                                            25                                           25



                      20                                            20                                           20
                           0.6      0.7     0.8       0.9                0.6     0.7      0.8      0.9                 0.6    0.7       0.8      0.9


                                                                                                                  0
                      30                                            30


                      25                                            25                                            -5

                           0.6      0.7     0.8       0.9                0.6     0.7      0.8      0.9                 0.6    0.7       0.8      0.9


                       1                                             4                                            0


                    0.95                                             2                                            -1

                                                                     0                                            -2
                           0.6      0.7     0.8       0.9                0.6     0.7      0.8      0.9                 0.6    0.7       0.8      0.9
                    Figure 5: Comparative statics: changing the value of the private haircut, 1 − ηe, constant balance sheet policy.
     Red solid lines denote the calibrated steady state. Green and blue dashed lines denote the level of private haircuts at which the non-negativity conditions on cash
     holdings and the run-away constraint of unconnected banks become slack, respectively. First row: money holdings of unconnected banks, collateral premium,
     and money holdings of households. Second row: bonds held by unconnected banks, bonds they pledge at the central bank, and bonds held by foreigners. Third
     row: deposits raised by unconnected and connected banks, and aggregate deposits. Fourth row: investment in capital by unconnected and connected banks, and
     percent deviation of capital from steady-state level. Fifth row: bond discount factor, net deposit rate and percent deviation of output from steady-state.




                       3                                             3
                       2                                             2                                           0.05
                       1                                             1
                       0                                             0                                              0
                            0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6



                       4                                             4
                                                                                                                    5




44
                       2                                             2

                       0                                             0                                              0
                            0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6



                      30                                            30                                             30
                      20                                            20                                             20
                      10                                            10                                             10
                            0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6



                                                                                                                    0
                      30                                            30                                             -5
                                                                                                                  -10
                      20                                            20
                                                                                                                  -15
                      10                                            10
                            0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6



                       1                                            0.1                                             0

                                                                   0.05
                      0.5                                                                                          -5
                                                                     0
                            0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6
                                  Figure 6: Comparative statics: changing the value of the private haircut, 1 − ηe, CO policy
     Red solid lines denote the calibrated steady state. Green, cyan and magenta dashed lines denote the level of private haircuts at which the non-negativity conditions
     on cash holdings and on bonds pledged at the central bank become slack, and the constraint on bonds pledged at the central bank not exceeding bond holdings
     becomes binding, respectively. First row: money holdings of unconnected banks, collateral premium, and money holdings of households. Second row: bonds held
     by unconnected banks, bonds they pledge at the central bank, and bonds held by foreigners. Third row: deposits raised by unconnected and connected banks,
     and aggregate deposits. Fourth row: investment in capital by unconnected and connected banks, and percent deviation of capital from steady-state level. Fifth
     row: bond discount factor, net deposit rate and percent deviation of output from steady-state.




                       3                                              3
                       2                                              2                                           0.05
                       1                                              1
                       0                                              0                                              0
                            0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6              0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6




45
                       4                                              4                                              5

                       2                                              2

                       0                                              0                                              0
                            0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6              0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6



                      30                                             30                                            30
                      20                                             20                                            20
                      10                                             10                                            10
                            0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6              0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6



                                                                                                                     0
                      30                                             30                                             -5
                                                                                                                   -10
                      20                                             20
                                                                                                                   -15
                      10                                             10
                            0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6              0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6



                       1                                            0.1                                              0

                                                                   0.05
                      0.5                                                                                           -5
                                                                      0
                            0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6              0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6
                                 Figure 7: Comparative statics: changing the value of the private haircut, 1 − ηe, OP policy
     Red solid lines denote the calibrated steady state. Green and orange dashed lines denote the stock of government bonds at which the non-negativity condition on
     cash holdings of unconnected banks becomes slack and the one on their bond holdings becomes binding, respectively. First row: money holdings of unconnected
     banks, collateral premium, and money holdings of households. Second row: bonds held by unconnected banks, bonds they pledge at the central bank, and bonds
     held by foreigners. Third row: deposits raised by unconnected and connected banks, and aggregate deposits. Fourth row: investment in capital by unconnected
     and connected banks, and percent deviation of capital from steady-state level. Fifth row: bond discount factor, central bank bond holdings, and percent deviation
     of output from steady-state.




                       3                                             3
                       2                                             2                                          0.05
                       1                                             1
                       0                                             0                                            0
                           0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6




46
                       4                                             4
                                                                                                                  5
                       2                                             2

                       0                                             0                                            0
                           0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6



                      30                                            30                                           30
                      20                                            20                                           20
                      10                                            10                                           10
                           0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6



                                                                                                                   0
                      30                                            30                                            -5
                                                                                                                 -10
                      20                                            20
                                                                                                                 -15
                      10                                            10
                           0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6



                       1                                             4                                            0

                                                                     2
                     0.5                                                                                          -5
                                                                     0
                           0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6
Online Appendix
A      Equilibrium

An equilibrium is a vector of sequences such that:

                             D , Z , the representative household chooses c > 0, h > 0, D ≥
    1. Given Pt , τt , Wt , Rt−1  t                                        t      t      t

      0, Mth ≥ 0 to maximize their objective function

                                            ∞
                                        "                                                  #
                                                                                     Mth
                                            X                                   
                                                      t
                               max Et             β           u (ct , ht ) + v
                                                                                     Pt
                                            t=0

      subject to


               Dt + Mth ≤ Rt−1
                           D           h
                               Dt−1 + Mt−1 + (1 − τt−1 ) Wt−1 ht−1 + Zt−l − Pt−1 ct−1 .


    2. Final good firms choose capital and labor to maximize their expected profits from pro-
      duction, which makes use of the technology

                                                       θ
                                              yt = γt kt−1 h1−θ
                                                            t   .


    3. Capital-producing firms choose how much old capital kt−1 to buy from banks and to
      combine with final goods It to produce new capital kt , according to the technology


                                         kt = (1 − δ) kt−1 + It .


    4. Bank families aggregate the assets and liabilities of the individual family members:


                                        Vt = ξt Vt,c + (1 − ξt ) Vt,u                            (31)

                                        kt = ξt kt,c + (1 − ξt ) kt,u                            (32)

                                      Dt = ξt Dt,c + (1 − ξt ) Dt,u                              (33)

                                      Bt = ξt Bt,c + (1 − ξt ) Bt,u                              (34)

                                        Ft = ξt Ft,c + (1 − ξt ) Ft,u                            (35)

                                     Mt = ξt Mt,c + (1 − ξt ) Mt,u                               (36)




                                                          47
5. Given the stochastic paths for the endogenous variables ct , ht , rt , Pt , Qt , QFt , ηt , and
   stochastic exogenous sequence for ηet and the draw of the type according to ξt , the
                                                               F ,F , D , M
   representative date-t connected bank chooses kt,c , Bt,c , Bt,c t,c t,c t,c and the rep-
                                                              F ,F ,D ,M
   resentative date-t unconnected bank chooses kt,u , Bt,u , Bt,u t,u t,u t,u to maximize

   the banks’ objective function, i.e. to maximize

                                        ∞
                                   "                                                #
                                        X                  uc (ct+s , ht+s ) Nt+s
                        Vt,l = Pt E φ         (β (1 − φ))s                                   (37)
                                                             uc (ct , ht ) Pt+s
                                        s=0

   where


                Nt = max{0,      Pt (r + 1 − δ) (ξt−1 kt−1,c + (1 − ξt−1 ) kt−1,u )          (38)

                                 + (ξt−1 Mt−1,c + (1 − ξt−1 ) Mt−1,u )

                                 + ((1 − κ) Qt + κ) (ξt−1 Bt−1,c + (1 − ξt−1 ) Bt−1,u )

                                 − (ξt−1 Ft−1,c + (1 − ξt−1 ) Ft−1,u )
                                   D
                                 −Rt−1 (ξt−1 Dt−1,c + (1 − ξt−1 ) Dt−1,u )}


   s.t. for l = c, u,


                                                 Vt,l ≥ λ (Pt kt,l + Qt Bt,l + Mt,l )
                                                               F
                                                   0 ≤ Bt,l − Bt,l

                    Pt kt,l + Qt Bt,l + Mt,l + φNt = Dt,l + QFt Ft,l + Nt
                                                               F
                                                 Ft,l ≤ ηt Qt Bt,l


   as well as
                              ω max Dt,u − Mt,u ≤ ηet Qt Bt,u − Bt,u
                                                                 F
                                                                          


   for the unconnected banks.

6. The central bank chooses the total amount of money supply M t , the haircut parameter
   ηt , the discount factor on central bank funds QFt , the bond purchases BtC as well as the
   seigniorage payment St . It satisfies the balance sheet constraint


                                       St = QFt F t + Qt BtC − M t                           (39)




                                                  48
      and the budget constraint


                        M t = QFt−1 F t−1 + Qt−1 Bt−1
                                                  C
                                                      + QFt F t                         (40)

                                  −F t−1 + Qt BtC − (1 − κ) Bt−1
                                                             C       C
                                                                           
                                                                 − κBt−1


    7. The government satisfies the debt evolution constraint, the budget constraint and the
      tax rule


                                          Bt =        (1 − κ) B t−1 + ∆B t              (41)

                            Pt gt + κB t−1 =          τt Wt ht + Qt ∆B t + St           (42)

                                    τt Wt ht = αB t−1 .                                 (43)


    8. The foreign sector chooses the amount of domestic bonds to hold

                                      Btw
                                                                
                                                       1
                                          =f        κ − log Qt πt ,
                                                            e                           (44)
                                      Pt               %

      and satisfies the budget constraint


                                Qt Btw + Pt cw                    w
                                             t = [κ + (1 − κ) Q] Bt−1 .                 (45)


    9. Markets clear:


                                        ct + gt + It + cw
                                                        t = yt                          (46)

                                         B t = Bt + BtC + Btw                           (47)

                                                 F t = Ft                               (48)

                                            M t = Mt + Mth                              (49)


B     Optimality conditions of households and firms

The optimality conditions of the households are given by:

                                  ul (ct , ht )             Wt
                                −               = (1 − τt )
                                  uc (ct , ht )             Pt
                                        
                                  vM mht = uc (ct , ht ) RtD − 1
                                                                       
                                                                    
                             uc (ct−1 , ht−1 )       D uc (ct , ht )
                                                = βRt                  .
                                  Pt−1                       Pt

                                                49
    First-order conditions arising from the problem of the firms are


                                                       yt =          θ
                                                                 γt kt−1 h1−θ
                                                                          t   ,

                                              Wt ht = (1 − θ) Pt yt ,

                                             rt kt−1 = θyt ,

                                                       kt = (1 − δ) kt−1 + It .


C     The problem of the banks

The marginal value associated to each unit of asset and marginal cost associated to each unit
of liabilities for the bank family are given by
                                                                             
                                        uc (ct+1 , ht+1 )
               ψ̃t,k   = β (1 − φ) Et                     ψt+1 (rt+1 + 1 − δ)                  (50)
                                          uc (ct , ht )
                                                                                      
                                        uc (ct+1 , ht+1 ) Pt
               ψ̃t,B   = β (1 − φ) Et                          ψt+1 ((1 − κ) Qt+1 + κ)         (51)
                                          uc (ct , ht ) Pt+1
                                                                       
                                        uc (ct+1 , ht+1 ) Pt          D
               ψ̃t,D   = β (1 − φ) Et                          ψt+1 Rt                         (52)
                                          uc (ct , ht ) Pt+1
                                                                   
                                        uc (ct+1 , ht+1 ) Pt
               ψ̃t,F   = β (1 − φ) Et                          ψt+1                            (53)
                                          uc (ct , ht ) Pt+1
                                                                   
                                        uc (ct+1 , ht+1 ) Pt
              ψ̃t,M    = β (1 − φ) Et                          ψt+1                            (54)
                                          uc (ct , ht ) Pt+1

    The first-order conditions characterizing the choice of banks l = u and l = c for capital,
bonds, money, are given by

                                                       ψ̃t,k
                                   1 + µRA
                                        t,l                   = µBC      RA
                                                                 t,l + λµt,l for l = c, u
                                                         Pt
                                     
                                          ψ̃t,B
                           1 + µRA
                                t,l        Qt     = µBC     RA       C
                                                     t,l + µt,l λ − µt,l for l = c
                                     
                                          ψ̃t,B
                           1 + µRA
                                t,l        Qt     = µBC     RA       C
                                                     t,l + µt,l λ − µt,l − µt,u η
                                                                                et for l = u
                                 
                         1 + µRA
                              t,l   ψ̃t,M + µM      BC     RA
                                             t,c = µt,l + µt,l λ for l = c
                                 
                         1 + µRA
                              t,l   ψ̃t,M + µM      BC     RA
                                             t,c = µt,l + µt,l λ − µt,u for l = u

    Those characterizing banks’ choices for deposits, central bank funding, and bonds to be
pledged at the central bank, are
                                         
                                 1 + µRA
                                      t,l   ψ̃t,D = µBC
                                                     t,l  for l = c
                                                                                             (55)
                                 1 + µRA
                                      t,l   ψ̃t,D = µBC
                                                     t,l − ω
                                                             max µ
                                                                   t,u for l = u


                                                                 50
                        1 + µRA    ψ̃t,F = µBC   F    CC     F
                                 
                             t,l            t,l Qt − µt,l + µt,l for l = c, u                 (56)

                                 µCC        C
                                  t,l ηt = µt,l for l = c
                                 µCC            et + µC
                                  t,l ηt = µt,u η     t,l for l = u

    The complementary slackness conditions are


                                                                     µFt,l Ft,l = 0           (57)

                                                                   µM
                                                                    t,l Mt,l = 0              (58)

                                                         µC               F
                                                                              
                                                          t,l Bt,l − Bt,l = 0                 (59)
                           h                                                 i
                      µRA
                       t,l   φNt,A + Ṽ t,l − λ (P k
                                                  t t,l + Q  B
                                                            t t,l + M   t,l )   =0            (60)

                                                                    µB
                                                                     t,l Bt,l = 0             (61)


for l = u, c, and
                        µt,u ω max Dt,u − Mt,u − ηet Qt Bt,u − Bt,u
                                                                F
                                                                   
                                                                       =0

for unconnected banks only.


D      The equations characterizing the steady state

We characterize the steady state of the model.
    Define a generic variable as the corresponding capital letter variable, divided by the con-
                                         Xt
temporaneous price level, i.e. xt =      Pt .   The steady state is characterized by the following
conditions:

    1. 4 household equations:
                                                            π
                                                     RD =
                                                            β
                                         ul (c, l)
                                          −        = (1 − τ ) w
                                         uc (c, l)
                                        
                                     vM mh = uc (c, n) RD − 1
                                                                

                                                        
                                                    1
                          c = (1 − τ ) wl +           − 1 πd + (1 − π) mh + φn
                                                    β




                                                     51
2. 3 firms’ equations:


                                                y = γk θ l1−θ

                                               wl = (1 − θ) y

                                               rk = θy


   and
                                                  I = δk.

3. 5 central bank equations: 2 equations


                                            s = QF f + QbC − m
                                                          
                                1 F   F              1
                                            f + Q − κ (1 − Q) bC
                                        
                         m= Q −   1−Q
                                π                    π
   plus the value of 3 variables (policy instruments): η, QF , bC .

   Note that the seigniorage revenue of the central bank is given by the interest rate pay-
   ments on its assets:
                                       1             1
                                         1 − QF f + κ (1 − Q) bC .
                                               
                                  s=
                                       π             π

4. 2 government equations:

                                         ∗
                                      b=b
                                                  ∗        
                          ∗                      b        1 ∗
                      τ (1 − θ) y = g + κ (1 − Q) − Q 1 −     b − s.
                                                 π        π

   where g is exogenous.

5. 4 market clearing equations:


                                                   f =f

                                               m = m + mh

                                              b = b + bC + bw

                                             y = c + cw + g + I


   where the market clearing condition for the goods market (last equation above) is redun-
   dant due to the Walras law.

                                                  52
6. 45 bank equations:

  8 equations common to c and u banks,


                                                ν = ψn



                          n = max {0, (r + 1 − δ) (ξkc + (1 − ξ) ku )
                                                    1
                            + (ξmc + (1 − ξ) mu )
                                                    π
                                                                  1
                            + ((1 − κ) Q + κ) (ξbc + (1 − ξ) bu )
                                                                  π
                                                  1
                            − (ξfc + (1 − ξ) fu )
                                                  π
                              1
                            − (ξdc + (1 − ξ) du ) ,
                              β

                               ve = ψ̃k k + ψ̃B b + ψ̃M m − ψ̃D d − ψ̃F f


                                  ψ̃k = β (1 − φ) ψ (r + 1 − δ)
                                                  1
                                 ψ̃B = β (1 − φ) ψ [(1 − κ) Q + κ]
                                                  π
                                                  1
                                 ψ̃D = β (1 − φ) ψ
                                                  β
                                                  1
                                 ψ̃F = β (1 − φ) ψ
                                                  π
                                                  1
                                ψ̃M = β (1 − φ) ψ
                                                  π

  18 equations for l = c, u:


                               kl + Qbl + ml + φn = dl + QF fl + n


                                    φn + vel = λ (kl + Qbl + ml )

                                             vl = φn + vel

                          vel = ψ̃k kl + ψ̃B bl + ψ̃M ml − ψ̃D dl − ψ̃F fl

                                              fl = ηQbFl

                                               µFl fl = 0

                                              µM
                                               l ml = 0



                                               53
                                     µC       F
                                                
                                      l bl − bl   =0

                                        µB
                                         l bl = 0


7 equations for unconnected banks:


                                      1 + µRA   ψ̃k = µBC    RA
                                              
                                           u           u + λµu              (62)
                                       ψ̃B
                             1 + µRA
                                  u          + µB     BC    RA    C
                                                 u = µu + λµu − µu − µu η
                                                                        e   (63)
                                          Q
                             1 + µRA    ψ̃M + µM      BC    RA
                                      
                                  u             u = µu + λµu − µu           (64)

                                    1 + µRA    ψ̃D = µBC   max
                                             
                                           u          u −ω     µu           (65)
                                                ψ̃F         C 1        1
                                     1 + µRA
                                          u        F
                                                     = µBC
                                                        u − µu  F
                                                                  + µFu F   (66)
                                                 Q             Q       Q
                                                µC    CC
                                                 u = µu η − µu η
                                                               e            (67)

          µu ω max du − mu − ηeQ bu − bFu = 0
                                        
                                                                            (68)


6 equations for connected banks:


                            1 + µRA   ψ̃k = µBC + λµRA
                                    
                                 c           c      c                       (69)
                                ψ̃B
                     1 + µRA
                           c          + µB     BC
                                          c = µc  + λµRA
                                                      c  − µC
                                                            c               (70)
                                   Q
                     1 + µRA     ψ̃M + µM      BC
                                                  + λµRA
                               
                          c              c = µc       c                     (71)

                             1 + µRA    ψ̃D = µBC
                                      
                                    c          c                            (72)
                                      ψ̃F             1        1
                          1 + µRA
                               c         F
                                           = µBC
                                              c  − µC
                                                    c   F
                                                          + µFc F           (73)
                                       Q              Q        Q
                                       µC    CC
                                        c = µc η                            (74)


6 bank aggregation equations:


                                   v = ξvc + (1 − ξ) vu

                                   k = ξkc + (1 − ξ) ku

                                   d = ξdc + (1 − ξ) du

                                   b = ξbc + (1 − ξ) bu

                                   f = ξfc + (1 − ξ) fu

                                m = ξmc + (1 − ξ) mu .


                                        54
  7. 2 rest of the world equations
                                                                 
                                                w      1
                                              b = f κ − log Qt πt
                                                            f
                                                       %

                                                                                 bw
                                          Qbw + cw = [κ + (1 − κ) Q]                .
                                                                                  π

   These are 66 equations (one redundant by the Walras law) in 65 endogenous variables:
                      (                                                                        )
                                y, k, c, cw , l, d, n, mh , b, bw , f, m, v, ve, b, τ ∗ ,
                          ψ, ψ̃k , ψ̃B , ψ̃M , ψ̃D , ψ̃F , µu , w, r, Q, RD , π, I, s, f , m

plus
                      kl , ml , fl , bl , bFl , dl , vl , vel , µFl , µM    RA BC     CC   C    B
                  
                                                                       l , µl , µl , µl , µl , µl ,

plus the value of the three policy instruments


                                                    η A , QF , bC ,


and of the following exogenous variables: g, ξ, ηe.
   The bank first-order conditions can be further simplified as follows. For the unconnected
banks, conditions (62)-(68) can be simplified to:


 µu ω max du − mu − ηeQ bu − bFu = 0
                               
                                                                                                      (75)
                                                                                 
                                        ω max µu = 1 + µRA
                                                        u     ψ̃k − ψ̃D − λµRA u                      (76)
                                                                          !
                                                                      ψ̃B
                                          µCC           RA
                                                                            − µB
                                                           
                                            u η = 1 + µu       ψ̃k −           u                      (77)
                                                                       Q
                                                                       
                                             µM
                                              u = 1 + µ RA
                                                        u     ψ̃k −  ψ̃M   − µu                       (78)
                                                                          !
                                              1             ψ̃F                            1
                                         µFu F = 1 + µRAu           − ψ̃D − ω max µu + µCC
                                                                                        u             (79)
                                             Q                 QF                          QF




                                                          55
    For the connected banks, conditions (69)-(74) can be simplified to,

                                       ψ̃k − ψ̃D
                            µRA
                             c  =                                                          (80)
                                    λ − ψ̃k − ψ̃D
                                                        !
                                                    ψ̃B
                             µB             µRA           − µCC
                                                  
                              c = 1+         cψ̃k −          c η                             (81)
                                                     Q
                                                     
                             µM        RA
                              c = 1 + µc     ψ̃k − ψ̃M                                       (82)
                                                        !
                            F 1        RA
                                           ψ̃F                  1
                          µ c F = 1 + µc         F
                                                   − ψ̃D + µCCc                              (83)
                             Q                Q                 QF


E     Proofs

Proof of Proposition 2
    For a connected bank, equations (69) and (72) write as:


                               1 + µRA   ψ̃k + µkc = µBC + λµRA
                                       
                                     c                c       c

                                    1 + µRA    ψ̃D = µBC + µD
                                             
                                          c           c     c


where µkc ≥ 0 and µD
                   c ≥ 0 are Lagrange multipliers on the capital and deposits, respectively,

of a connected bank.
    Combining the above equations and re-arranging yields

                                                  
                            1 + µRA
                                 c         ψ̃k − ψ̃D = λµRA
                                                         c  − µkc − µD
                                                                     c .


    Since ψ̃k > ψ̃D , µkc ≥ 0, and µD                    RA > 0, implying that the run-away
                                    c ≥ 0, we must have µc

constraint of a connected bank binds. Given that the run-away constraint binds, it follows
that connected banks raise outside funding to top up their net worth to invest in capital.
    For an unconnected bank, equations (62) and (65) write as:


                            1 + µRA   ψ̃k + µku = µBC    RA
                                    
                                 u                 u + λµu

                                 1 + µRA    ψ̃D = µBC   max
                                                            µu + µD
                                          
                                       u           u −ω           c


where µku ≥ 0 and µD
                   u ≥ 0 are Lagrange multipliers on the capital and deposits, respectively,

of an unconnected bank.




                                                      56
   Combining the above equations and re-arranging yields

                                              
                        1 + µRA
                             u         ψ̃k − ψ̃D = λµRA
                                                     u +ω
                                                          max
                                                              µu − µku − µD
                                                                          u.


   Since ψ̃k > ψ̃D , µku ≥ 0, and µD                    RA                           RA
                                   u ≥ 0, we must have µu > 0, µu > 0, or both. For µu > 0,

the run-away constraint of a unconnected bank binds, which means it raises outside funding
to top up their net worth to invest in capital. For µu > 0, the afternoon constraint of an
unconnected bank binds, which means it raises deposits. This completes the proof.
   Proof of Proposition 3
   By equation (81),
                                                                       !
                                           1                    ψ̃B        1
                           µCC
                            c    = 1 + µRA
                                        c                  ψ̃k −           − µB ≥0
                                            η                     Q         η c

since µCC
       c  ≥ 0. It also follows that
                                                           ψ̃B
                                                   ψ̃k −       ≥0                                    (84)
                                                            Q
since µB                      CC in equation (83) to obtain:
       c ≥ 0. Substitute for µc
                                       "                   !                           !#
                                           ψ̃F                     1             ψ̃B         1
                µFc          µRA                                F
                                                                                            − µB
                                   
                      = 1+    c                − ψ̃D           Q +         ψ̃k −                 .   (85)
                                           QF                      η              Q          η c

   We first show that if condition (28) holds, then µFc > 0 and fc = 0 (connected banks do
not borrow from the central bank). We prove the claim by contradiction, i.e., suppose that
condition (28) holds and yet µFc = 0 (and fc > 0). There are two cases: either µB
                                                                                c > 0 or

µB                B
 c = 0. Consider µc > 0. Then, bc = 0 (connected banks do not hold any bonds), implying

that bFc = 0 (connected banks have no bonds to pledge to the central bank) and, therefore,
fc = 0. A contradiction.
   Consider µB
             c = 0. Then equation (85) re-writes as
                                           "                    !                           !#
                                               ψ̃F                       1          ψ̃B
                      µFc = 1 + µc RA
                                                                    QF +
                                      
                                                   − ψ̃D                      ψ̃k −              .
                                               QF                        η           Q

By condition (28),                             !                        !
                                       ψ̃B         1        ψ̃F
                                 ψ̃k −               +          − ψ̃D        QF > 0
                                        Q          η        QF

implying that µFc > 0 and fc = 0. A contradiction.



                                                           57
   We now show that if µFc > 0, then condition (28) holds. We prove the claim by contra-
diction, i.e., suppose that µFc > 0 and yet condition (28) does not hold. There are again two
cases, either bc = 0 (connected banks do not hold any bonds) or bc > 0. Consider bc = 0.
Then, µB
       c ≥ 0. Since (28) does not hold, we have that
                                            !                                   !
                                ψ̃F                 1
                                                    F                     ψ̃B
                                    − ψ̃D       Q +                 ψ̃k −           ≤0
                                QF                  η                      Q

and, by equation (85), µFc ≤ 0. A contradiction.
   Consider bc > 0. Then, µB
                           c = 0. Since (28) does not hold, we have that
                                            !                                   !
                                ψ̃F                 1
                                                    F                     ψ̃B
                                    − ψ̃D       Q +                 ψ̃k −           ≤0
                                QF                  η                      Q

and, by equation (85), µFc ≤ 0. A contradiction.
   In sum, condition (28) is a necessary and sufficient condition for connected banks not to
borrow from the central bank. A simple sufficient condition for connected banks not to borrow
from the central bank is
                                                ψ̃F
                                                    > ψ̃D .
                                                QF
                                  ψ̃B                   ψ̃F
This is because by (84), ψ̃k ≥     Q ,   so that        QF
                                                              > ψ̃D implies that µFc > 0 and fc = 0. This
condition is intuitive: if the interest rate on central bank funding is higher than the rate on
deposits, central bank funding will not be used. It is both more expensive in terms of the
interest rate and it requires collateral.
   Next, we show that if condition (28) holds and if the afternoon constraint of unconnected
banks binds, µu > 0, then a connected bank does not hold any bonds, i.e., bc = 0. Combining
(62) with (63), we get
                                                                      !
                                                              ψ̃B
                           µB            µRA                              − µC
                                                
                            u   = 1+      u             ψ̃k −                u − µu η
                                                                                    e.
                                                               Q

Since µu > 0, µC          B
               u ≥ 0 and µu ≥ 0, it follows that


                                                              ψ̃B
                                                    ψ̃k >                                            (86)
                                                               Q

must hold.




                                                         58
   Now turning to the connected banks, combine (69) and (70), to get
                                                                     !
                                                               ψ̃B
                                 µB           µRA                        − µC
                                                    
                                  c    = 1+    c         ψ̃k −              c .           (87)
                                                                Q

   Recall that (28) holds so that fc = 0. We now show that µC
                                                            c = 0 must hold. Intuitively, if a

bank does not borrow from the central bank, it cannot be collateral-constrained at the central
bank. Formally, consider the following complementary slackness condition in a connected bank
problem:
                                            µC       F
                                                       
                                             c bc − bc = 0.


Since a connected bank does not borrow from the central, fc = 0, we have that bFc = 0 since
fc = ηQbFc and bFc ≥ 0. Therefore, the above complementary slackness condition simplifies to


                                                µC
                                                 c bc = 0.


There are two possibilities: either the bond holdings are positive, bc > 0 or they are zero,
bc = 0. In the former case, it follows that µC
                                             c = 0, which proves the claim. In the latter case,

we have bc = 0, and a bank does not hold any bonds, does not pledge any bonds, and thus is
not constrained by the bond collateral constraint, implying µC
                                                             c = 0.

   Having establsihed that µC
                            c = 0 for a bank that does not borrow from the central bank,

(87) simplifies to                                                       !
                                                                   ψ̃B
                                       µB         RA
                                                     
                                        c = 1 + µc           ψ̃k −           .
                                                                    Q

              ψ̃B
Since ψ̃k >    Q ,   we have that µB
                                   c > 0 implying that bc = 0.

   Finally, we show that connected banks do not hold money. Combining (80) and (82) for
connected banks implies that if
                                                ψ̃k > ψ̃M

holds, we have µM
                A,c > 0 and thus mA,c = 0. The above condition is equivalent to

                                               y                 1
                                   θ                       +1−δ > .                       (88)
                                       (ξkc + (1 − ξ) ku )       π

Condition (27) is equivalent to

                                               y                 1
                                   θ                       +1−δ > ,
                                       (ξkc + (1 − ξ) ku )       β


                                                        59
                                                                                          π
and given that for households to deposit with banks, it must be that                      β   > 1, the condition (88)
is always satisfied.
   Proof of Propositon 4
   Since the afternoon constraint is slack, µu = 0, it follows from Proposition 2 that µRA
                                                                                        u >0

and unconnected banks raise either deposit or central bank funding, or both. To show that
condition (28) is a necessary and sufficient condition for an unconnected banks unconstrained
by the afternoon constraint to not borrow from the central bank, µFu > 0 and fu = 0, the proof
follows the same lines as the proof of Proposition 3 for connected banks since the relevant
first-order conditions of the unconnected banks simplify to those of the connected banks.
   Proof of Propositon 5
   Since the afternoon constraint binds, it must be that unconnected banks raise deposit
funding, du > 0.
   We first show that when (29) holds, unconnected banks do not borrow from the central
bank. We prove the claim by contradiction: suppose (29) holds and yet unconnected banks
borrow from the central bank so that fu > 0 and µFu = 0. Using (79), we get
                                                                          !
                                                              ψ̃F                      1
                            ω max µu = 1 + µu       RA
                                                                              + µCC
                                                       
                                                                  − ψ̃D          u       .
                                                              QF                      QF

                             ηe
Since µCA             CC
       u ≥ 0 we have µu ≥ µu η by (67). Therefore,

                                                !                                                 !
         max                        ψ̃F                        1                      ψ̃F                    ηe 1
                          µRA                           µCC       ≥ 1 + µRA
                                                                           
     ω         µu = 1 +    u            − ψ̃D       +    u               u                − ψ̃D       + µu
                                    QF                        Q F                     QF                     η QF

and we have that
                                                                                    !
                               max   ηe 1           RA
                                                                     ψ̃F
                          µu ω     −        − 1 + µ u                     − ψ̃D           ≥ 0.
                                     η QF                             QF

But condition (29) is equivalent to
                                                                                    !
                               max   ηe 1           RA
                                                                     ψ̃F
                          µu ω     −        − 1 + µ u                     − ψ̃D           < 0.
                                     η QF                             QF

A contradiction.
                                                                                                             ψ̃F
   Note that whenever deposit funding is cheaper than central bank funding so that                           QF
                                                                                                                   > ψ̃D ,
then a simple sufficient condition boils down to ηe > ηQF ω max .



                                                           60
   We now show that if condition (30) holds, then unconnected banks top up deposit funding
with central bank funding in the morning by pledging their entire bond portfolio, bFu = bu .
                                                                                    ψ̃B
                                                                            ψ̃k −    Q
We prove the claim by contradiction: Suppose that ηe <                      ψ̃k −ψ̃M
                                                                                          and yet unconnected banks
use bonds to borrow from the secured market so that bFu < bu (and, consequently, µC
                                                                                  u = 0).

Since bu > 0, we have µB             C                            CC = µ ηe . Using this to
                       u = 0. Since µu = 0, we have by (67) that µu     uη

substitute out µCC
                u  in (77), we have:
                                                                            !
                                                                   ψ̃B          1
                                               µRA
                                                        
                                  µu = 1 +      u            ψ̃k −                 .
                                                                    Q           ηe

By (78), we have
                                                                
                            µM        RA
                             u = 1 + µu                  ψ̃k − ψ̃M − µu ≥ 0

so that
                                                                  
                                       1+   µRA
                                             u         ψ̃k − ψ̃M ≥ µu .

Then, we have that
                                                                                           !
                                                                                ψ̃B         1
                            µRA                                 µRA
                                                                        
                      1+     u         ψ̃k − ψ̃M ≥ 1 +           u           ψ̃k −
                                                                                    Q          ηe

or, equivalently,
                                                              ψ̃B
                                                      ψ̃k −    Q
                                             ηe ≥                   .
                                                      ψ̃k − ψ̃M
A contradiction.
   Since bFu = bu , unconnected banks cannot borrow in the secured market. The binding
afternoon constraint then implies that


                                            mu = ω max du > 0.


This completes the proof.




                                                        61
F    Additional comparative statics

In this Appendix, we present results of a comparative statics exercise which aims to capture the
effects of safe asset scarcity, a concern which became particularly pronounced in the aftermath
of the Global Financial Crisis. In the euro area, the share of AAA-rated sovereign bonds in
GDP declined from 30% pre-crisis to just 14% in 2017 (a country is taken as AAA-rated if the
country is AAA-rated by at least one of the following three rating agencies: Moody’s, Fitch,
S&P). To analyze the macroeconomic effects of this development, the supply of government
bonds b in our model varies between 7.50 units (the steady-state level) and 3.75 units. Figures
8 and 9 show the results for the constant balance sheet and the OP policy, respectively.
    In both figures, the solid red line denotes the supply of government bonds under our
benchmark calibration (b = 7.50). The green dashed lines indicate the level of b at which
unconnected banks start holding money so that the multiplier µM
                                                              u becomes zero. The blue

dashed lines indicate the level of b at which the leverage constraint of unconnected banks turns
slack and the multiplier µRA
                          u  becomes zero. The orange dashed lines indicate the level of b
at which unconnected banks stop holding bonds. As we shall see, these three constraints will
play a major role in this exercise.
    In the calibrated steady-state (at the solid red line), the collateral premium on bonds is
positive and the afternoon constraint binds for unconnected banks. If the stock of government
bonds is lower (moving rightward in both figures), it becomes more difficult for unconnected
banks to obtain collateralized funding of any kind.
    Under the constant balance sheet policy (Figure 8), the figures resemble what happens as
private haircuts increase. In particular, if bonds are more scarce (as of b = 6.93, indicated
by the green dashed lines), unconnected banks demand money to self-insure against afternoon
liquidity shocks. As the supply of money is fixed under this policy, higher demand for money
by unconnected banks is accommodated by the decrease of money holdings by households.
This is facilitated by the increase in the nominal rate (the deposit rate), which is proportional
to inflation. Higher inflation increases the opportunity cost of holding money for unconnected
banks and further tightens their afternoon constraint. Unconnected banks respond by reduc-
ing their deposit intake and, therefore, investment in capital. This puts a downward pressure
on aggregate capital and, correspondingly, an upward pressure on the return on capital. For
the connected banks, this tightens their leverage constraint and, therefore, they reduce their



                                               62
investment in capital and their deposit intake. When the supply of bonds is 6.33 units, un-
connected banks are very constrained in the secured market but they cannot increase money
holdings any further as households reduced their money holdings to a minimum. At this point,
unconnected banks become so constrained in the afternoon that they must reduce their deposit
intake. Their leverage constraint turns slack. Connected banks are able to pick up some of the
deposits from unconnected banks but only up to a limit as they are constrained by the leverage
constraint. As a result, aggregate deposits, capital and output decline. Quantitatively, if the
stock of bonds is halved, output contracts by 3.3 percent.
   Under the CO policy, the outcome is the same as under the constant balance sheet policy.
This is because providing collateralized central bank funding through CO when bonds are
scarce cannot mitigate output contractions.
   By contrast, OP policy is very effective in stabilizing output in this case. It achieves
this by substituting scarce bonds with another liquid asset - money - while maintaining the
opportunity cost of holding money low. Specifically, for the stock of government bonds is at
6.86, unconnected banks sell their entire bond holdings to the central bank. For steady-states
with a lower stock of government bonds, a lower stock of government bonds is reflected only in
lower foreign bond holdings. Quantitatively, if the stock of bonds is halved, output contracts
only by 0.1 percent under the OP policy.




                                              63
                       Figure 8: Comparative statics: changing the stock of government bonds, b, constant balance sheet policy
     Red solid lines denote the calibrated steady state. Green, blue and orange dashed lines denote the stock of government bonds at which the non-negativity
     condition on cash holdings of unconnected banks becomes slack, their leverage constraint becomes slack, and the non-negativity condition on their bond holdings
     becomes binding, respectively. First row: money holdings of unconnected banks, collateral premium, and money holdings of households. Second row: bonds held
     by unconnected banks, bonds they pledge at the central bank, and bonds held by foreigners. Third row: deposits raised by unconnected and connected banks,
     and aggregate deposits. Fourth row: investment in capital by unconnected and connected banks, and percent deviation of capital from steady-state level. Fifth
     row: bond discount factor, net deposit rate, and percent deviation of output from steady-state.




                       3                                            3
                       2                                            2
                                                                                                               0.05
                       1                                            1
                       0                                            0                                            0
                             7        6        5        4                 7         6        5         4               7        6        5        4




64
                       4                                            4                                            5

                       2                                            2

                       0                                            0                                            0
                             7        6        5        4                 7         6        5         4               7        6        5        4



                      25                                           25                                           25

                      20                                           20                                           20

                      15                                           15                                           15
                             7        6        5        4                 7         6        5         4               7        6        5        4


                                                                                                                 0
                      30                                           30
                                                                                                                 -5
                      25                                           25
                      20                                           20                                           -10
                                                                                                                -15
                             7        6        5        4                 7         6        5         4               7        6        5        4


                       1                                           0.1                                           0

                    0.95                                          0.05                                           -2

                     0.9                                            0                                            -4
                             7        6        5        4                 7         6        5         4               7        6        5        4
                                    Figure 9: Comparative statics: changing the stock of government bonds, b, OP policy
     Red solid lines denote the calibrated steady state. Green and orange dashed lines denote the stock of government bonds at which the non-negativity condition on
     cash holdings of unconnected banks becomes slack and the one on their bond holdings becomes binding, respectively. First row: money holdings of unconnected
     banks, collateral premium, and money holdings of households. Second row: bonds held by unconnected banks, bonds they pledge at the central bank, and bonds
     held by foreigners. Third row: deposits raised by unconnected and connected banks, and aggregate deposits. Fourth row: investment in capital by unconnected
     and connected banks, and percent deviation of capital from steady-state level. Fifth row: bond discount factor, central bank bond holdings, and percent deviation
     of output from steady-state.




                       3                                             3
                       2                                             2
                                                                                                                0.05
                       1                                             1
                       0                                             0                                            0
                             7         6       5         4                 7        6        5        4                 7         6        5        4




65
                       4                                             4                                            5

                       2                                             2

                       0                                             0                                            0
                             7         6       5         4                 7        6        5        4                 7         6        5        4




                      25                                            25                                           25
                      20                                            20                                           20
                      15                                            15                                           15
                             7         6       5         4                 7        6        5        4                 7         6        5        4



                                                                                                                  0
                      30                                            30
                                                                                                                  -5
                      25                                            25
                      20                                            20                                           -10
                                                                                                                 -15
                             7         6       5         4                 7        6        5        4                 7         6        5        4



                       1                                             4                                            0

                    0.95                                             2                                            -2

                     0.9                                             0                                            -4
                             7         6       5         4                 7        6        5        4                 7         6        5        4
