                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ALTERNATIVE MECHANISMS FOR CORPORATE CONTROL




                                  Randall Morck

                                 Andrel   Shlelfer
                                Robert W. Vishny




                             Working Paper No. 2532




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 1988




We are indebted to James Brickley, Harry DeAngelo, Cliff Holderness, David Malmquist,
Abbie Smith. and Michael Weisbach for helpful coninents. We also acknowledge
the financial support of the Center for the Study of the Economy and the State,
and the William S. Fishman and Dimensional Fund Advisors Faculty Research Funds
at the Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago. None of the above
is responsible for the content of this paper. The research reported here Is
part of the NBER's research program In Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                          NBER Working Paper #2532
                                                          March 1988




                       Alternative Mechanisms for Corporate Control



                                             ABSTRACT



            We   examine   performance and   management characteristics of Fortune   500
    firms    experiencing one of     three of control change: internally
                                             types
    pricipitated management turnover, hostile takeover, and friendly takeover.
    We find that firms experiencing internally precipitated management turnover
    perform poorly relative to other firms in their industries, but are not
    concentrated in poorly performing industries. In contrast, targets of
    hostile takeovers are concentrated in troubled industries. There is also
    weaker evidence that hostile takeover targets underperform their industry
    peers. We interpret this evidence as consistent with the idea that the board
    of directors is capable of firing managers whose leadership leads to poor
    performance relative to industry, but that an external challenge in the form
    of a hostile takeover is often required when th. whole industry is in
    decline.
        The evidence also indicates that firms run by a me.ber of the founding
    family are less likely to experience either internally precipitated top
    management turnover or a hostili takeover. On the other hand, firms whose
    top management team is dominated by a single, relatively young top executive,
    while lacking in internal discipline, are more likely to experience a hostile
    takeover.




Randall   Morck.                     Andret Shleifer                     Robert 14. Vislrny
Faculty of Business                  Graduate School of Business         GradUate School
University of Alberta                University of Chicago               of Business
Edmonton Alberta                     1101 E 58th Street                  University of Chicago
Canada                               Chicago, IL 60637                   Chicago, IL 60637
                                         2

1. Introduction.

       Ineffective boards of directors have been held responsible for many woes

of American companies (Mace, 1971, Jensen, 1986), including the advent of

hostile takeovers. The board is blamed for both failing to recognize the

problems of the firm, and for failing to stand up to top officers when tough

solutions to these problems are needed. Where the board fails, external

control devices come to play a role.

       An alternative view suggests that the board serves its monitoring and

control functions effectively (Fama and Jensen, 1983). Consistent with this

view, Coughlan and Schmidt (1985), Warner, Watts and Wruck (1988) and

Weisbach (1988) find that poor performance of the firm increases the

likelihood   of chief Executive Officer (CEO) replacement, and attribute this

to monitoring by the board. Evidently, board, can deal with at least some of

the problems of the firm.

       The question then is: which problems of the firm can the board of

directors deal with effectively and which ones instead trigger the external

control market? Arguably, the board's effectiveness depends in part on

whether the problem experienced by the firm is idiosyncratic or industry-

wide. In the former case,    it might   be relatively easy for the board to

assess   blame and fire a CEO whose leadership causes the company to
underperfora its otherwise healthy industry. In the case of industry-wide
problems, such as those caused by foreign competition, technological
progress, or deregulation, the board's problem is much harder. It is       then

less   clear that the fin is making mistakes • or what those mistakes are, when
the whole industry is suffering. With this kind of uncertainty, most boards
would be reluctant to blame the CEO for the firm's problems, let alone fire
him. Even when the board understands that changes are needed, it might
                                            3

refuse   to force the current CEO (or his replacement) to divest divisions,

close plants lay off workers, cut wages, and take other painful measures

that might increase profits in a declining industry. Under these

circumstances, an external challenge to the board's authority may be

necessary to enforce shareholder wealth maximization.

       The board's effectiveness also depends on the status and power of the

CEO. Some managers, by virtue of their ability, ownership stake, tenure, or

status   as founders might be able to dominate the          board,   rather than be
controlled by     it     whatever problems the company faces. If the board's

comparative advantage is to deal with certain types of problems end with

handling particular CEOs       companies going through internallycaused

management turnover will be different than targets of hostile takeovers. By

contrasting the characteristics of the two types of firms, this paper tries

to find out what boards do in fact accomplish.

      Our analysis focuses on three alternative means of control change in a

sample   of 454   publicly-traded   Fortune 500 companies that       we follow between

1981 and 1985. The control methods that          we study   include internally-caused

complete turnover of the top officers of the corporation, friendly sale of

the company, and the hostile takeover1. Complete turnover of top managers

appears to be the      best measure of forced internally precipitated change, as
opposed to orderly transitions. We do not treat ordinary internal succession
as a control change, since those do not         usually represent responses to

management problems (Vancfl, 1987). In fact, we present evidence in              section
4   that, far from being used as a disciplinary       device, internal succession is
associated with abnormally good performance. Friendly acquisitions are

      'Other recent studies of the     characteristics      of takeover targets include
Masbrouck (1985), Palepu (1986),      Ravenscraft and    Scherer (1987), and Morck,
Shleifer and Vishny (1988).
                                          4

studied because they too represent control changes, but not necessarily of

the same disciplinary nature as hostile takeovers (Morck, Shleifer and

Vishny, 1988, present evidence on this point). As such, friendly

acquisitions provide a useful contrast to both hostile takeovers and

internally-caused complete turnover.

      We find    that complete top management turnover is associated primarily
with poor   performance of a fin relative to its industry and not with adverse

industry    shocks. In   contrast, hostile takeovers are targeted at firms

concentrated in troubled industries. While targets of hostile takeovers also

underperform      their already troubled industries, this effect is less
pronounced than poor performance of their industries. This         evidence is

consistent   with the following conclusions: In many cases, boards of directors
succeed in comparing the performance of their companies to the industry
standard,   and in dismissing management teams that underperform      the   industry.

In contrast, boards typically fail to deal with problems faced by an entire

industry    in   trouble. These boards are either unsure that management is doing

a bad job in      responding to the adverse industry shock,   or they refuse to

force   changes that an improvement of profits requires, such as divisional
selloffs or wage reductions. In this respect firms acquired in friendly
deals are more similar to firms experiencing complete turnover than         they are

to   targets of hostile takeovers. To the extent that they are disciplinary at
all, friendly deals seem to be encouraged by corporate boards that are faced
with poor performance relative to a healthy industry.
      We also find that fins run by members of the founding family and CEOs
with large direct ownership are less likely to experience either complete
management turnover or a hostile takeover. Both disciplinary devices are
less effective against CEOs with strong attachment to the firm, who either
                                          S


control the board or can better weather a hostile threat. In an additional

attempt to measure poor internal discipline, we focus on firms where the top

management team consists of a single individual. We define such firms as

cases where only one executive holds any of the three titles of chairman,

chief executive officer and president and where he is also alone in s&gning

the letter to shareholders in the annual report. We find that, as long as

such   one-man firms are run by a young top   executive, they are less likely

than   an average firm to experience complete turnover of the management team,
but. more likely than an average firm to be a target of a hostile takeover.
Hostile takeovers may thus be a way to deal with these young Thosses" whom

the board cannot effectively control.

       In suary, our evidence indicates that, given the current capabilities

of   boards of directors, internal turnover and hostile takeovers provide
complementary means   of enforcing maximization of shareholder value.2 Hostile

takeovers become relevant precisely when the problems of the firm and the

status of top management make the board's disciplinary role too difficult to

perform  effectively.
       Section 2 of the paper discusses the data we use in our empirical work,
and presents the basic characteristics of firms that undergo different forms
of control changes. Section 3 presents the main empirical results that
attempt to identify characteristics conducive to particular means of control
change.    Section 4 compares firms   experiencing complete turnover of the
management tea -. used as a proxy for disciplinary turnover - -      with   firms

experiencing a partial turnover of top management.      Section   5 concludes.




     2which does not necessarily coincide with social welfare; see Shleifer
and Vishny (1988) and Shleifer and Sunars (1988).
                                           6

2. Basic results on alternative forts of control change.
    The question raised in the introduction is whether the form of control

change depends on a firms performance problems and characteristics of top

managers. This section compares mean characteristics of firms that were

acquired in a friendly deal, a hostile deal or that underwent an internally

precipitated control change. The subsequent section presents a multinomial

logit model in which all the determinants of alternative types of change are

treated simultaneously.



2a. Types of Management Changes.

     The analysis in this paper is based on the sample of all publicly traded

1980 Fortune 500 firms. Of the 454 firms in the sample, 82 have been

acquired by third parties or went through a management buyout (MBO) in the

period 1981-1985. Based on an examination of the Wall Street Journal Index.

40 of those appear to have started hostile and 42 friendly. We call an

acquisition hostile if the initial bid for the target (which need not be a

bid by the eventual acquiror) was neither negotiated with its board prior to

being made nor accepted by the board as made. Initial rejection by the

target's board is thus taken as      evidence    of the bidder's hostility, as is

active management resistance to the bid, escape to a white knight, or a

management buyout in response to unsolicited pressure. We sort acquisitions

on the basis of the initial mood because we are interested in firm

characteristics that sparked the bidding in the first place. Targets that

are not classified as hostile are called friendly.

     Following the analysis of Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988), we exclude

friendly MBOs - -   those   proposed by management in the absence of visible

evidence   of outside takeover threat --       from   our sample of acquisitions, since
                                           7


they neither represent control changes nor resemble ordinary targets of

friendly offers in their characteristics. This reduces the sample of

friendly acquisitions to 34. Also following the evidence in Morck, Shleifer

and Vishny (1988), we treat hostile )thOs •-     that   are defensive responses to &

hostile   bid or 13-D filing -- as if they were regular hostile takeovers. Our

sample of hostile takeovers stays at 40 observations.

      Among the firms   that   have not been acquired, we define complete

turnover as a complete change between 1980 and 1985 in the list of officers

signing   the letter to shareholders in the annual      report.   A firm   experiences

a   complete turnover if none of the officers who    signed   the annual    report   in
1980 also signs in 1985. An alternative way to define complete turnover

would be using changes in the list of people holding top titles rather than

in the list of signers. The trouble with following this path is that titles

can be retained by figureheads, who have no effective control or power.

Signing the annual report, in contrast, seems to be a more effective proxy

for leadership. We focus on complete rather than partial turnover of

signatures     because we are interested in disciplinary management changes
forced by the board. Presumably, most changes in which one co-signer of the
annual report replaces another represent ordinary succession rather than
disciplinary actionby the board. The results in section 4 strongly support
this conclusion.
       Where   a company has experienced a management    turnover   prior to a hostile
takeover, this company is treated as an acquisition and not as a turnover.
This happens in 4 out of 40 hostile takeovers. While in these cases the
board is arguably trying to deal with the management problems, it is not
providing an adequate solution. A takeover ii still required to provide an
alternative that mimizes shareholder wealth. Similarly, if management
                                              8

turns    over prior to a friendly acquisition, which also happens in 4 out of 34

cases, the turnover cannot be properly viewed as solving the need for new

management. Accordingly, we classify these cases as friendly acquisitions.

     The       above definition yields 93 cases of complete turnover. This number
seems too high as a measure of disciplinary turnover,         and doubtless still

includes      cases of ordinary succession. Some such non-disciplinary cases
might    be   planned CEO retirements accompanied by the appointment of an outside
replacement         team, but such cases are rare (Vancil, 1987). More commonly,

these would be cases where the planned internal successor did not come from

the list of 1980 signers of the annual report. Overall, although our

definition probably covers most extraordinary non-takeover-related management

changes, it also covers some cases of ordinary replacement that only add

noise.

     In section 4, we separately look at the cases of partial turnover, in

which the Forbes-listed top executive (usually the CEO) changes between 1980

and 1985 but there is no complete turnover in the list of signers of the

letter to shareholders. (The Forbes-listed top executive is alway. among the

signers       of   the letter to shareholders in the annual report.) Our sample

includes       70 cases of such partial turnover. Arguably, incumbent top
executives         are partly competing for their Jobs with other executives in the

company. On that theory, even replacement by a member of the same management

team can be disciplinary. Our view, supported by the results of section 4,

is that most of the partial turnovers in our sample represent         ordinary
succession         and not disciplinary changes. Accordingly, we focus on complete

turnover to gauge the effectiveness of the board as a control device.



2b. Performance Characteristics by Type of Control Change.
                                                9

       This study uses three different measures of performance: average robin's

Q, stock market abnormal returns, and employment growth rates. Average

Tobin's Q is equal to the ratio of the firm's market value to the replacement

cost of its physical assets. As such, Tobin's Q can be viewed as measuring

the intangible assets of the firm. These may include future growth

opportunities, monopoly power, goodwill, rents appropriated away from unions,

as well as the quality of management. Our measure of Q was obtained from the

Griliches It & D Master File (Cummins, Hall and Laderman, 1982) for 1980. The

numerator      is the sum   of the actual market      value of the firm's coon stock
and estimated market values of preferred stock and debt3. The denominator of
Q is   the   replacement  cost of the firm's plant and inventories, A, also taken
from   the It   S I) Master File. Values of Q are not available for 85 firms,

primarily because of the difficulty of obtaining values of long term debt

and,   in some cases, replacement cost A. Our            final   sample for results using Q
consists     of 371 firms.    These   include   80   cases of complete turnover,   31

hostile takeovers,      and 17 friendly acquisitions.

       Since we are looking at an imperfectly measured Q, the interpretation of

Q as   a measure of the valuation of intangible assets can be problematic. The
replacement cost of assets could be overstated, for example, if the firm

             The market value of comeon stock is taken from Standard and           Poor's
COMFUSTAT tape. The market value          of preferred stock is estimated by dividing
the preferred stock dividend figure (reported on COMPUSTAT) by the Moody's
preferred dividend rate for the median-risk companies. The market value of
the fin's debt is taken as the value of its short ten liabilities net of
its short-term assets (from COMPUSTAT) plus an estimate of the market value
of its long-term debt. Estimates of long-ten debt for our                firms were
obtained from the NBfl's R&D Master File (see Cu—ins, Hall. and Laderman,
1982). These estimates are constructed on the assumption that all long-term
debt has an orignial maturity of 20 years • and using a matrix of bond prices
in year t for bonds due in year s from the Moody's corporate BAA bond price
series. The age structure of corprate debt is estimated from changes in the
firm's book value of long-term debt in each of the 20 previous years on the
COMPUSTAT tape. Using this age structure estimate end the bond price matrix,
Cunins et al. (1982) calculate the value of each fin's long-term debt.
                                           10

bought its assets tong ago and their value depreciated significantly because

of technological progress, foreign competition, or other changes. In these

cases, the inflation-adjusted historical cost is a poor guide to the true

replacement   cost,   but a   very low Q is probably stilt   a reliable indicator of

a   declining firm.
       Our second measure of performance is the cumulative abnormal return over

the   period 1978-1980, calculated using the Capital Asset Pricing Model. The

data   for returns are the standard monthly series from the Center for Research
in Securities Prices. The reason for using abnormal returns is that they
capture the market's evaluation of more recent news about the fin's
current   and future profitability. Our sample using returns consists of 427

non-OTC firms, of which B7 went through complete turnover of management, 37

were targets of hostile takeovers, and 32 of friendly ones.

       Our third   measure of performance is employment growth over the 1978-
1980 period. Although employment growth is not        an   unambiguous   measure   of
performance, we use     it for two   reasons. First, it is more closely related to
the business side, as opposed to being based on stock market prices. Use of
such a measure enables us to say that takeover targets are not characterized
solely by being priced by the market below the tru. value of their earnings
streams under their current operating strategies. Second, employment growth
seems like a fairly reliable measure of industry health even though it may be
an ambiguous measure of f in performance within an industry. Our sample
using employment growth consists of 449 firms, of which 93 went through
complete turnover of management, 39 were targets of hostile takeovers, and 34
of friendly ones.
       Although we consider takeovers and management changes during the period
1981 to 1985, all our performance measures are calculated based on the data
                                           11

from a prior period. This ii done for two reasons. First1 it is difficult

to find an appropriat. way to compare performance of firms that experienced

control changes between 1981 and 1985 with those that experienced none,

except by looking at all of them prior to the hazard period. While for the

sample of firma experiencing change it might be more natural to look at

performance closer to the time of that change, there is no natural time frame

in which to measure performance of firms where the management stayed intact.

More importantly, in choosing a prior period, our aim was to avoid mixing in

the effects of the market's anticipation of future restructuring activity.

Starting in the early 1980s. a large component of market valuation of many

industrial fins may have been traceable to the expected premium from a

takeover or a restructuring. Prior to that period, corporate restructurings

were less prominent, and hence it is likely that the market valued fins

primarily as going concerns under the current management. Since two of our

three performance measures are based on stock market prices, our results

depend on these prices reflecting expected future profitability under current

management, and not the expected premium from a control change.

       For all three performance measures, we look separately at industry-wide

and firm-specific performance. For each fins in the sample, we consider both

the average Q of iti industry at the 3-digit SIC code level and the deviation

of its Q fro, the average Q of its industry. Analagously, we look at both

industry   abnormal   returns, and at   the deviation of the firm s abnormal,   return

from   the industry   average,   as well as at industry-wide and firm-specific
employment growth rates. This differentiation between industry effects and
firm-specific effects is the main contribution of this       study.   We are
interested in finding out whether boards respond differentially to industry-
                                                 12

wide and firm-specific problems, and whether takeovers are differentially

targeted at firms with these distinct types of problems.

        Table 1 presents the means of performance measures of our sample

companies for four categories of firms.               The first three Categories include

firms that experienced one of the three types of management change: complete

turnover, hostile takeover, or friendly acquisition; the fourth category

includes the remaining ('residual") firms. The results suggest that firms

experiencing complete turnover or a hostile takeover have an average Q

statistically significantly lower than that of residual firms.                 robin's   Q of

complete turnover firms         is   .734, which is 27% below Tobins Q of residual

firms    equal   to .932 (t—-2.20). Tobin's Q of         hostile takeover targets is
.524,    which is 44% below .932 (t—-3.OO).             In contrast, Tobin's Q of firms

acquired in a friendly deal is .774, which while lower than that of residual

firms,    is   not statistically significantly so.

        The    decomposition of Q      into an industry-specific component, IQ, and a

firm-specific      component,    DQ,   reveals   important differences between hostile

takeovers      and complete turnover as control devices4. While among firms
experiencing complete turnover IQ is not appreciably lower than it is for
residual firms, among hostile takeover targets IQ is on average 19% below
that    for residual firms      (t—-2.02).    To   the extent that   IQ   measures industry
performance,       this evidence indicates that hostile takeovers are targeted at

firms    in   troubled industries, but that complete management turnover is not

associated      with industry troubles.



     4Note that in Table 1 the means of the industry and within industry
components of the performance variables do not sum identically to the means
of the performance variables themselves. This happens because the means are
calculated using slightly different subsamples due to missing data.
                                           13

       The evidence on fin-specific performance, as measured by DQ, shows that

both targets of hostile acquisitions and firms experiencing complete turnover

underperform their industries. Complete turnover fins have an average DQ of

-.14, which is significantly below DQ for no outcome firms            (t—-2.56).
Hostile targets also have an average DQ of -      .14, with the test for equality
vis a vis no outcome firms having a t-statistic of .1.79.

       Although fins sold to friendly acquirors show both DQ and EQ below that

of residual, firms, these differences in performance are        not   statistically

significant.      Moreover, they are not nearly as   large   in magnitud. as       the
corresponding performance shortfalls of hostile takeover and complete

turnover firms. We cannot then conclude that targets of friendly

acquisitions are concentrated in troubled industries, or that they

significantly     underperform their industries. Friendly acquisitions are not

significantly related to performance as measured by Q.         IQ or DQ.

        The results using abnormal stock returns during the period 1978-1980 are

also    presented in Table 1. Evidence on cumulative 1978-1980 abnormal returns
largely but not always corroborates that on Tobin's Q. Over this period,
firms    experiencing   complete turnover or hostile takeover have abnormal
returns of -7.3%     and   -11.3% respectively, compared to +5.2% for firms
experiencing     no control   outcome. Targets of friendly bids have 1978-1980

abnormal returns of -5.6%, but this is not reliably          different than the
abnormal returns for no outcome firms. Also, consistent with the results on
Q, the industry abnormal return is -8.5% for targets of hostile takeovers,
and    +1.4% for complete turnover    firms.
        The   results on Tobins Q and on abnormal returns are also in some ways
different. First, the fin-specific component of abnormal returns for
hostile takeover targets is not reliably different from the fin-specific
                                        14

abnormal return for no outcome firms. The univariate returns data         thus


suggest that   hostile takeovers are primarily associated with industry-wide

troubles    and less with fin-specific trouble., while the converse is true
about    complete turnover. Some multivariate tests of whether firm-specific
problems    matter for hostile takeovers are presented in Section 3.

        The second interesting differencà between the results using Tobin's Q

and abnormal returns is the evidence on friendly acquisitions. During the

1978-1980 period, the industry-wide abnormal return on these firms is +9.4%,

but the firm-specific abnormal return is -14.9%. which is different from that

for no outcome firms at the 5% level. This suggests that targets of friendly

acquisitions, like firms undergoing complete turnover of top management, are

experiencing some firm-specific problems prior to control change.

      Evidence on employment growth for 1978-1980 closely mirrors that for

1978-1980 stock market returns. Firms experiencing complete turnover have

substantially lower employment growth rates than their industry peers,

whereas those industry peers grow at rates comparable to the rest of the

Fortune 500. Targets of hostile takeovers are in low employment growth

industries,    and there is weak evidence that these firms also lag their

industry    peers. Finally, targets of friendly bide are in industries with
high employment growth, but significantly lag behind their industry peers.
        Despite the close parallels between the results for stock market returns
and    employment growth, these employment numbers should be interpreted with
caution. A high level of employment growth relative to industry neers            is not

necessarily a signal of superior performance, since excessive employment

growth can itself be an important deviation from value-maximization. At the

same    time, industry-wide employment growth is probably a reliable indicator
of industry health. Accordingly, our     finding   that   targets of hostile
                                         15

takeovers belong to industries with low employment growth supports our

interpretation of the results for Tobin's Q and abnormal returns as related

to poor performance and not just to stock market undervaluation.

     The inconsistency of our results for friendly acquisitions using

alternative performance variables should probably be attributed to the

different aspects of performance that Tobin's Q and the other two variables

measure. Targets of friendly mergers are often thought to have considerable

intangible assets, such as a growing customer base, to which the acquiror can

add management skills or access to capital. As a result of having such

intangible assets, these firms are unlikely to have a low measured Tobin's Q,

even if they   are performing poorly. Our evidence    would    then suggest that the
likely candidate.   for a friendly acquisition are firms with considerable

intangible assets that have recently underperformed their industry.

    Although    no clear picture emerges for performance characteristics of
friendly acquisitions, the results support a consistent picture of
performanc. of firms subject to disciplinary" control changes. Whether
performance is measured using   Tobin's Q,    stock market   returns, or   employment
growth,   poor industry performance is   prevalent among targets of hostile
takeovers,     in contrast, firms experiencing complete   management turnover are
best characterized by their poor performance relative to their own industries
and not by poor industry performance. The evidence is less clear as to
whether poor performance within industry is also important in predicting
hostile takeovers.


2c. Management Characteristics.
     Performance alone does not determine which (if any) control devices are
used; characteristics of top management may also     be   important. Some of those
                                       16

considered here have been previously studied by Morek, Shleifer and Vishny

(1988) to compare targets of hostile and friendly acquisitions. These

include the age of the Forbes-specified top executive, his equity position in

1980, and a dummy indicating whether a member of the top management tea is

from the founding family. The equity position of the Forbes-listed top

executive, obtained from the 1980 Corporate Data Exchange Directory of

Fortune 500 companies, can proxy for both the degree of entrenchment and the

financial incentive to accept a friendly offer5. Top officer members of the

founding family, identified by looking at a sequence of annual reports

extending if necessary to the turn of the century, may have a special ability

to resist challenges to their control even without a substantial ownership

stake by virtue of having hand-picked the board over the years. Age is

obtained from 10-K forms.

        This paper uses one additional measure of the status of the top

executive not used in our previous research. This dummy variable, called

BOSS, is obtained from 1980 annual reports of our sample companies. BOSS is

set equal to 1 if only one executive holds any of the three titles of

Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer that exist in the company

and he is also the sole signer   of the letter to shareholders in the   annual

report. Of the 113 executives who satisfy the first criterion all but 12

satisfy   the second; the rest cosign the annual   report with a Vice Chairman or

a   Vice President and hence are arguably not completely alone at the helm.
The BOSS variable thus tries to identify top executives who either completely




        Walkling and Long (1984) find that managers with a larger stake are
less likely to resist a tender offer. Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988) find
that management ownership reduces the likelihood of hostile bids, and raises
that of friendly ones.
                                            Li

dominate the management of their company, or else have no internal

replacement   in mind.

     Since   BOSSes are alone at the helm, their retirement or removal is, by

construction, a complete turnover. Because we are interested in the effect

of entrenchment on the form of control device used, we want to minimize the

impact of planned retirements on our results. To this end, we focus on young

BOSSes.    The dummy variable '(BOSS is set equal to 1 for companies run by a
BOSS no more than 60 years of age in 1980. Except for members of founding
families, YBOSSes are probably the most difficult to discipline through
internal   control devices. Of the 101 BOSSes in the sample, 79 are young

BOSSes ('(BOSSes), and   the   other 22 are over 60. By comparison, Ill firms

count among their top management a member        of   the founding   family.

     Table 2 presents the characteristics of top management by type of

control    change. Not surprisingly, a firm experiencing complete turnover is
about 40% as likely to be run by a founder or a member of the founding family
as a residual firm. Similarly, targets of hostile takeovers are only S5%        as

likely    to be run by a member   of   the founding family as residual firms. In
contrast, firms run by founding families are more likely to be targets of
friendly acquisitions than residual fins, although this result is only
marginally significAnt. This finding replicates the result in Morck,
Shleifer and Vishny (1988) that founders are harder to force out in a hostile
takeover but are more likely to sell their firms when they choose to retire
or diversify. The earlier paper did not consider management turnover.
     The equity attic, of the Forbes-listed top executive works largely the
same way as the founding family variable. It reduces the likelihood of
complete turnover and of a hostile takeover, but raises that of a friendly
                                            18

acquisition. Our preferred interpretation of this result is similar to that

for the founding family variable.

      The higher average age of the CEO in firms experiencing complete

turnover probably reflects greater incidence of retirements. More

interesting is the result that the average top executive of a target of a

hostile bid is younger than that of a no outcome firm. This result suggests

that hostile takeovers might be a way to get rid of CEOs with an otherwise

long expected employment with the firm. Top executives of targets of

friendly acquisitions, by contrast, are as old as those of residual fins.

      The main results in Table 2 concern the BOSS variable defined above. A

f ira experiencing complete turnover is less likely to be run by a BOSS than a

residual   firm, despite the fact that g         turnover   of a BOSS is automatically
a complete turnover. A       firm   experiencing complete turnover is only 30% as
likely to be run by a BOSS aged 60 or under as a residual firm, suggesting
that young BOSSes are relatively immune to internal discipline. Of course,
this may largely reflect a pure age effect. In section 3,            we estimate   the
impact of a young BOSS controlling for age.
       BOSSes have a radically different experience with hostile takeovers than
they do with complete turnover. Targets of hostile takeovers are more likely
to be nan by both young and old bosses than the no outcome fins, with              the

differences significant at the 10% level. Thus the probability           that a

hostile target is run      by a young BOSS is .3,   which is 62%   higher than .185,
the   probability   that a no outcome fin is nan by     a young    BOSS. This suggests
that to get rid of a young BOSS one may have to buy the company. Firms
acquired   in friendly deals are also more likely to be run        by young BOSSes,
but   this result is not   statistically significant.
                                                   19

        This preliminary evidence suggests that characteristics of management

might be   extremely important in determining the form of control change. Some
managers, such as founders,          owners   of   large stakes,   or   BOSSes   seem to be

relatively   immune to internal discipline. But not all of these groups are

equally difficult to remove in a takeover. Young BOSSes in particular may be

a class of mangers against whom hostile takeovers are much more effective

than action by the board. It is also interesting that friendly takeovers are

more likely to occur in firms with young BOSSes. These may represent

situations in which board members welcome an acquisition because they cannot

work out a solution to their management problem themselves. But these cases

may differ from the hostile takeovers where the board is presumably unwilling

to condone the disciplinary changes sought by the raider.

       Although   the evidence presented in this section sheds light on the
functioning    of various control devices, it is not conclusive. The problem                  is

that   many of the performance and management variables are correlated with
each other. In the next section, we turn to a multivariate analysis to
determine    which characteristics of the           firm   determine the form of control

change.



3. Nultivariate Analysis.

       This section presents 4-choice logit estimates of the determinants of

the form of control    change. The four choices are: complete turnover of the
top    management (not followed by an acquisition), hostile takeover, friendly
acquisition and     none    of the above. To avoid inducing spurious correlations
because large firms are less likely to be acquired, we control for firm size
in the logits. The measure of size we use is the logarithm of the market
value of the firm's        assets,   calculated identically to the numerator of Q.
                                           20

Hence, all the multinomial. logits are estimated on the subsample of 371 firms
for   which we could compute Q,   even   when abnormal return or employment growth
is used as the measure of performance. Tables 3 and 4 present the results
using Q   as   the measure of performance. The omitted category are firms that
neither were acquired nor experienced a complete turnover (residual firms).
       The results using Q a. a measure of performance indicate that, relative

to    the probability of being a residual firm, the probability of óomplete

turnover is lower when the firm is run by a member of the founding family,

when the top executive is aged 60 or under, when the firm outperforms its

industry, and when it is run by a BOSS aged 60 or under, although the last

effect is not significant at conventional levels. Since we are controlling

for age, we are capturing the marginal effect of young BOSS only. In the

logit, the log odds of a complete turnover versus no outcome is not

significantly affected by industry Q, or by the equity stake of the top

executive. In terms of probabilities rather than log odds ratios, starting

from the 'base case in which the performance variables are set equal to

their median values and all of the other independent variable, are set equal

to their mean values, when Q relative to industry falls to the top of its

lowest quartile, the estimated probability of a complete turnover rises from

17.7% to 20.0%. The estimated probability drops from l7.7i to 8.8% when the

firm is   run by a member of the founding family. These estimated
probabilities    are contained in Table 4.

       The log odds of a friendly acquisition relative to no outcome (residual

firms) does not seem to be significantly affected by almost any of our

variables, although this result is at least partly due to the small number

(17) of friendly acquisitions in the sample for      which   we have complete   data.
Notably, young age, membership in the founding family and ownership        stake
                                          21

have no statistically significant influence on the log odds of a friendly
acquisition. We do, however, find the probability of a friendly acquisition
to be higher for firms run by BOSSes aged 60 or under.
      Consistent with   our earlier evidence, the log odds of a hostile

takeover   versus no outcome increases with poor performance of the industry
and with poor performance within industry.       This log odds   ratio is also
higher for firms not run by a member of the founding family and, albeit with
a t-statistic of only 1.14, firms that are run by a young BOSS. Young age by
itself has no real effect on the probability of a hostile (or for that matter
friendly) acquisition. Finally, the results indicate that large size reduces
vulnerability to a hostile takeover, as one would expect.
      These estimates are interpreted in terms of probabilities in Table 4.
Starting at the base case (performance variables at their median values and
all others at their mean values), the probability of a hostile acquisition
increases   from 5.7% to 8.4% when industry Q drops to the top of its lowest

quartile. Similarly, the probability of a hostile takeover rises from 5.7%

to 7.4% when DQ falls to the top of its lowest quartile.

     Two more results from this regression are worth emphasizing. First,

poor performance within industry is typical of both targets of hostile

takeovers and   of I iris experiencing complete turnover, but poor industry

performance   is typical only of the former. The effect of IQ on the log odds
of hostile acquisition versus complete turnover is statistically significant
at the 5% level (t—l.97), whereas the corresponding effect of DQ on the log
odds ratio is not   (t—,779).     This is consistent with the view that boards are
more successful   in addressing firm-specific than industry-wide problems.
     Second, the presence of a BOSS aged 60 or under actually has       opposite

effects on the log odds   of    complete turnover versus no outcome and of hostile
                                          22

takeover versus no outcome. The log odds of a complete turnover versus a

hostile takeover decline. significantly (t— 2.03) in the presence of a young

boss. In terms of probabilities, the presence of a young boss is associated

with a rise in the probability of a hostile takeover from 3.7% to 8.8% and a

fall in the probability of complete turnover from 17.7% to 8.7% starting at

the base case (i.e., the mean value of the young BOSS variable).

        One interpretation of these results is that young BOSSes can

effectively stand up to the board of directors, but succumb to hostile

bidders. In contrast, members of founding families seem to neither turn ovei

nor lose out to hostile bidders, indicating that they are more effectively

entrenched than the young BOSSes. The ownership stake of the top executive

also has a negative effect on the log odds of both control changes relative

to no outcome, although the estimates are not statistically significant.

        Tables 5 and 6 present the results of the logit using abnormal returns

for the 1978-1980 period instead of Tobin's Q.       The results for complete

turnover are very similar to those for 'robin's Q:     the   presence of a founder,

young age of the top executive, good performance relative to industry, and

the presence of a young Boss    all   reduce the log odds of complete turnover

versus no outcome, although the coefficient on the young BOSS variable is not

significant.     The estimated probability of a complete turnover rises from
17.9% to 21.1% as 1978-1980 abnormal returns relative to industry decline        to
the    top of the lowest quartile starting from the base case. As in the

previous logit, the presence of a young BOSS raises the log odds of a

friendly acquisition. Starting at the base case for all other independent

variables, the estimated probability of a friendly acquisition rises from

4.5%    to 10.5% going from a firm without a young BOSS to one with    a young

BOSS.
                                            23

       The most important difference in the results for Tobin's Q and abnormal

returns is that, when abnormal      returns are   used, poor performaüce relative to

industry no longer significantly raises the log odds of a hostile takeover.

Using either measure, we have the result that, relative to residual firms,

poor industry performance raises the odds of hostile takeovers, whereas poor

performance within industry raises the odds of complete turnover. The log

odds of a hostile takeover vis a vis complete turnover increases

significantly with poor industry performance measured either by Q (t—l.97) or

abnormal returns (t—l.84). The effect of poor firm-specific performance on

the log odds of a hostile takeover versus complete turnover shows no clear

tendency at all.

       The results using abnormal returns also confirm the finding using

tobin's Q that large firm size and the presence of the founding family reduce

the log odds of a hostile acquisition versus no outcome. The presence of a

young Boss raises the log odds      of   a hostile takeover (t—1.59).   In   fact, the

effect    of young Boss on the log odds of complete turnover versus hostile
takeovers is highly significant (t—2.2l). In terms of probabilities rather
than log odds ratios, having a young boss at the helm is associated with an
estimated    increase in the probability of hostile takeover from 6.0% to 11.0%
and an estimated reduction in the probability of complete turnover from 17.9%
to 9.2% starting at the base case. These multivariate results bear out our
earlier    finding that   young BOSSes are less vulnerable to a threat by the
board    and more vulnerable to one by a takeover artist.

         Tables 7 and 8 present the results of a aultinomial logit using 1978-

1980   employment growth as a performance, measure. Again, the      results fairly

closely    track those for the other performance measures. The most notable
exception is that the idiosyncratic component of employment growth comes in
                                             24

much less strongly in predicting both complete turnover and hostile takeovers

than the idiosyncratic components of either abnormal returns or Tobin's Q.

This is consistent with the ambiguity of the firm- specific component of
employment growth as a measure of relative performance. On the other hand,
low industry employment growth predicts hostile takeovers, consistent with

the accuracy of industry employment growth as an indicator of industry

health. The employment numbers thus support our conclusion that hostile

takeovers     are targeted at firms   in troubled industries.



4. complete and Partial Turnover.

       One   issue   raised in the introduction is whether complete turnover of the

management team (defined using       the   list of signers of the letter to

shareholders    in the annual report) is an adequate proxy for disciplinary
turnover.      We have already recognized that this variable includes some cases
that   are not disciplinary, such as ordinary retirements or deaths of sole

signer..      The question addressed in this section is whether the complete
turnover     variable omits some disciplinary replacements. In particular, we

look at the characteristics of firms experiencing a partial turnover of top
officers to see if they look like firms in need of disciplinary intervention.
       On our definition, a firm      experiences partial turnover if   a) its Forbes-

designated     top officer changes between 1980 and 1985.      and b) the turnover of

the list of signers is not       complete.    This definition suggests three ways in

which partial turnover can occur. First, one          of   the 1980 signers could

become the Forbes-listed top executive by 1985. Second, an insider who was

not a signer could get rapidly promoted to top executive, while some of the

1980 signers remain among the top management         signing the letter in 1985.
Third.   a top executive could be brought in from the outside, but some
                                          25

managers who signed in 1980 continue to do so in 1985. 01 the 70 cases of

partial turnover, 54 are examples of a 1980 signer becoming the Forbes-listed

top executive in 1985, 6 are examples of an insider who did not sign in 1980

being promoted to top executive by 1985 ahead of some 1980 signers, and 10

are examples of a new top executive being brought from outside, while some

1980 signers continue to sign in 1985. This evidence suggests that partial

turnover consists predominantly of internal succession.

        Even internal succession can be disciplinary in nature, however. This

would be the case if the board asks the CEO to resign, but still invites one

of the current top managers to replace him. To evaluate this possibility,

Table 9 presents mean performance characteristics of three types of firms.

These include firms experiencing complete turnover (already described in

Table 1), firms experiencing partial zrnover, and firms in which the 1980

top executive is still at the helm in 1985.

        The results on performance measures suggest that firms experiencing

partial turnover do better than firms experiencing complete turnover. In

particular, they have a statistically significantly higher average Q      that
appears to be primarily a within industry effect. Partial turnover firms

have the average DQ of .131, compared to -.138 for complete turnover firms.

The t-statistic for the difference between the two is 2.23. interestingly,

partial turnover    firms seem   to be outperforming even the no turnover firms in

their    industry (with DQ of .131 compared to .042), although this difference
is   not statistically significant. It is hard to reconcile the result that

firms with partial turnover outperform their industry with the notion that

partial turnover is typically a disciplinary action.

        Similar results obtain using abnormal returns as a measure of

performance.    Most importantly, the firm-specific component of abnormal
                                               26

returns is quite different for the two           types   of turnover. Firms experiencing

partial turnover have average fin-specific abnormal return of +12.9%,

compared to -7.1% for the complete turnover fins. The t-statistic for the

difference between the two    is    2.66. Furthermore, the fin-specific abnormal

return for fins where the Forbes-listed top executive does not change is

only 2.6%. which is much lover than 12.9% (t—l.4l), the figure for partial

turnover firms. This evidence indicates that firms experiencing partial

turnover exhibit superior within-industry performance.

       These results suggest that far from being a disciplining device, partial

turnover is more of a reward to the current management team for especially

good performance. This seems plausible: the board should be more inclined tc

pick   a successor from the incumbent management team when its operating
strategy proves successful and hence worth continuing. Consistent with this
interpretation, the primary source of superior performance is within
industry, where partial turnover firms outperform both complete turnover and
no turnover firms. This evidence supports our not treating partial turnover
as a disciplinary control outcome.


5.   Concluding Comments.

       This paper has          to assess the effectiveness of the board of
                        attempted

directors in disciplining top managers. We have found that the board is not
completely unresponsive to poor performance. When a firm significantly
underperforms its industry, the probability of complete turnover of the top
management team rises. This result suggests that boards compare the
performance of the firm     with   that   of   other firms in its industry, and
sometimes remove top managers when they cannot            keep up with the industry.
                                         27

     But the 1980s have presented the board of directors with a harder

problem. During this period, because of deregulation, commodity price

shocks, and foreign competition, whole industries such as airlines, oil, and

steel have suffered adverse shocks. As discussed by Jensen (1986) and

Shleifer and Vishny (1989), shareholder value could be raised in many of

these industries through painful measures such as restructurings, selloff of

assets, employee layoffs, and wage reductions. Despite wide disagreement

about whether there are net social gains from such strategies, it is fair to

say that shareholders typically benefit from them.

     The evidence in this paper indicates that the board of directors has not

been a major force in removing unresponsive managers in poorly performing

industries. Instead, this function has been accomplished by hostile

takeovers. Our    evidence   supports the view that takeover organizers have

taken advantage of opportunities raised by the ineffectiveness of internal

control devices such as the board of directors and incentive pay. To the

extent that internal control devices are cheaper to operate and are more

conducive to long-ten planning by incumbent management than are hostile

takeovers, the replacement of the oversight function of the board by the

external   market for corporate control might be deemed a third-beet situation.
Shleifer and Vishny (1988) have made some proposals aimed at making internal
control devices more effective, and so rendering hostile takeovers less
important   for shareholders.
                                          28

                                     References

Coughian, Anne T. and Ronald M. Schmidt. "Executive Compensation, Management

     Turnover, and Firm Performancez An Empirical Investigation," Journal of

     Accountinz and Economics, 7, 1985, 43-66.

Cumains,   C., B. Hall,    and B. Laderman, The R&D Master Pile: documentation,

     N.3.E.R. mimeograph, 1982.

Fama, Eugene F. and Michael C. Jensen, "Separation of Ownership and

     Control", Journal of Law and Economics, 26, June 1983, 301-325.

Hasbrouck, Joel, "The Characteristics of Takeover Targets: q and other

     Measures," Journal of Banking and Finance 9, 1985, 351-362.

Jensen, Michael C.. "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and

     Takeovers," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings. May 1986,

     323-329.

Mace, Myles L., Directors: Myth and Reality, Division of Reseach, Harvard

     Business School, 1971.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shteifer, and Robert V. Vishny, "Characteristics of

     Hostile and Friendly Takeover Targets,' forthcoming, Alan J. Auerbach

     ed., Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences. University of

     Chicago Press, 1988.

Palepu,    Krishna, "Predicting Takeover Targets: a Methodological and Empirical
     Analysis." Journal of Accountint and         Economics. vol.   8, 1986, 3-35.
Ravenscraft,    David J.   and P.M. Scherer, Mereers. Sell-offs and Economic
     Efficiency,    Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1987.

Shleifer, Andrei and Lawrence H. Suers, "Breach of Trust in Hostile

     Takeovers," forthcoming, Alan J. Luerbach, ed., Corporate Takeovers:

     Causes and Consecuences, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.
                                          29

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert V. Vishny, "Value Maximization and the

     Acquisition Process," Journal of Economic Persyectives, February, 1988.

Vancil, Richard F. •    Passin   the Eaton. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business

       Press, 1987.

Walkling, Ralph A. and Michael S. Long, "Agency Theory, Managerial Welfare,

     and Takeover Bid Resistance, " Rand Journal of Economics. Spring 1984,

     54-68.

Warner, Jerold, Ross Watts, and Karen Wruck, Stock Prices, Event Prediction,

     and Event Studies: An Examination of Top Management Changes,

     forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics. 1988.

Weisbach, Michael S. •   Outside Directors and CEO Turnover, forthcoming.
     Journal   of   Financial Economics, 1988.
          TABLE 1: Means of Performance Variables by Control Outcomet

                           Complete
                           management
                           turnover       Hostile      Friendly       No outcome


1980 Q                           .734        .524          .774          .932
                            (-2.20)        (-3.00)       (-.856)


1980 Industry Q                  .831        .691          .862          .855
                            (-.395)        (-2.02)       (.0696)


1980 Q - Industry Q              .138       -   .139     -   .0370       .0647
                            (-2.56)        (-1.79)       (-.662)


Total abnormal stock        -   .0729       -   .113     -   .0561       .0519
return 1978-1980            (-2.19)        (-2.03)       (-1.17)




Industry abnormal stock         .0138     -.0850             .0944       .0051
return 1978-1980                (.229)     (-1.76)           (1.54)


Abnormal stock return .     -.0714        -.0531         -.149          .0507
industry abnormal stock     (-2.08)       (-1.24)       (-2.34)
return 1978-1980

Employment growth rate       .0184         .0152         .0195          .0476
1978-1980                   (-1.86)       (-1.36)       (-1.11)


Industry employment             .0376       .0220            .0472      .0376
growth rate 1978-1980       (-   .0086)   (-1.79)            (1.00)

Employment growth rate -    -.0220        -.0081        -.0277          .0115
Industry growth rate        (-1.92)       (- .763)      (-1.44)
1978- 19 80




aNumbers in parentheses are t-statistics for test of equality of means
 for no outcome and respective control outcome.
bAll abnormal returns are estimated from a monthly CAP?! equation for 1.178
 through 12/80. These numbers are converted to total abnormal returns over
 the period 1/78-12/80 for ease of interpretation.
     TABLE 2:   Means of Characteristi%s of Top Management for Different
                 Control Outcomes, 19B0




                                Complete
                                Turnover    Hostile     Friendly   No outcome


Founding family represented         .118       .100        .412        .286
  on top management team         (-3.30)     (-2.52)      (1.52)




Equity stake of top                .0266       .0103      .0978        .0547
  executive                       (-1.99)     (-2.26)     (1.80)


Age of top executive               60.6         55.0       57.1            56.3
  in 1980                         (6.09)      (-1.21)     (.628)




One-man top management             .161         .35        .265            .220
  team (BOSs—i)                  (-1.21)       (1.83)     (.596)




Young one-man top                  .0538        .300      .265             .185
  management team (age            (-3.08)      (1.71)    (1.12)
  of boss 60)




aNuabers in parentheses are t-statistics for test of equality of means for no
 outcome and respective control outcome.
TABLE 3:     Nultinomial Logit Modal of Control Outcomes using Tobin's Q
             as a Performance Measure



                                                 Control   Outcome


                                   Complete           Hostile         Friendly
                                   Turnover           Takeover        Takeover


Intercept                             .954              2.39           -1.85
                                     (1.09)            (1.88)         (-1.13)

Log   of   Total Market Value         -   .101         -   .434        -   .0867
                                     (-.796)          (-2.27)         (-.374)

Founding Family on Top                -1.14            -1.41           -   .388
  Mgmt. Team — 1                     (-2.40)          (-1.69)         (-   .596)


Age of top executive       60         -1.54            -   .139        -.550
  in 1980 — 1.                       (-4.89)          (-.256)         (-   .836)

Equity stake of top executive         -1.29            -7.00            1.90
                                     (-.787)          (-1.22)          (1.02)

Young one-man top management          -.850             .540            1.12
  team (age of boss S 60)            (-1.49)           (1.14)          (1.85)


Industry Q                            - .140           -1.84           -.0878
                                     (-.378)          (-2.25)         (-.139)

Q   - Industry   Q                    -.949            -1.68           -.321
                                     (-2.28)          (-1.90)         (-.521)



N — 353



Note: t-statistics are in parentheses.
TABI2 4:     Rstiaatqd       Probabilities from )fultthomial Logit   Model Using
             ToWn's      Q   as a Performance Measure


                                    Probability   Probability Probability Probability
                                    of Complete    of Hostile of Friendly  of No Con-
                                      Turnover     Takeover      Takeover    trol Chante

Base casea                              .177          .057           .049          .717



Founding family present                 .088          .023           .043          .846



No founding family                      .216          .074           .049          .662



Age of CEO > 60                         .389          .046           .052          .513



Age of CEO     60                       .125          .059           .045          .770



Young one-man top                       .087          .088           .120          .705
management tea

No young one-man                        .203          .051           .039          .706
top   management team
Industry Q at top of                    .176          .084           .048          .692
lowest quartile

Q    - Industry Q   at   top            .200          .074           .049          .671
of    lowest quartile




ame base case is where the performance variables are at their medians and
all other variables are at their means. The rows following the base case
are estimated probabilities evaluated at various points differing from the
base case only in the value of the respective independent variable.
TABLE 5: Nultinomial Logit Model of Control Outcomes using Abnormal Return
         as a Performance Measure



                                             Control   Outcome


                                 Complete        Hostile          Friendly
                                 Turnover        Takeover         Takeover



Intercept                          .877            1.27            -1.72
                                  (.962)          (.937)          (-1.04)

Log   of   Total Market Value     - .0955         - .466           - .132
                                 (-.765)         (-2.39)          (-.606)

Founding Family on Top            -1.22           -1.42            -   .611
  Mgmt. Team — 1                 (-2.49)         (-1.67)          (- .883)



Age of top executive       60     -1.64           -.382            - .464
  in 1.980 — 1                   (-5.13)         (- .689)         (- .677)



Equity stake of top executive     - .479          -5.37             3.56
                                 (-.261)         (-.952)           (1.61)


Young one-man top management      - .770           .778             1.08
  team (age of boss 60)          (.1.34)          (1.59)           (1.80)


Industry abnormal return          - .00687        -68.00          25.76
  1/78-12/80 (monthly)          (-.000349)        (-1.99)          (.778).


Abnormal return - Industry        -31.58          -28.97         -25.97
abnormal return 1/78-12/80        (-2.39)         (-1.43)        (-1.12)
(monthly)



N — 341



Note: t-statistics are in parentheses.
TABLE 6:   Estimated Probabilities fret Multinomial Logit Model       Using
           Abnormal Return   as a   Performance   Measure


                              Probability    Probability  Probability Probability
                              of Complete     of Hostile of Friendly   of No Con-
                                Turnover          Takeover   Takeover    trol Change

Base casea                          .179            .060       .045           .716



Founding family present             .084            .024       .034           .858



No founding family                  .219            .076       .047           .657



Age of CEO > 60                     .404            .055       .043           .497


Age of CEO    60                    .123            .058       .043           .776



Young one-man top                   .092            .110       .105           .693
management team

No young one-man                    .204            .051       .036           .708
top management team

Industry abnormal return at         .177            .077       .040           .706
top of lowest quartile

Abnormal return   industry          .211            .069       .051           .669
abnormal return at top of
lowest quartile




aBase case is where the performance variables are at their medians and         all
 other variables are at their means. The rows following the base ease are
 estimated probabilities evaluated at various points differing from the base
 case only in the value of the respective independent variable.
TABLE 7: Multinomial Logit      Model of Control Outcomes using Employment
            Grovth as   & Performance Measure



                                                   Control Outcome

                                     Complete        Hostile          Friendly
                                     Turnover        Takeover         Takeover


Intercept                               1.40            2.45            -1.75
                                       (1.63)          (1.96)         (-1.07)
Log of   Total Market Value            -.167           - .583           -
                                                                            .141
                                      (-1.39)         (-3.16)         (-.638)

Founding Family on   Top               -1.07           -1AJ             - .332
  Mgmt. Team — 1                      (-2.35)         (-1.77)         (- .519)



Age of top executive       60          -1.62           - .269          - .624
  in 1980 — 1                         (-5.29)         (-.501)         (- .949)



Equity stake of top executive          -1.58           -7.64            1.77
                                      (-.956)         (-1.21)          (.975)


Young one-man top management           - .820           .738            1.12
  team (age of boss 60)               (-1.43)          (1.54)          (1.83)



Industry employment growth             -1.14            -9.20           4.91
  1978-1980                           (-.354)          (-2.01)         (.943)

Employment growth - Industry           -3.52            -2.62          - .710
  employment growth 1978-1980         (-1.74)          (-1.00)        ( .342)




N — 359



Note: t-statistics are in parentheses.
TABLE I: Estimated ProbabilitIes from Kultinotial Logit     Nodet   Using
          Employment Growth as a Performance Measure


                             Probability   Probability   Probability Probability
                             of Complete   of Hostile of Friendly       of No Con-
                              Turnover       Takeover     Takeover     trol Change
Base   casea                     .182          .056          .045           .717


Founding family present          .095          .021          .041           .843

No founding family               .217          .074          .045           .664


Age of CEO > 60                  .407          .047          .069           .498

Age of CEO     60                .126          .056          .041           .778


Young one-man top                .090          .100         .109            .700
management team

No young one-man                 .207          .049         .036            .708
top management team
Industry employment              .184          .069         .039            .708
growth rate at top of
lowest quartile

Employment growth rate -         .204          .060         .044            .692
industry employment growth
rate at top of lowest
quartile



ame base  case is where the performance variables are at their medians and
all other variables are at their means. The rows following the base case
are estimated probabilities evaluated at various points differing from the
base case only in the value of the respective independent variable.
          TARLE 9:   Means of Performance Variable! by Control Outcomet



                                14o outcome   ComDlete turnover   Partial turnover


      Q                             .894               .734                1.04
                                   (1.31)             (2.27)




Industry Q                          .849               .831                .873
                                   (.342)             (.554)




Q   - Industry Q                   .0415              -.138                .131
                                   (.945)             (2.23)




Total abnormal returnb             .0285             -.0729                .125
                                   (1.30)             (2.55)




Industry abnormal return           .0090              .0138            -   .0069
                                   (.370)             (.441)




Abnormal return -    Industry      .0256             -.0714                .129
abnormal return                    (1.41)             (2.66)




aNumbers in parentheses are t-statistics for test of equality of means for
 partial turnover and respective control outcome.


bAll abnormal returns are estimated from a monthly CAPM equation for 1/78
 through 12/80. These numbers are converted to total abnormal returns over
 the period 1/78 - 12/80 for ease of interpretation.
