NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE HETEROGENEOUS EFFECT OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION ON PERFORMANCE
Anat Bracha
Alma Cohen
Lynn Conell-Price
Working Paper 25322
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25322

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

We would like to thank Uri Gneezy, Muriel Niederle, Tali Regev, Analia Schlosser, Lise
Vesterlund and participants of the North American ESA Meetings in Santa Cruz and the 2014
SITE experimental economic workshop for helpful comments. The project was made possible by
the generous financial support of the Foerder Institute for Economic Research and the Harvard
Law School. This research has been conducted with IRB approval. The views expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Anat Bracha, Alma Cohen, and Lynn Conell-Price. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Heterogeneous Effect of Affirmative Action on Performance
Anat Bracha, Alma Cohen, and Lynn Conell-Price
NBER Working Paper No. 25322
December 2018
JEL No. C91,I28,J16,J78,K19,K31
ABSTRACT
This paper experimentally investigates the effect of gender-based affirmative action (AA) on
performance in the lab, focusing on a tournament environment. The tournament is based on GRE
math questions commonly used in graduate school admission, and at which women are known to
perform worse on average than men. We find heterogeneous effect of AA on female participants:
AA lowers the performance of high-ability women and increases the performance of low-ability
women. Our results are consistent with two possible mechanisms—one is that AA changes
incentives differentially for low- and high-ability women, and the second is that AA triggers
stereotype threat.
Anat Bracha
Research Department
600 Atlantic Ave
Boston, MA 02210
anat.bracha@bos.frb.org
Alma Cohen
Harvard Law School
1525 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
alcohen@law.harvard.edu

Lynn Conell-Price
5000 Forbes Avenue
BP 208
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
USA
lconellp@andrew.cmu.edu

1. Introduction
Affirmative action (AA) is a hotly debated policy, with passionate arguments in favor of and
against it. While the arguments center around issues of fairness, discrimination, and the interplay
of AA and stereotypes (e.g., APA 2012, Schuck 2002), there is also the question of the extent to
which AA improves, or worsens, outcomes for its intended beneficiaries (Sander 2010, Imbens et
al. 2012). On this point, there is an underexplored empirical question: how does AA affect the
performance of its intended beneficiaries? College admission processes using AA could, for
instance, affect performance on the SAT exams or investments in education at earlier stages of
life.
This paper seeks to shed light on this question by examining the effect of gender-based AA on
women’s performance on math admission exams in a lab experiment. We add to the literature by
examining the effect of AA on performance in tests like those used to make high-stakes
admissions decisions and are the first to find experimental evidence of its heterogeneous effect.
Specifically, the results of the lab experiment find a positive effect of AA on the performance of
low-ability women but a negative effect of AA on the performance of high-ability women,
suggesting a new nuance in the AA debate. That is, not only should researchers and policymakers
ask whether AA benefits disadvantaged groups, they should also consider the possibility that AA
may differentially affect high-performance and low-performance individuals in those groups.
We chose to focus on gender-based AA policies as this is a timely topic that attracts substantial
interest and policy debate. It is well known that although women today represent half of all
college-educated individuals, they are still substantially underrepresented in many selective,
high-level professional positions and occupations, such as corporate directors and top
executives1, partners in US law firms, and holders of science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) jobs in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries
(see Catalyst Census: Fortune 500 Women Board Directors 2013 and European Commission 2012,

Women constitute less than 20% of corporate directors, and their fraction of top executive positions in
large public companies is below 5%.
1

1

National Association for Law Placement 2013, Meeting of the OECD Council at Ministerial Level
2011 and, for the United States, the U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics
Administration 2011).
This underrepresentation of women in certain professional groups and positions has led to a
strong interest in AA policies. For example, in 2012 the European Commission proposed
legislation to ensure that, by 2020, 40% of nonexecutive directors will be women (European
Commission 2012). Adding to this are recent studies in economics that argue that
underrepresentation of women in certain professions may be due, in part, to women’s avoidance
of competition, especially in mixed-sex settings, and AA could therefore help remedy the impacts
of this aversion to competition (see, e.g., Gneezy et al. 2003, Niederle and Vesterlund 2007,
Niederle and Vesterlund 2010, Sutter and Rützler 2010, Niederle et al. 2013, Balafoutas and Sutter
2012, and a review by Croson and Gneezy 2009).
We chose to examine performance on the GRE math questions since it is used in actual admission
decisions, and because it is a challenging task on which women are known (and documented) to
underperform compared with men (Willingham & Cole, 1997). Further, participants in our
sample have a good understanding of their relative performance on this type of exam, since they
are students who took the SAT, which contains very similar math questions.
The first two properties of the GRE math questions (challenging problems, and known
underperformance of women) are essential to understanding the overall effect of AA. This is
because while AA may curb the effects of women’s noncompetitive tendencies, it may also affect
their incentives to exert effort (positively or negatively) and influence their mindsets. In the
context of admission exams, AA could increase the return to effort for lower-performing women
by making admission a more achievable goal while at the same time decreasing the return to
effort for higher-performing women who already expected admission. However, this effect is
only likely when participants have a good understanding of their relative performance. For
instance, a high-ability woman who may choose to reduce her efforts under AA when she knows
she is of high relative ability would not necessarily choose to reduce her effort if she were not
2

aware of her relative ability. As for mindset, the theory of stereotype threat predicts that
reminding people of a negative stereotype about their group can adversely affect their objective
performance (Steele 1997, Steele & Aronson 1995, Steele et al., 2002; in economics see for example
Hoff and Pandey 2006). While AA may trigger stereotype threat by making salient a negative
stereotype about a group’s performance in the domain that the policy targets (Leslie et al. 2014),
this mindset effect, if it exists, appears only in performing challenging tasks (Spencer et al. 1999).
Since in many real-life examples these properties hold, it is important to examine the effect of AA
in such settings.
We use a lab experiment to examine the effect of AA on performance. Participants were assigned
to groups of four, two men and two women each, and were asked to solve math GRE questions.
Performance was incentivized using piece-rate payments and a bonus. In the control group, the
bonus was awarded to the top two performers regardless of gender, while in the AA condition it
was required that at least one woman receive the bonus. We then compared the individuals’
performance (i.e., their piece-rate payment) across the different conditions and found that women
with low baseline ability perform significantly better in the presence of an AA policy, whereas
women with high baseline ability perform significantly worse.2 These results hold whether we
use linear or nonlinear specifications and whether we use a standard regression analysis or the
bootstrapping method.
Our experimental study differs from past experimental studies of AA in the properties of the task
that we use. In the context of gender-based AA, for example, Niederle et al (2013) study the effect
of gender-based AA on the willingness to compete using the task of summing up five 2-digit
numbers. This task is simple, with no known gender difference, participants are unlikely to know
their relative performance due to the novelty of the task, and performance on it does not respond
to incentives. These properties of the task are suitable for isolating competition preferences,

2

Once participants were assigned to groups, those in the AA conditions were informed of the AA policy
before they began solving the GRE questions. That is, the performance we analyze is their GRE performance
while knowing that AA will be used at the end of the round to determine who gets the bonus, much like a
student who takes the SAT exam and expects AA to affect the college admission process.

3

however, it cannot uncover potential effects on performance, such as incentive and mindset
effects. The closest experimental work to our own, by Calsamiglia et al. (2013), also focuses on the
effect of AA on performance. They find no negative effect of AA on the performance of either
group (the advantaged or disadvantaged subjects). However, in their study the disadvantaged
subjects have no prior knowledge of either their absolute or relative ability on the task used, and
there is no ingrained stereotype associated with the task or the disadvantaged group, in contrast
with real-world applications of AA that we attempt to capture.3
We identify three potential mechanisms that could explain our results. One is the incentive effect
of AA, i.e., the increased chance of women winning the competition under AA, holding effort
levels constant. While this effect increases the marginal return to effort (and hence optimal effort
exertion) for lower ability women, it may lower the marginal return to effort for the highest ability
women. Intuitively, this is because the competition becomes less fierce under AA and, as a result,
the highest-ability women may not need to exert as much effort as without AA to secure their
win. Importantly, even if the incentive effect is positive for all women, it will be lower for higher
ability women than their low ability counterparts. Second, stereotype threat may reduce women’s
performance by triggering a negative mindset. Notably, if stereotype threat is induced for all
women, its combination with changes in incentives will still lead to a more negative net effect (or
smaller positive net effect) for higher ability than for lower ability women because of the
difference in the offsetting incentive effect.

Finally, single-sex as opposed to mixed-sex

competition may also affect effort provision. This is relevant because gender-based AA may
change women’s perception of the competition from a mixed-sex to a single-sex competition, in
which case we would expect AA to help boost women’s performance (e.g., Gneezy et al. 2003).
While we reject the single-sex competition mechanism using an experimental treatment, we
cannot disentangle the incentive effect from the stereotype threat effect through our design. Our

3

Calsamiglia et al. (2013) examine school-based rather than gender-based AA, with children from two
primary schools in Spain competing on Sudoku puzzles. The children across the two schools were similar
except that one of the two schools had the advantage of prior Sudoku training. In light of this difference,
the disadvantaged children, those who did not get Sudoku training prior to the experiment, were subject
to AA.

4

findings suggest that if both mechanisms are at work, the incentive effect among low-ability
women must be positive and larger than the stereotype threat effect. The negative effect of AA
on the performance of high-ability women may be due to a positive incentive effect that is smaller
than the negative stereotype threat effect, or to an incentive effect alone that is already negative.
Disentangling the two effects is left for future work.
The findings indicate that AA may have unintended negative effects on test performance that are
relevant to the assessment of AA policies, and that these effects may vary for people of different
underlying ability. This makes the overall welfare impact unclear, demanding further work on
this subject.
The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our experimental design
and procedure. Section 3 describes and discusses our results. Section 4 concludes.

2. Experimental Design and Procedure
To test the effect of gender-based AA on performance, we employed a between-subject
experimental design in which 248 participants were randomly assigned to gender-based AA in a
competitive setting with incentivized performance. Participants were asked to solve math GRE
questions.4 We chose such questions because (1) men’s average performance on math GREs is
known to be better than women’s; (2) this setup resembles real-life situations where AA is
introduced to counteract existing disadvantages; (3) participants have a good idea of their relative
ability based on experience from previously taking the SAT; and (4) AA applied to a disadvantage
group, when the task is challenging and important to the subjects, has the potential to trigger a
stereotype threat effect.

The exam uses multiple-choice questions with five possible answers from which the examinee must select
one. The questions were selected from previous versions of the actual GRE which are published after their
use. All participants saw the same questions in the same order.
4

5

The experiment used three 10-minutes rounds, during which participants were asked to
answer as many questions as they could (there were enough questions in each round such that
none of the participants ran out of questions). To measure performance and, in turn, examine the
effect of AA, we calculated participants’ performance score in each round. The score increased by
one point with every correctly answered question and decreased by a quarter of a point with
every incorrectly answered question.5 There was no feedback on performance given to
participants until the end of the experiment.
Effort was incentivized in each round. In the first round, we used noncompetitive piece-rate
incentives, with each point of the score earning a dollar. That is, each correctly answered question
yielded a dollar and each incorrectly answered question reduced earnings by a quarter. At this
point, participants were not aware of any AA policy and we can therefore use the round 1 score
as a proxy for ability.
In the second round, which is the main focus of our analysis, participants were randomly
assigned to a group of two men and two women.6 In this round, the payment consisted of two
types of incentives: (1) a noncompetitive piece-rate incentive, as in round 1, and (2) a competitive
incentive, with participants competing for an additional $10 bonus. This reward structure is
somewhat analogous to admission, as the piece rate can be thought of representing the GRE score
and the additional bonus as being admitted or not. The rules for winning the bonus depended on
the experimental condition to which each group was assigned. Specifically, groups were
randomly assigned to one of two conditions: a control condition (No AA) and an AA condition
(AA). Under the No AA condition, the two highest-performing group members won the
tournament, and each received a $10 bonus. Under the AA condition, the two highest-scoring
5

The current scoring rule for the GRE does not directly penalize incorrect responses in this manner.
However, incorrect responses still indirectly hurt one's score by affecting the difficulty (and point value) of
subsequent questions that the "Computerized Adaptive Test" (CAT) system presents. A way to capture this
relationship in a lab setting is with a direct penalty, which is also consistent with past scoring rules of the
GRE, as described in GRE test preparation books—see for example the 2009 Princeton Review “Cracking
the GRE” and Henry George Stratakis-Allen’s 2007 book “The complete Idiot’s guide to Acing the GRE”.
6 While all group members were present in the lab at the same time, it was not possible for them to identify
who of the other people in the lab were in their group. Participants were not allowed to communicate with
each other, and since they were not aware of group membership, communication was also irrelevant.

6

group members received a $10 bonus subject to a gender quota that required at least one woman
to receive the bonus. Thus, if the two participants with the highest scores were men, the man with
the highest (overall) score and the woman with the highest (female) score would earn the bonus.
However, if two women earned the highest scores they would both receive the bonus. The AA
policy was explained to participants assigned to the AA condition at the outset of round 2, before
they began solving GRE questions in this round. Two versions of the AA condition were used:
AA without information (AA-no-I) and AA with information (AA-I). The two versions were
identical except that, just before beginning the task, participants in the AA-I version received
information on the gender gap in math GRE performance.
These two versions of the AA condition were designed a priori to disentangle two possible
mechanisms of AA effect on performance, should we find one. Specifically, we added an
informational prime similar to those that have been shown to activate a stereotype threat effect
in previous studies (e.g., Spencer et al. 1999) with a paragraph in the description of the quota
policy reading, “Since ETS statistics show that females quantitative GRE scores are consistently lower
compared with males by about 15 percent, we set the following rule: The two participants with the highest
score in each group of four (two men, two women) will get the bonus, as long as at least one of the two is a
woman. Hence, if AA does not act as a prime that triggers the stereotype threat effect, or if it does
act as such but only partially, we would expect performance under AA-I, the AA condition with
information, to be lower than performance under AA-no-I, the AA condition without the
additional information.
The third round was identical to the first round: participants were given piece-rate incentives
according to their scores. We use the third round to judge ceiling effect in performance and the
effect of fatigue.7 While participants were given incentives to perform in all three rounds, they
had the greatest incentives to perform in round 2, when they also had a chance to win the extra

7

Ceiling effect refers to the possibility that subject reach their maximum performance in round 1 and
therefore could not increase their performance in round 2. Fatigue refers to the possibility that performance
in round 2 is lower than round 1 due to exhaustion. If the performance in round 3 is found to be higher this
rules out both explanations.

7

bonus. Hence, if the marginal cost of effort equals the marginal incentive, we would expect
weakly higher effort in the second round compared to the other two rounds.
After completing the three rounds, but before learning about earnings and awards of the
bonus, participants filled out a questionnaire in which they reported their SAT scores
(quantitative and verbal), the extent to which they exerted effort on our exam, two Cognitive
Reflection Test (CRT) questions used to proxy IQ,8 their expected score in round 2, and what they
thought their chance of winning the bonus was. They were then informed of their earnings in the
three rounds, told whether they had won the $10 bonus, and paid privately in cash. See the
Appendix for screen shots of the study. Average earnings from performance in the study (all
rounds) not including the bonus were $20.19; including the bonus, average earnings were $25.43.
That is, the size of the bonus was about half the average piece-rate earnings.
The experiment was programmed using Authorware 7.01 and run on computers in the
Harvard Decision Science Lab. In total, 248 subjects participated in the study ―80 subjects in the
control condition, 84 subjects in the AA-no-I condition, and 84 subjects in the AA-I
condition―and each condition contained equal numbers of men and women.9 All subjects were
undergraduate or graduate students of Harvard University recruited from the lab’s subject pool
and were 20 years old on average. The self-reported average quantitative SAT score was 729.73
and the average verbal SAT score was 719.46. Balancing tests indicate that the randomization was
successful and treatment samples within each condition are similar across key observables such
as age and previous test scores (see Table 1).

The two questions were as follows: (1) “A bat and a ball cost $1.10 in total. The bat costs a $1 more than
the ball. How much does the ball costs?” and (2) “If it takes 5 machines 5 minutes to make 5 widgets, how
long would it take 100 machines to make 100 widgets?” These are two of three questions of the CRT that
are thought to be associated with IQ (Frederick 2005).
9 Two subjects were dropped from our analysis because they left before the end of the experiment. Five
additional male subjects who had missing survey questions about their SAT performance were also
excluded from analyses where we control for measures of ability.
8

8

3. Results
To investigate the effect of gender-based AA policies on performance in a competitive math test,
we focus on the effect of AA on the change in test scores between the first and second rounds. 10
We use a weighted least squares (WLS) model that adjusts for a systematic relationship between
variance in score and number of questions attempted.11 We also explore the effect of AA on the
individual’s self-reported measure of effort and on his or her predicted score, which may capture
changes in effort.

3.1. The Net Effect of Affirmative Action
Table 2 presents descriptive information on gender differences in performance for each
round. In all rounds, men’s scores are, on average, higher than women’s: in round 1, men’s
average score is 6.36 and women’s is 5.65; in round 2, men’s average score is 7.31 and women’s is
6.45; and in round 3, men’s average score is 7.54 while women’s is 7.06. Examining the average
number of questions attempted, we find systematic gender differences that appear to reflect
different response strategies: men answered more questions in every round—8.91 questions on
average in round 1, 11.51 in round 2, and 12.20 in round 3, whereas women answered 8.32
questions on average in round 1, 9.89 in round 2, and 11.26 in round 3. We find that these
differences in response strategy are statistically significant in round 2 and 3. That is, under piecerate payment schedule and before the introduction of competition, there is no gender difference
in response to incentives. Gender differences in response strategies on competitive tests such as

10

Test scores determine payments and capture both the quantity and the accuracy of the responses.

11

A technical concern of using ordinary least squares (OLS) is heteroskedasticity, in which the variance in
the second-round score may systematically increase with the number of questions attempted. This concern
is simply due to the fact that with more questions attempted, the potential high and low scores are more
extreme. On the basis of this relationship, we use a WLS model with weights proportional to the number
of attempted questions in round 2. We get similar pattern of results whether we use WLS, OLS, or bootstrap
regression models. Also note that using number of questions attempted in round 2 as weights rather than
the difference in questions attempted in round 2 minus round 1 is appropriate since a similar regression
explaining the score in round 2 is equivalent to the regression explaining the difference in scores between
round 2 and round 1. The only change would be the coefficient on the right hand side of the round 1 score.

9

the SAT and GRE are well documented in experimental studies by Baldiga (2013), Ben-Shakhar
& Sinai (1991), and Hirschfeld et al. (1995).
The observed gender differences in baseline ability and response to competition in round
2 suggest that the impact of AA may differ for men and women. Guided by these differences, we
separately analyze the effect of AA on performance progress for each gender. We also control for
ability (using the first-round scores), response strategy (using the number of questions
attempted), age, and self-reported SAT scores.12
We consider two sets of specifications: one with a dummy variable that equals 1 when the
AA policy is in effect and zero otherwise, and the other that adds an interaction term of the AA
dummy variable with the first-round score; the latter allows for a heterogeneous effect of AA by
ability. That effect could have several causes, such as low-ability men giving up under AA or lowability women getting the greatest boost because of their increased opportunity to win.
Table 3 reports the results of pooling both AA conditions together.13 We find that, regardless
of the specification considered, baseline ability (first-round score) has a significant negative effect
on the change in scores between the first two rounds.14 This reflects the fact that the higher the
baseline score, the more difficult it is to improve. We also find that the self-reported quantitative
SAT score has a positive significant association with the change in scores; however, the selfreported verbal SAT score does not. The number of questions attempted in the first round, which
may capture response strategy,15 is associated with a significantly higher performance progress

There is no significant gender difference in average quantitative SAT score in our sample: women’s score
is 736 while men’s is 718 (one-sided t-test yields p = 0.11).
13 The results in the table exclude five subjects missing data on SAT performance but the results are
robust to an alternate specification that includes these subjects and does not control for SAT performance.
14
The dependent variable is the change in score from round 1 to round 2. Whether we use the change in
score or round 2’s performance level does not change the result. This is because round 1 score is our proxy
of ability and we control for it in the regression. For ease of interpretation—improvement or decline in
performance—we opted to use performance difference rather than level.
15 Indeed, in a regression of the success rate in round 2 on the number of attempts, gender, and the
interaction of the two, we find that for a given number of attempts, women have significantly higher
success rates (the main effect of gender is 0.168, p = 0.054), which diminish marginally with the number of
attempts (the interaction is ‒.012, p = 0.107). Nevertheless, the gender effect is positive up to 14 attempts,
12

10

for women (effect of 0.442 or 0.471, depending on the specification, both with p-value < 0.001), but
an insignificant effect for men.
Turning to the main question—the effect of AA on performance progress—we find that,
regardless of ability (Table 3, column 1), AA has a positive, albeit insignificant, effect on women.
Allowing for the possibility that high- and low-performing women are affected differently (Table
3, column 2), we find a positive significant main effect of AA (1.889, p-value = 0.019) that declines
with ability (–0.23; p-value = 0.035). For the average woman in the sample, the overall effect of
AA is positive and accounts for about 10% of the score in round 1. That is, the average woman’s
score progress is better under AA than without it. However, the overall effect of AA becomes
negative for women whose first-round score is over 8.21—approximately the top 20% of female
performers.16,17,18 Note that this result is not due to regression to the mean. While regression to the
mean may exist in this setting—that is, the performance of high-ability women declines in the
second round while that of the low-ability women increases—we compare women of similar
ability level across AA conditions. We find that the effect of AA on high ability women is negative,
meaning that even if high ability women reduce performance from round 1 to round 2 due to
regression to the mean, the reduction in performance is stronger with AA than without it. For
men, we find an insignificant positive effect of AA regardless of the specification. That is, the
main effect of AA on men’s performance progress, regardless of ability (Table 3, column 3), is
0.566 and is insignificant. When AA is allowed to have a differential effect by ability (Table 3,

representing about 92% of the women in our sample. This is consistent with a different response strategy
across gender, in which men attempt to answer more questions at the cost of accuracy.
16 Looking at percentiles, approximately 80% of women have a first-round score lower than 8 in round 1,
which is very close to the 8.21 cutoff.
17 Note that since we are working with a sample of students from a very selective university, the results for
the lower range of the ability distribution in our sample may be more representative of a broader
population than are the results for the entire sample. At the same time, AA policies often aim at the very
best individuals within the beneficiary group, in which case the very best in our sample would be the most
interesting and relevant individuals to examine.
18 Examining the correlation between the score in round 1 and the score in round 2, as well as between the
number of questions attempted across the two rounds, we find very high correlation of about 0.8 for both.
That is, the effect is not driven by high-ability women who performed poorly in the first stage.

11

column 4), its main effect is positive (1.051) and its interaction with ability is negative (–0.067),
both are insignificant.
To test whether the overall negative effect on the high-ability women subgroup is in fact
significant, we use the bootstrap method that allows such testing in spite of sample size issues
and does not require any parametric assumptions. Specifically, we split the women in our sample
into three groups according to their first-round scores: low ability (scores below 5; bottom 50%),
mid ability (scores between 5 and 8; between 50% and 80%), and high ability (scores above 8; top
20%). This split is guided by the WLS regression result: the top 20% corresponds closely to the
group for whom the overall effect of AA appears to be negative.19 We then calculate, for each
ability subgroup, the difference in (mean) scores between round 2 and round 1. We do so
separately for women under AA and women in the control group, and we then take the
difference-in-differences (AA minus control). We repeat this exercise 500 times, randomly
sampling women in each ability subgroup with repetition, resulting in a distribution of diff-indiff (see Figure 1). This allows us to ask whether the average diff-in-diff is negative and significant
for the subgroup of high-ability women. We find that the mean diff-in-diff for the high-ability
women is negative in 93% of the random sample, with its mean equal to −1.36 and significantly
different from zero. That is, the bootstrap exercise demonstrates that the total effect of AA is
negative for high ability women.
We further complement the bootstrap exercise with a regression analysis using the division
of women into the three ability groups described above coded as an ordered group dummy (0,1,2)
for low-, mid-, and high-ability women; this exercise allows for a nonlinear relationship between
ability and the effect of AA.20 The results (see Table 4) are consistent with those obtained from the

19

The top-ability group definition is guided by the regression results suggesting to focus on the top 20% of
female participants. The additional split into low-and mid-ability groups was done based on the premise
that below-the-median performance is considered low, and then it follows that performance above the
median but not at the top 20% is average.
20
Using 40% and 60% cutoffs to determine low- and mid-ability groups (i.e., 40% cutoff means that below
40% is considered low, and performance in the 40-80% range is mid-level ability) do not change the
qualitative results. Separately, if one were to use the OLS results the suggested round 1’s score cutoff for
the negative effect of AA is slightly lower at about 7.1. Using this cutoff to define the high ability group,
the results are robust

12

bootstrap approach: the effect of AA on low-ability women is positive (1.43) and at least
marginally significant (one-sided t-test for a positive effect yields p = 0.03. The two-sided t-test
yields p = 0.056); its effect on mid-ability women is overall negative (−0.118) but insignificant, and
its effect on high-ability women is negative (−1.67) and at least marginally significant (one-sided
t-test for a negative effect yields p = 0.03. The two-sided t-test yields p = 0.067.)21 For robustness
check, we repeat this exercise with two additional cutoffs—top 25% and top 15%--for defining
the high ability group. The results are robust for these different cutoffs—see Table A1 in the
Appendix.
Before moving on to explore possible mechanisms that could drive this heterogenous effect
of AA on performance, we may wonder whether the result is robust to using a different measure
of ability. To explore this issue, we repeat the exercise using participants’ round 3 scores as our
measure of ability. We find that 22 out of the 25 top female performers based on round 1
performance are also classified as top performers based on their round 3 score, which is
reassuring and suggests that the ability classification based on round 1’s score is not due to luck.
Using this alternative measure (based on round 3 scores) gives rise to a similar pattern, with a
negative coefficient estimated for the interaction of affirmative action and the high ability group
indicator. The coefficients are of similar magnitude to those in the main analysis, however the
statistical significance of the interaction is weaker with p-values at p=0.105 when using a separate
dummy for mid- and high-ability groups and p=0.12 when using an ordered ability-group
dummy. This is to be expected because individuals were already exposed to the treatment and
round 3 score is therefore a noisier measure of ability.22

21

Coding the score group dummy as an ordered variable (0,1,2) allows for nonlinear relationship between
ability and performance, however it assumes a linear effect moving from one group to another. Using
dummies separately for the medium-ability subgroup and for the high-ability subgroup, we find again that
AA has an insignificant negative effect on the medium-ability group and a significant negative effect on
high-ability women.
22
We cannot construct meaningful ability groups using the self-reported SAT quantitative score or the CRT
questions because there is not enough variation in these variables among participants in our experiment.
Conceptually, we also believe that using the score in round 1 is a more appropriate proxy for ability because
it is observed rather than self-reported, it was measured at the time the subjects took the test, and it is free
of any treatment effects

13

3.2. The Underlying Mechanisms
While the result highlighting the possibility of an unintended negative effect of AA on
performance is important in and of itself, an interesting issue for policymakers is the possible
underlying mechanisms driving this result. AA might be affecting performance in several ways:
(1) by affecting an incentive to exert effort; (2) by acting as a negative prime triggering the
stereotype threat effect; and (3) by changing the perceived sex composition of the tournament,
leading women to focus on a single- rather than mixed-sex competition. It may also affect
performance through a combination of all or some of these mechanisms. Below we review each
of these potential mechanisms and their expected effects.
The first mechanism, incentive to change effort, refers to the fact that AA affects women’s
probability of winning the bonus, which, in turn, changes the incentive to exert effort. Without
AA, a woman must outperform two of three competitors to win the bonus. She also knows that
the score of one of her competitors is drawn from the same (female) score distribution as hers and
that the other two competitors’ scores are drawn from the (male) distribution with a higher mean.
With AA, her chance of winning the bonus increases because it is now sufficient to outperform
just one other competitior, and she also knows that this other competitor is a woman whose ability
is drawn from the female performance distribution.
The second mechanism is the stereotype threat effect, whereby reminding individuals that
they belong to a group that stereotypically performs worse than other groups adversely affects
their performance on the given task.23 In our context, AA may be viewed as a prime triggering
the stereotype threat effect and may therefore reduce women’s performance.

23

This second potential mechanism—the stereotype threat effect—was introduced by the psychology
literature. It suggests that reminding individuals that they belong to a group that stereotypically performs
worse than other groups on a task adversely affects their performance on that task, especially if the task is
challenging. For example, studies document that reminding African-American students of their race leads
them to perform significantly worse on verbal GREs (Steele and Aronson 1995) and that reminding women
of their gender impairs their performance in math (Shih et al. 1999, Spencer et al. 1999). Although most
studies in the stereotype threat literature find a stereotype threat effect, others find opposite (Wei 2009,
2012) or no effects (Stricker 1998, Fryer et al. 2008). This has also recently been shown by Iriberri and Rey-

14

The third mechanism is the single-sex competition, and it refers to the findings that women
are less effective in mixed-sex competitive environments. If it leads women to perceive the
competition as a single-sex competition, AA may circumvent this effect of mixed-sex competition
and help women improve their performance.
Of the three potential mechanisms that we have identified, we can directly test the effect of
single-sex competition by running an additional condition in which the second-round
competition is between two women.24 Thirty-four women from the same subject pool participated
in this condition.25 The setting for this women-only condition was identical to that of the other
experimental conditions described above. That is, participants were asked to solve GRE
quantitative questions in three rounds. In round 1 and round 3, they were given a piece-rate
payment; in round 2, however, they were assigned to single-sex groups of two women, where the
person to win the bonus was the woman with the highest score.
We then test whether, in round 2, women’s performance in the single-sex condition differs
from women’s performance in the control group, where subjects were assigned to mixed-sex
groups and were not subject to AA. Table 5 shows no significant difference between the two
conditions: neither the main effect of women-only competition nor its interaction with ability is
significant. In other words, the effect of AA on women’s performance does not seem to be due to
a shift in focus from a mixed-sex group to a single-sex group.
Turning to the remaining mechanisms—incentive and stereotype threat effect—only the
incentive effect can account for the positive effect of AA on low-ability women. While this result

Biel (2017), noting that gender stereotype threat effect is most likely to present itself in tasks that are
perceived as unfavorable to women and where the presence of rivals is salient.
24 We note that the incentives in a single-sex competition and mixed-sex AA competition are not exactly
comparable because they are dependent on ability level. That is, in the mixed-sex AA competition a woman
can win the bonus if she is better than the other woman, and if she is not better than the other woman, she
could still win the bonus if she is better than the other two men. However, importantly, if AA change
women’s mindset to think of their competition as a single-sex competition then this treatment should
capture the incentives associated with that view.
25 We ran women-only conditions during the same sessions as all other conditions, so the observable
gender composition was mixed during all sessions.

15

affirms the existence of an incentive effect, it does not rule out the stereotype threat effect, which
may still exist even if dominated by incentive. For the high-ability women, we find a negative AA
effect on performance. The incentive mechanism for these women can go both ways because, for
high-ability women, who know they are of high ability, the chances of winning under AA are
high even without their putting in much effort. Hence, this mechanism could lead high-ability
women to exert more, the same, or less effort under AA.26 The overall negative effect of AA on
the performance of high-ability women can therefore be a result of either a negative incentive
effect (with or without the existence of the stereotype threat effect) or a positive incentive effect,
similar to that observed for low-ability women, which is dominated by a negative stereotype
threat effect.
To look into stereotype threat effect, we first confirmed that Harvard students believe
women underperform compared to men on the GRE math questions using a survey. 27 Next we
use the two AA conditions with and without an informational prime (AA-I, and AA-no-I,
respectively)—where the information provided in the AA-I condition is similar to the
informational prime used in the psychology literature to trigger stereotype threat effect (see e.g.,
Spencer et al. 1999)—to test for differential effect. If AA does not act as a prime triggering a

To illustrate why these different effects are possible, we can think of each participant’s problem in round
1 as choosing an effort level to maximize Reward(e) – c(e), where Reward(e) is the piece rate earning as a
function of effort e and c(e) is the cost of exerting effort level e and of the problem in round 2 as choosing e
to maximize p(e;AA)Bonus + Reward(e) - c(e), where p(e;AA) is the probability of winning the bonus with
effort level e under a specific AA condition. In this toy model, the optimal effort level in round 1 equates
the marginal benefit of higher effort in piece rate earnings with the marginal cost of effort. In round 2, the
marginal benefit is again the increased piece rate earnings and an elevated probability of earning the bonus.
Hence, unless the cost function changes with AA—which is a way of thinking of stereotype threat—it
would generally be optimal for women to increase effort in round 2. However, it is possible that highability women might choose to reduce effort (or keep it constant) compared to when in a mixed-sex
competition without AA if they are confident that under AA they will win the bonus. In that case, the
marginal increase in probability to win the bonus with effort may be lower under AA.
27 75 Harvard students participated in a survey regarding the gender gap in GRE math performance. Each
subject was asked to report his or her belief about women’s GRE math scores compared to men’s—
specifically, whether women’s scores are much lower (1), lower (2), the same (3), higher (4), or much higher
(5) than men’s scores. Overall, the Harvard students believe that women’s GRE quantitative performance
is lower than men’s. This holds true whether they are asked about the general population that takes the
GRE (average response is 2.7, significantly different from 3 at the 1% level) or about the Harvard student
body (average response is 2.78, significantly different from 3 at the 1% level).
26

16

stereotype threat effect (or does so only partially), and assuming that the informational prime
does, we would expect performance to be lower under AA-I. To test whether there is a differential
effect of AA with and without an informational prime, we run an analysis similar to that shown
in Table 4 but with an additional indicator variable “Info,” which takes the value of 1 if a
participant was assigned to the AA-I treatment and of zero otherwise.28 We also interact this
indicator variable with our measure of ability and find that both its main effect and its interaction
with the ability group are insignificant (see Table 6). There are two possible explanations
consistent with this result: either that AA fully act as a prime triggering stereotype threat or that
stereotype threat effect does not exist in this environment.
Because the experimental design cannot disentangle these two mechanisms, we look at our
survey measures to examine whether high-ability women’s effort changes in response to AA. We
start by investigating participants’ self-reported effort exerted during the study, as indicated in
an exit questionnaire (responses range from 1 to 7, where 7 represents the highest effort). Table 7
reports the results of Ordered Probit regressions analyzing those responses using the same
specification as in our main analysis (Table 3): AA dummy variable, first-round score, and the
interaction of the two, plus controls that include the number of questions attempted in the first
round, age, and self-reported SAT scores. Two specifications were considered as before: one using
the continuous measure of ability, forcing a linear relationship, and the other using ability groups,
allowing for a nonlinear relationship. Two women reported an unusually low level of effort of
less than or equal to 2 (the median effort is 6); we therefore present the results both including
these individuals (columns 1, 3, and 5) and excluding them (columns 2, 4, and 6). The results show
that women report exerting more effort under AA, and this finding is robust to adding the
interaction of the dummy variable of quota policy with ability (measured by first-round score)
when the outliers are excluded. Taking into account all the women, including the two outliers,
the effect is always positive albeit sometimes insignificant. The results, therefore, suggest that
women’s efforts do not decrease in response to AA across the board.

The information prime describes women’s inferior performance relative to men on the GRE, which is, on
average, 15% lower. See Section 2 for details.
28

17

The second measure that we examine is the participants’ round 2 score predictions,
submitted before any feedback on actual performance was given. If high-ability women exerted
less effort under AA, the expectation is that they would predict lower round 2 scores than
participants in the No AA condition. Table 8 shows that, overall, women under AA reported
higher scores in round 2 (average predicted score is 6.2) than those in the control (with average
predicted score of 5.8). While this positive difference is not statistically significant for low- and
mid-ability women, it is significant at the 5% level for high-ability women. This evidence is again
consistent with women not decreasing their efforts in response to AA.
The two self-reported measures of effort suggest that women—in particular, high-ability
women—did not reduce their effort in response to AA in our study. While this evidence is not
conclusive, it is nevertheless suggestive of the coexistence of the incentive mechanism and the
stereotype threat effect.

3.3. Response Strategy
Test scores are influenced by both the number of questions attempted and the success rate on
these questions. That is, an increase in a given score can be obtained by increasing the number of
questions answered while keeping the success rate fixed, by improving the success rate while the
number of questions answered is fixed, or both.
Table 9 shows the regression analysis of the number of questions attempted in round 2 on a
similar specification as in prior analyses: a dummy of AA, baseline ability (score in round 1), and
their interaction. We also control for the number of questions attempted in round 1, age, and selfreported SAT scores. We find a positive but insignificant main effect of AA on the number of
questions that women attempt and this effect does not vary with ability.
We then proceed to examine the effect of AA on success rate. Again, we use a regression
analysis with the same specification as above, but with the success rate in round 2 as the
dependent variable. Table 10 shows that the main effect of AA on success rate is positive and

18

significant and that this effect declines with ability. For the highest-ability women, those whose
average score in round 1 is over 11, the overall effect of AA on success rate is negative.

4. Conclusions
This paper examines the effect of gender-based AA on quantitative GRE performance in an
incentivized and competitive environment. While the findings show that AA positively affects
the performance of most women, we find a surprising negative effect on the performance of
women of the highest ability. This result has not been detected by the literature thus far, possibly
owing to task differences. As we noted above, the GRE math task has several distinct properties
that other tasks used in the literature do not share. First, participants are very familiar with this
task, as they have all taken at least the SAT and therefore have a good understanding of their
relative ranking in the performance distribution. Second, there is an established stereotype of
gender gap in performance, which accurately reflects reality. Together, this knowledge and the
gender gap in performance result in different incentives by ability. Furthermore, the established
stereotype combined with the fact that the task is relatively challenging may lend itself to a
stereotype threat effect.
We discuss three potential mechanisms that, either separately or together, may drive our
results. Of these three potential mechanisms, we test the single-sex competition directly and find
that this cannot explain the results. Our experiment cannot disentangle the remaining two
mechanisms—the incentive effect and stereotype effect. Nevertheless, we use self-reported
measures of effort and predicted performance to shed light on the effect of AA on effort exerted.
We find no evidence that women of any ability reduced their effort in response to AA; yet given
that these are self-reported measures, the results are only suggestive.
An important finding that can be drawn from our results is that when policymakers consider
the impacts of introducing an AA policy, they should account for the possibility that this policy
may have a negative impact on performance in the group of intended beneficiaries. When
possible, policymakers might avoid this effect by not announcing the policy rule explicitly. Future
19

research disentangling the incentive and stereotype threat mechanisms is important to
developing specific policies. If the effect is solely due to incentives, AA may not be the optimal
policy to use. For example, if the objective is to select women of highest ability, their reduction in
effort could lead them to fall behind. In that case, AA could be detrimental to overall human
capital accumulation if high-ability women reduce effort in response to AA and AA is used in
different stages of life. That is, if effort is strategically reduced in response to AA, it can lead
women to underperform and fuel gender stereotypes in spite of women’s true ability. On the
other hand, if the effect is solely due to stereotype threat, then AA may be an effective policy if
coupled with education at an early age.
As noted in the paper, participants in the study were students in a highly selective
institution, and it may be argued that they are not representative of the effect of AA in the field.
However, AA policies are often designed to motivate candidates of the highest abilities, so the
results in this study are directly relevant to these contexts. Second, it is possible that the effect is
driven by relative ranking within the group rather than by absolute skill. If so, the effect found in
this study may also occur in other groups of lower abilities as long as the high-ability individuals
are defined relative to the group they are competing against.
With the substantial interest around the world in AA policies aimed at advancing women, it
is important to fully understand their potential effect. This paper provides the first direct
experimental evidence that AA policies may have unintended negative consequences on
performance.

20

References
American Psychological Association. 2012. Brief of Experimental Psychologists et al. as Amici
Curiae Supporting Respondents, Fisher v. University of Texas, (August 13, 2012) (No. 011015).
Balafoutas, Loukas, and Matthias Sutter. 2012. Affirmative action policies promote women and
do not harm efficiency in the laboratory. Science 335:579–582.
Baldiga, Katherine. 2013. Gender differences in willingness to guess. Management Science 60(2):
434-448.
Ben‐Shakhar, Gershon and Sinai, Yakov, 1991. Gender differences in multiple‐choice tests: the
role of differential guessing tendencies. Journal of Educational Measurement, 28(1), pp.23-35.
Calsamiglia, Caterina, Jörg Franke, and Pedro Rey-Biel. 2013. The incentive effects of affirmative
action in a real-effort tournament. Journal of Public Economics 98:15–31.
Catalyst Census. 2013. Fortune 500 Women Board Directors. Available at:
http://www.catalyst.org/system/files/2013_catalyst_census_fortune_500_women_board_dir
ector.pdf.
Croson Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. Gender Differences in Preferences. Journal of Economic
Literature 47(2): 448-474.
European Commission – Directorate-General for Justice, 2012. Women in Economic Decisionmaking in the EU: Progress Report.
Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/justice/gender-equality/files/women-on-boards_en.pdf.
Frederick Shane. 2005. Cognitive Reflection and Decision Making. Journal of Economic Perspective
19(4): 25-42.
Fryer, Roland, Steven Levitt, John List. 2008. Exploring the impact of financial incentives on
stereotype threat. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 98(2): 370-375.
Gneezy, Uri, Muriel Niederle, and Aldo Rustichini. 2003. Performance in competitive
environments: Gender differences. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1049–1074.
Hirschfeld, Mary, Moore, Robert L. and Eleanor Brown. 1995. Exploring the gender gap on the
GRE subject test in economics. The Journal of Economic Education, 26(1): 3-15.
Hoff, Karla, and Priyanka Pandey. 2006. Discrimination, Social Identity, and Durable Inequalities.
The American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 96(2): 206-211.

21

Imbens, Guido, Donald B Rubin, Gary King, Richard A Berk, Daniel E Ho, Kevin M Quinn, James
D Greiner, Ian Ayres, Richard Brooks, Paul Oyer, and Richard Lempert. 2012. “Brief of
Empirical Scholars as Amici Curiae.” Filed with the Supreme Court of the United States in
Abigail Noel Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin, et al.
Iriberri, Nagore, and Pedro Rey-Biel. 2017. Stereotypes are only a threat when beliefs are
reinforced: On the sensitivity of gender differences in performance under competition to
information provision. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 135: 99-111.
Leslie, L.M., Mayer, D.M. and Kravitz, D.A., 2014. The stigma of affirmative action: a
stereotyping-based theory and meta-analytic test of the consequences for
performance. Academy of Management Journal, 57(4), pp.964-989.
Meeting of the OECD Council at Ministerial Level, Paris 25-26 May 2011, Report of the Gender
Initiative: Gender Equality in Education, Employment and Entrepreneurship. Available at:
http://www.oecd.org/education/48111145.pdf.
National Association for Law Placement press release, December 11, 2013. Representation of
Women Associates Falls for Fourth Straight Yeas as Minority Associates Continue to Make
Gains – Women and Minority Partners Continue to Make Small Gains.
Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2007. Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do Men
Compete Too Much? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3): 1067-1101.
Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2010. Explaining the Gender Gap in Math Test Scores:
The Role of Competition. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(2): 129-144.
Niederle, Muriel, Carmit Segal, Lise Vesterlund. 2013. How costly is diversity? Affirmative action
in light of gender differences in competitiveness. Management Science 59(1): 1-16.
Sander, Richard. H., 2010. Listening to the Debate on Reforming Law School Admissions
Preferences. Denver University Law Review 88: 889.
Schuck, Peter H., 2002. Affirmative action: Past, present, and future. Yale Law & Policy Review, 20(1): 1-96.

Shih, Margaret, Todd L. Pittinsky, and Nalini Ambady. 1999. Stereotype susceptibility: Identity
salience and shifts in quantitative performance. Psychological Science 10:80–83.
Spencer, Steven J., Claude M. Steele, Diane M. Quinn. 1999. Stereotype threat and women’s math
performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 35:4–28.
Steele, Claude M., 1997. A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and
performance. American Psychologist 52(6):613.

22

Steele, Claude M. and Joshua Aronson. 1995. Contending with a stereotype: African-American
intellectual test performance and stereotype threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
69:797–811.
Steele, Claude M., Steven J. Spencer and Joshua Aronson. 2002. Contending with group image:
The psychology of stereotype and social identity threat. In Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 34, pp. 379-440). Academic Press.
Stricker, Lawrence J. 1998. Inquiring about examinees’ ethnicity and sex: Effects on AP Calculus
AB examination performance. Collage Board Report No. 98-1. ETS Report No. 98-5.
Sutter, Matthias and Daniela Rützler. 2010. Gender Differences in Competition Emerge Early in
Life. IZA Discussion Paper No. 5015.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration. 2011. Women in STEM:
A Gender Gap to Innovation.
Available at: http://www.esa.doc.gov/Reports/women-stem-gender-gap-innovation.
Wei, Thomas. 2009. Under what conditions? Stereotype threat and prime attributes. Working
Paper. Available at http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~twei/papers/sthreat_exper.pdf.
Wei, Thomas. 2012. Sticks, stones, words, and broken bones: New field and lab evidence on
stereotype threat. Educational Evaluation & Policy Analysis 34:465.
Willingham, W. W., & Cole, N. S. (1997). Gender and fair assessment. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.

23

Table 1: Summary Statistics: Independent Variables
Control vs. AA

Age

Control
(mean)
20.22

AA
(mean)
20.07

SAT Quantity

722.66

734.13

0.45

SAT Verbal

717.09

722.81

0.73

CRT Questions

1.05

1.12

0.53

N

79

167

P-Value
0.55

Round 1

Female
(mean)
5.65

# Questions

8.91

8.32

0.201

Ratio correct

0.76

0.72

0.236

Score

7.31

6.45

0.107

# Questions

11.50

9.89

0.001

Ratio correct

0.69

0.71

0.386

Score

7.54

7.06

0.397

# Questions

12.20

11.26

0.037

Ratio correct

0.68

0.68

0.961

123

123

Round 3

Score

Male
(mean)
6.36

Round 2

Table 2: Summary Statistics: Dependent Variables
By Gender and Round

N

24

P-Value
0.156

Table 3: The Effect of Affirmative Action on Performance Progress
(1)
(2)
(3)
Female
Female
Male

(4)
Male

Affirmative Action (AA)

0.436
(0.432)

1.889**
(0.795)

0.566
(0.532)

1.051
(0.904)

Score in 1st Round (Score R1)

–0.723***
(0.078)

–0.572***
(0.093)

–0.372***
(0.141)

–0.340**
(0.137)

–0.230**
(0.108)

(AA)x(Score R1)

–0.067
(0.128)

# Questions in 1st Round

0.442***
(0.069)

0.471***
(0.075)

0.187
(0.132)

0.171
(0.130)

Age

0.000
(0.106)

–0.052
(0.111)

–0.173
(0.180)

–0.160
(0.177)

SAT Quantitative

0.018***
(0.003)

0.017***
(0.003)

0.022***
(0.006)

0.023***
(0.006)

SAT Verbal

0.002
(0.003)

0.002
(0.003)

0.002
(0.004)

0.002
(0.004)

–13.242***
(3.974)
123
0.359

–13.153***
(3.931)
123
0.380

–13.356**
(5.905)
118
0.176

–14.058**
(6.019)
118
0. 171

Constant
N
Adjusted R2

Notes: WLS regressions. Dependent variable: difference in score between round 2 and round 1.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates significance at the 10% level; **
indicates significance at the 5% level; *** indicates significance at the 1% level. t indicates p<0.15.

25

Table 4: The Effect of Affirmative Action on Performance, by Group
(1)
(2)
Female
Male
Affirmative Action (AA)

1.434*
(0.744)

0.979
(0.705)

1st Round Score Group

–1.071*
(0.582)

–1.270*
(0.674)

AA x 1st Round Score Group

–1.552**
(0.670)

0.108
(0.637)

# Questions in 1st Round

0.195**
(0.095)

0.013
(0.082)

Age

–0.018
(0.140)

–0.123
(0.177)

SAT Quantitative

0.012***
(0.004)

0.022***
(0.006)

SAT Verbal

–0.001
(0.004)

0.001
(0.004)

Constant

–7.887*
(4.578)
123
0.229
0.028
0.034

–13.626**
(6.313)
118
0.203
0.084
0.901

N
r2
T_Low_pos
T_High_neg

Notes: WLS regressions. Dependent variable: difference in score between round 2
and round 1. T-Low(+) displays the result of a t-test calculating the probability that
an individual in the lower performance group was positively affected by the AA. THigh(-) displays the result of a t-test calculating the probability that an individual in
the higher performance group was negatively affected by the AA. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates significance at the 10% level; **
indicates significance at the 5% level; *** indicates significance at the 1% level. t
indicates p<0.15.

26

Table 5: Women-Only Competition
(1)
Women only

0.235
(0.802)

Score in 1st Round (Score R1)

-0.451***
(0.124)

1st Round Score Group

(2)
0.366
(0.743)

-0.667
(0.586)

(Women only)x(Score R1)

0.025
(0.095)

(Women only)*(1st Round Score Group)

-0.248
(0.592)

# Questions in 1st round

0.311**
(0.122)

0.074
(0.078)

Age

-0.066
(0.120)

-0.082
(0.146)

SAT Quantitative

0.012*
(0.006)

0.004
(0.007)

SAT Verbal

0.003
(0.003)
72
0.193

0.001
(0.004)
72
0.057

N
r2

Notes: WLS regressions. Dependent variable: difference in score between round 2 and round 1. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates significance at the 10-percent level; ** indicates
significance at the 5-percent level; *** indicates significance at the 1-percent level. t indicates p<0.15.

27

Table 6: Affirmative Action and Informational Prime
(1)
(2)
Female
Male
Affirmative Action (AA)

1.696**
(0.755)

1.350t
(0.830)

Info

-0.519
(0.701)

-0.616
(0.958)

1st Round Score Group

-1.071*
(0.586)

-1.277*
(0.683)

AA x 1st Round Score Group

-1.601**
(0.741)

-0.048
(0.784)

Info x 1st Round Score Group

0.064
(0.753)

0.257
(0.842)

# Questions in 1st Round

0.196**
(0.096)

0.021
(0.082)

Age

-0.026
(0.135)

-0.135
(0.181)

SAT Quantitative

0.012***
(0.004)

0.021***
(0.006)

SAT Verbal

-0.001
(0.004)

0.001
(0.004)

Constant

-7.644*
(4.526)
123
0.234

-12.898*
(6.811)
118
0.207

N
r2

Notes: WLS regressions. Dependent variable: difference in score between round 2
and round 1. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates
significance at the 10-percent level; ** indicates significance at the 5-percent level;
*** indicates significance at the 1-percent level. t indicates p<0.15.

28

Table 7: The Effect of Affirmative Action on Effort, Women
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Affirmative Action (AA)

0.405*
(0.211)

0.473**
(0.221)

0.549t
(0.374)

0.878**
(0.404)

0.497t
(0.318)

0.668*
(0.353)

Score in 1st Round (Score R1)

0.036
(0.049)

0.041
(0.049)

0.052
(0.052)

0.086t
(0.057)

-0.026
(0.051)

-0.071
(0.055)

1st Round Score Group

0.187
(0.247)

0.392t
(0.270)

AA x 1st Round Score Group

-0.093
(0.256)

-0.200
(0.279)

(AA)x(Score R1)

# Questions in 1st round

-0.017
(0.048)

-0.005
(0.046)

-0.014
(0.049)

0.006
(0.045)

-0.007
(0.037)

-0.002
(0.037)

Age

0.017
(0.064)

0.009
(0.068)

0.012
(0.067)

-0.006
(0.073)

0.012
(0.066)

-0.001
(0.071)

SAT Quantitative

0.005**
(0.002)

0.002
(0.003)

0.005**
(0.002)

0.002
(0.003)

0.005**
(0.002)

0.002
(0.002)

SAT Verbal

-0.002
(0.002)
123

-0.003
(0.002)
121

-0.002
(0.002)
123

-0.003
(0.002)
121

-0.002
(0.002)
123

-0.003t
(0.002)
121

N

Notes: Ordered probit regressions. Dependent variable: self-reported effort level. Robust standard errors
are reported in parentheses. * indicates significance at the 10-percent level; ** indicates significance at the
5-percent level; *** indicates significance at the 1-percent level. t indicates p<0.15.

29

Table 8: Women self-reported predicted round 2 scores by ability and AA condition
(prior to learning actual score).
Ability
AA-no-I & AA-I
No AA
Diff

Low-Ability
4.5
3.97
0.53

Mid-Ability
6.17
6.35
-0.18

High-Ability
10.36
8.11
2.25**

Overall
6.2
5.8
0.4

* indicates significance at the 10-percent level; ** indicates significance at the 5-percent
level; *** indicates significance at the 1-percent level.

30

Table 9: Number of Questions
(1)
Female
Affirmative Action (AA)

-0.529
(0.904)

Score in 1st round (Score R1)

0.178
(0.149)

(AA)x(Score R1)

-0.037
(0.138)

(2)
Female
-0.085
(0.673)

1st Round Score Group

1.252*
(0.654)

AA x 1st Round Score Group

-0.570
(0.711)

# Questions in 1st Round

0.526***
(0.197)

0.545***
(0.148)

Age

0.091
(0.249)

0.074
(0.244)

SAT Quantitative

0.009*
(0.005)

0.008**
(0.004)

SAT Verbal

-0.005t
(0.004)
123
0.600

-0.006t
(0.004)
123
0.612

N
r2

Notes: WLS regressions. Dependent variable: number of questions
answered in round 2. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. * indicates significance at the 10-percent level; **
indicates significance at the 5-percent level; *** indicates significance
at the 1-percent level. t indicates p<0.15.

31

Table 10: Success Rate
(1)
Female
Affirmative Action (AA)

0.149**
(0.064)

Score in 1st Round (Score R1)

0.019**
(0.009)

(AA)x(Score R1)

-0.013*
(0.008)

(2)
Female
0.120**
(0.053)

1st Round Score Group

0.064t
(0.040)

AA x 1st Round Score Group

-0.051
(0.043)

# Questions in 1st Round

-0.001
(0.009)

0.002
(0.006)

Age

0.004
(0.010)

0.004
(0.010)

SAT Quantitative

0.001***
(0.000)

0.002***
(0.000)

SAT Verbal

0.001**
(0.000)
123
0.416

0.001**
(0.000)
123
0.409

N
r2

Notes: OLS regressions. Dependent variable: success rate in
round 2. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *
indicates significance at the 10-percent level; ** indicates
significance at the 5-percent level; *** indicates significance at
the 1-percent level. t indicates p<0.15.

32

Figure 1

.8

Females’ [Round 2- Round 1] Score Difference, by AA

.6

Mid Ability:
Mean is 0.153

.4

Low Ability:
Mean is 0.696

0

.2

High Ability:
Mean is -1.36*

-4

-2
0
2
Difference [AA- No AA] of Change in Score Between Rounds
Low ability
Mid ability

33

High ability

4

Appendix:
Table A1: Robustness Checks29
Different Cutoffs for Being Considered a Top Performer, Females

(1)
75%

(2)
85%

Affirmative Action (AA)

1.427*
(0.756)

1.132t
(0.739)

1st Round Score Group

-1.040*
(0.559)

-1.930***
(0.522)

(AA)x(1st Round Score Group)

-1.363**
(0.637)

-1.238**
(0.618)

# Questions in 1st Round

0.174*
(0.097)

0.245***
(0.084)

Age

-0.032
(0.14)

0.014
(0.125)

0.012***
(0.004)

0.014***
(0.004)

SAT Verbal

-0.002
(0.004)

0.002
(0.004)

Constant

-6.580t
(4.483)
123.000
0.234
0.031
0.061

-11.416**
(4.448)
123.000
0.30
0.064
0.043

Top Cutoff:

SAT Quantitative

N
r2
T_Low_pos
T_High_neg

Notes: WLS regressions. Dependent variable: difference in score between round 2 and
round 1. T-Low(+) displays the result of a t-test calculating the probability that an
individual in the lower performance group was positively affected by the AA. THigh(-) displays the result of a t-test calculating the probability that an individual in
the higher performance group was negatively affected by the AA. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates significance at the 10% level; ** indicates
significance at the 5% level; *** indicates significance at the 1% level. t indicates p<0.15.

29

The score group variables is an ordered dummy variable (0,1,2) for the low-, mid-, and high-ability
women group. The results are similar using separate dummy variables for each ability group.

34

Screen shots for the AA-I condition.

35

36

ROUND 1—10 MINUTES. Example:

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

ROUND 2—10 MINUTES. Example:

45

46

ROUND 3- 10 MINUTES. Example:

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

