NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HALL OF MIRRORS:
CORPORATE PHILANTHROPY AND STRATEGIC ADVOCACY
Marianne Bertrand
Matilde Bombardini
Raymond Fisman
Bradley Hackinen
Francesco Trebbi
Working Paper 25329
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25329

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

Bertrand: University of Chicago Booth School of Business and NBER; Bombardini: University
of British Columbia, CIFAR, and NBER; Fisman: Boston University and NBER; Hackinen: PhD
Candidate, University of British Columbia; Trebbi: University of British Columbia, CIFAR, and
NBER. We would like to thank Kevin Milligan and seminar participants at Harvard Kennedy
School and UBC for discussion. Bombardini and Trebbi acknowledge financial support from
CIFAR and SSHRC. Pietro Montanarella and Jack Vincent provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Marianne Bertrand, Matilde Bombardini, Raymond Fisman, Bradley Hackinen, and
Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Hall of Mirrors: Corporate Philanthropy and Strategic Advocacy
Marianne Bertrand, Matilde Bombardini, Raymond Fisman, Bradley Hackinen, and Francesco
Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 25329
December 2018
JEL No. K2,P16,P48
ABSTRACT
Politicians and regulators rely on feedback from the public when setting policies. For-profit
corporations and non-pro t entities are active in this process and are arguably expected to provide
independent viewpoints. Policymakers (and the public at large), however, may be unaware of the
financial ties between some firms and non-profits - ties that are legal and tax-exempt, but difficult
to trace. We identify these ties using IRS forms submitted by the charitable arms of large U.S.
corporations, which list all grants awarded to non-pro fits. We document three patterns in a
comprehensive sample of public commentary made by firms and non-profits within U.S. federal
rulemaking between 2003 and 2015. First, we show that, shortly after a firm donates to a nonprofit, the grantee is more likely to comment on rules for which the firm has also provided a
comment. Second, when a firm comments on a rule, the comments by non-profits that recently
received grants from the firm's foundation are systematically closer in content similarity to the
firm's own comments than to those submitted by other non-profits commenting on that rule. This
content similarity does not result from similarly-worded comments that express divergent
sentiment. Third, when a firm comments on a new rule, the discussion of the final rule is more
similar to the firm's comments when the firm's recent grantees also comment on that rule. These
patterns, taken together, suggest that corporations strategically deploy charitable grants to induce
non-pro fit grantees to make comments that favor their benefactors, and that this translates into
regulatory discussion that is closer to the firm's own comments.
Marianne Bertrand
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagobooth.edu
Matilde Bombardini
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
CANADA
and CIFAR and RCEA
and also NBER
matilde.bombardini@ubc.ca
Raymond Fisman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road, 304A
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
rfisman@bu.edu

Bradley Hackinen
6000 Iona Dr.
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Brit V6T 1L4
Canada
bradhackinen@gmail.com
Francesco Trebbi
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
Canada
and CIFAR
and also NBER
ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca

1

Introduction

Economists and political scientists have long studied – both theoretically and empirically – the role
interest groups play in the formation of laws and regulations. In the U.S., as in many democracies,
there are well-established channels through which interest groups can try to influence the laws and
rules that may impact their communities, their businesses, or society at large. Through means
such as lobbying, grassroots campaigns, testimonies, or public advocacy, interested parties inform
politicians and bureaucrats of the costs and benefits of government action.
While interest groups may have expertise on topics of direct relevance to them, they may also
be tempted to present information that is tainted by their self-interest. This logic is at the core
of the literature on informational lobbying (Grossman and Helpman, 2001).1 For example, oil
company representatives may have expertise in drilling, but also a strong incentive to minimize,
say, the predicted environmental costs of Arctic oil exploration. Government officials must thus
weigh both the quality of information and its impartiality, based in part on its source. As such,
lawmakers and rulemakers may view information provided by for-profit corporations as less credible
if that information is not corroborated by other groups with non-aligned (i.e., neutral or opposing)
interests.
Non-profit organizations often fall into the role of interests that are non-aligned with business. Some non-profits – such as research groups, universities, and think tanks – are providers of
nonpartisan, technical expertise and are commonly expected to offer more neutral input into the
lawmaking and rulemaking process, with a focus on cost-benefit analysis and broader societal interests. Other non-profits – such as human services organizations, environmental protection groups,
social welfare organizations, and advocacy groups – may have opposing interests to business, to
the extent that laws or regulations that benefit their members (or those on whose behalf they
advocate) adversely constrain business profits. Non-profit organizations are therefore expected to
play an important balancing role in the informational lobbying process.
This role may be subverted, however, by the financial links between corporations and nonprofits: in exchange for donations, a non-profit may (consciously or otherwise) take a perspective
that is favorable to its benefactor’s bottom line. If politicians and bureaucrats are more likely
to implement a proposal when it is supported by interest-group diverse coalitions (as suggested
theoretically in the strategic advocacy literature, e.g., Krishna and Morgan (2001), Dewatripont
and Tirole (1999), Dewatripont and Tirole (2005), and empirically in Lorenz, 2017) and if such
ties are undisclosed, such “coalition building via corporate giving” may distort the outcome of the
1

By informational lobbying we refer to the broad literature on information transmission which encompasses
cheap talk and costly signalling models in the context of lobbying, for example Potters and Van Winden (1992),
Austen-Smith (1993), Austen-Smith (1995) and Lohmann (1995).

2

political process away from the public good and towards private interests.2
The goal of this paper is to provide systematic evidence establishing this to be an empirically
relevant phenomenon. The context of U.S. Federal Regulation, with its far-reaching economic
implications and its carefully documented record of communications between organizations and
government agencies, offers an ideal setting to establish such evidence.
There exists anecdotal evidence that these concerns are well-founded. Across a range of issues
and regulatory agencies, researchers and journalists have documented cases of companies using
charitable contributions to co-opt ostensibly neutral and even non-aligned non-profits. Notably,
Peng (2016) describes the efforts of telecommunications firms to win merger approvals in front of
the Federal Communication Commission (FCC), in part by assembling diverse and vocal coalitions of supporters. Peng quotes Crawford (2013) on the Comcast-NBCU merger, in which “[t]he
company encouraged letters to the FCC from more than one thousand non-profits...including community centers, rehabilitation centers, civil rights groups, community colleges, sports programs,
[and] senior citizen groups.” For the AT&T/T-Mobile merger, Peng similarly documents letters
of support addressed to the FCC from non-profits that, at first glance, would appear to have little
interest or expertise in telecommunications policy, including a homeless shelter in Louisiana, a
special needs employment agency in Michigan, and the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD). The non-profits were all AT&T Foundation grantees (in the case of the homeless
shelter, the donation had come in just five months before the merger was announced). In no
case did the non-profit disclose its AT&T funding in its letter to the FCC. In at least one case,
the comments did not appear to represent the views of the non-profit membership. According to
Peng, “GLAAD’s president and six board members resigned when its merger endorsement made
headlines and revealed that the organization had received AT&T funds.”
Journalists and medical experts have documented similar persuasion-via-donation in public
health debates. Jacobson (2005), for example, describes a (“no-strings attached”) $1 million
donation from Coca-Cola Foundation to the American Association of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD),
accompanied by a shift in the tone of AAPD statements on sugary beverages, from describing
soft drinks as “a significant factor” in tooth decay, to describing the scientific evidence of the
relationship as “unclear.” 3 Similar concerns have been raised with respect to the role of donations
2

Implicitly we are presuming that Coasian bargaining in the political sphere does not already lead to efficient
policies. To the extent that, for example, it is difficult to contract across multiple regulatory agencies and/or pieces
of legislation (let alone make outright side payments), one may think of the government as aiming to set optimal
policy on a rule-by-rule basis, assigning winners and losers in each instance. See, e.g., Acemoglu (2003), for a
discussion.
3
A more direct link to policy can be found in the soda industry’s efforts against New York City’s ban on large
sugary drinks in the 2010s. In his decision to strike down the Bloomberg administration policy, the presiding
judge cited amicus briefs filed by two New York non-profits (the local chapter of the NAACP and the Hispanic
Federation), which argued that the ban would disproportionately affect ethnic and racial minority groups. Both
non-profits were recipients of funds from Coca-Cola and PepsiCo. See “Minority Groups and Bottlers Team Up

3

from corporations to university research hospitals.4
Investigative journalists have also documented many instances of companies influencing the
policy statements of “neutral” non-profits that ostensibly provide evidence-based analysis on matters of public interest. Confidential memos and documents suggest that some think tank reports
are discussed with corporate donors before the research is complete, with donors potentially shaping the final reports, so that the resulting “scholarship” can be used to corroborate their separate
lobbying efforts. In her 2017 book Dark Money, journalist Jane Mayer , provides one prominent
example, documenting how the philanthropic activities of the billionaire industrialist brothers
Charles and David Koch furthered their efforts to influence political discourse: “[The Koch brothers] subsidized networks of seemingly unconnected think tanks and academic programs and spawned
advocacy groups to make their arguments in the national political debate. [...] Much of this activism was cloaked in secrecy and presented as philanthropy, leaving almost no money trail that
the public could trace. But cumulatively it formed, as one of their operatives boasted in 2015, a
’fully integrated network.’” Raising concerns about such practices in general, Senator Elizabeth
Warren, also a commercial law professor, observed that, “[t]his is about giant corporations who
figured out that by spending, hey, a few tens of millions of dollars, if they can influence outcomes
here in Washington, they can make billions of dollars.”56
In this paper we show that the patterns discussed in these anecdotes hold more broadly in
a setting in which we can plausibly draw a strong circumstantial connection between corporate
donations and the participation of non-profits in the political and regulatory process.
We focus on the formation of federal rules and regulations. Federal agencies in the U.S. are
legally required to publish proposed rules in the Federal Register and accept public comments
in Battles Over Soda.” The New York Times March 12, 2013. Aaron and Siegel (2017) show that 95 national
public health organizations received funding from Coca-Cola and PepsiCo during 2011-2015; the study does not
look, however, at the effect on organizations’ publicly stated positions.
4
For example, Harris, Gardiner “Top Psychiatrist Failed to Report Drug Income.” The New York Times October
3, 2008; Charles Piller and Jia You “Hidden conflicts? Pharma payments to FDA advisers after drug approvals
spark ethical concerns” Science News July 5, 2018. See also Ross et al. (2000).
5
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/08/us/politics/think-tanks-research-and-corporate-lobbying.html
6
Warren also commented on the use of these practices in the rulemaking context, which we focus on in the
empirical analysis below: “Unlike congressional action, agency rules are constrained by well-established judicial review standards that seek to determine whether the agency’s action is supported by the evidentiary record and the
authority delegated to it by Congress. Rules must be supported by “substantial evidence”; agency actions must not
be “arbitrary and capricious.” But corporate players are savvy. They have learned that those same judicial review
standards can be used to suffocate new rules. They play a sophisticated game— leveraging their own expertise and
paying outside experts with purportedly independent credentials to produce long, detailed comments filled with data
and analyses, all selectively produced to serve their own interests.” Discussing fixes, she also writes: “Another [principle] would be to help agencies and courts distinguish between legitimate, high-quality data and research, on the
one hand, and bought-and-paid-for studies on the other, by requiring disclosure of financial arrangements and editorial relationships associated with regulatory comments.” See https://www.theregreview.org/2016/06/14/warrencorporate-capture-of-the-rulemaking-process/ (accessed October 31, 2018).

4

on those proposals before rules are finalized and comments discussed.78 While there is no legal
requirement for agencies to act on feedback received in comments, the agencies themselves often
attribute changes between proposed and final rules to arguments made via rulemaking. As emphasized by Sunstein (2012), public commentary is also a valuable source of feedback to preempt
regulatory mistakes “when the stakes are high and the issues novel.” Regulations.gov provides the
largest single source for comment information on proposed rules, and was rolled out in 2003 when
most agencies started a systematic effort to digitize the commenting process. By 2008, 80% of all
proposed rules provided a regulations.gov link for commenting, and the fraction is about 90% as
of 2018.
For the purpose of this paper, we use regulations.gov to build a comprehensive dataset including
the majority of the comments submitted in the rulemaking process since the 2003. For each
comment, we know the specific proposed rule the comment is in response to, as well as the content
(text file) of the comment and the identity of the commenter. We may thus connect specific
organizations to commentary on the same proposed regulation and its final discussion (we refer
to a sequence of rule postings from proposal to final version as a “regulatory stream” or docket).
We complement the commentary data with information on corporate foundations and their beneficiaries, using data on charitable donations by foundations linked to large corporations through
tax forms filed to Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The combination of these datasets allows us
to explore whether (i) non-profits that benefit from corporate philanthropy are more likely to
comment on the same rule as their benefactors; (ii) conditional on both providing feedback on
the same regulation, the non-profits’ comments are unusually similar to that of their benefactors;
and (iii) co-comments by a corporate foundation’s grantees lead to discussions of the rule by the
regulator that use language that is more similar to the language contained in the company’s comments. By exploiting the particular timing of corporate donations and comments, as well as the
inclusion of firm-grantee pair fixed effects, we argue that we can plausibly draw a compelling link
from funding to co-commentary and comment overlap.9
Our sample of firms is comprised of the companies that have appeared at any point in the 1995
7

The Administrative Procedures Act of 1946, 5 U.S.C. 553(c) states: “. . . the agency shall give interested
persons an opportunity to participate in the rule making through submission of written data, views, or arguments with or without opportunity for oral presentation. After consideration of the relevant matter presented, the agency shall incorporate in the rules adopted a concise general statement of their basis and purpose.”
https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/5/553. Accessed October 31, 2018.
8
There are some exceptions for urgent actions or cases in which the change is so trivial that the agency does not
expect comments, but in general, agencies which fail to publish a sufficiently informative proposal or fail to follow
the commenting procedure can have their regulations vacated in court.
9
Of course, this does not obviate the possibility that non-profits have time-varying policy preferences, and
corporate gifts coincide with shifts in these preferences. While we cannot rule out this possibility (a critique that
applies even to the Coca-Cola/AAPD example mentioned above), our approach does help to rule out the possibility
that latent, time-invariant shared interests drive both donations and comment overlap.

5

to 2016 lists of Fortune 500 or S&P 500 (or both) for which we identify a corporate foundation,
and our sample of non-profits is the set of all grantees that received at least one donation from
these foundations over the period 1998-2015. Organizations (firms or non-profits) are linked by
name via a fuzzy match to 981,232 rulemaking comments made on all proposed regulations on
regulations.gov during the years 2003-2017. The main sample for our analysis is comprised of the
414 corporations with charitable foundations and 11,746 grantees that commented at least once
during this period.
In our first set of results, we show that non-profits are more likely to comment on the same
regulation as their benefactors, and that this “co-commentary” is most strongly associated with
donations in the year preceding the comments, a result which survives the inclusion of firm-grantee
fixed effects. The magnitude of the estimated relationship between donations and co-commentary
is very large: even with firm-grantee fixed effects, our analysis implies that a donation in the
preceding year is associated with nearly a doubling in the likelihood of co-commentary.
Our findings on the link between donations and co-commentary frequency point to potential
influence over non-profits in their regulatory feedback. In our second set of results we examine
whether, conditional on co-commentary, the content of comment-pairs from firms and non-profits
linked via charitable donations tend to be more similar, relative to other comments on the same
proposed rules. Using established methods of natural language processing, we generate pairwise
measures of textual similarity between any two firm-non-profit comments on a given rule. Cocomments by non-profits contain textual material that is more similar to comments by their
corporate benefactors relative to other co-comment pairs and, importantly, the timing of this
relationship parallels that of our first set of findings – co-comments in the year immediately
following a donation are most similar. We also investigate the semantic orientation of the comments
and show that the co-comment similar for firm-grantee pairs does not result from comparablyworded comments that express opposing sentiments. Specifically, we find that co-comments by
firm and grantee that are connected by an immediately preceding charitable donation do not
express adversarial views on the same regulatory matter.
We also show that the co-commenting relationship matters for the final rules. Focusing on
all comments made by corporations in our dataset, we show that, if a grantee (and particularly
one receiving a recent donation) also commented on the proposed regulation, the language of the
discussion of the final rule is more closely aligned with that of the corporation’s comments. This
result survives the inclusion of both firm fixed effects and rule (docket) fixed effects, and also
holds when we measure a firm’s influence based on whether it is cited by the regulators in their
discussion of the final rule.
Finally, we explore whether corporations use charitable donations to encourage otherwise opposing voices to remain silent (rather than encouraging non-profits to provide supportive com6

mentary). While it is challenging to devise a decisive test to detect the omission of comments
that might otherwise have been made, we provide suggestive evidence, based on an extension of
our main results on donations and co-comment frequency, that “hush money” may not be of firstorder importance in our setting. More specifically, we show that the link between co-commentary
and donations is strongest in areas in which a non-profit most commonly provides comments, the
opposite of what one might expect if hush money played a dominant role.
Our findings first and foremost provide a contribution to the literature on the mechanisms by
which interest groups seek to influence government policy (for canonical early contributions see,
for example, Grossman and Helpman, 1994, 2001 and for a more recent discussion Baumgartner
et al., 2009; Bertrand et al., 2014; Drutman, 2015). We differ from much of this prior work in
our focus on influence via expert commentary rather than financial contributions and, much more
importantly, in documenting one mechanism by which private interests may cloak biased advice by
inducing its provision by a non-obviously aligned party. This has implications for how we model the
process of governmental information acquisition (Austen-Smith, 1993; Laffont and Tirole, 1993),
and is also of direct policy relevance. Our results suggest that calls for restrictions on financial
relationships among those aiming to influence government policy may be well-founded, and that
at a minimum potential conflicts-of-interest statements should be required for any organization
providing input on government regulations (Peng, 2016). Our work is also related to prior research
that has shown the value of coalitions of diverse interest groups in the adoption of government
policy. In particular, studying bills introduced in Congress between 2005 and 2014, Lorenz (2017)
shows that bills supported by interest-diverse coalitions are more likely to receive committee
consideration; in contrast, Lorenz (2017) finds no association between committee consideration
and lobbying coalitions’ size, or their interests’ PAC contributions. Generalizing beyond the
lawmaking process, this work complement our findings in that it suggests that corporations can
expect some return for the type of charitable “investments” we uncover in this paper. Other
papers that have focused on returns to lobbying instead include Bombardini and Trebbi (2011,
2012); Kang (2016); Kang and You (2016). Finally, our paper expands on earlier work highlighting
how corporations may strategically use their corporate philanthropy as an undisclosed tool of
political influence. Bertrand et al. (2018) show that corporations allocate more of their charitable
giving to congressional districts that are more relevant to the corporations due to the committee
assignments in the House of Representatives of their elected representatives. We identify in this
paper another, independent, category of “strategic CSR” (Baron, 2001) in the government arena.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 3 presents our data on U.S. federal
regulation and corporate donations. Section 4 introduces parallel analyses of corporate giving and
regulatory rulemaking public commentary that explores whether contributions flow to non-profits
that comment on rules on which firms also comment. Section 5 presents evidence on the excess
7

similarity between the content of comments filed by non-profits and corporations around the time
corporations provide charitable grants to the non-profit. Section 6 assesses whether co-commenting
by a grantee is associated with rules whose language is more aligned with that of the grantee’s
corporate benefactor’s comments. Section 7 shifts the focus on tests for hush money. Section 8
concludes.

2

Institutional context: Rulemaking process

The rulemaking process of U.S. federal agencies provides a context in which we may observe both
the presence and the content of communication by different entities with an interest in influencing
the policymaker. While informational lobbying at the federal or local level does not come with
statutory requirements of disclosure of the content or even the exact target of communication,10
the rulemaking process consists of a series of codified procedures that regulate the activity of
federal agencies in the production of “rules” under the Administrative Procedure Act of 1946
(APA). The subject of policy deliberation is a rule “designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe
law or policy,” according to the APA. The process of rulemaking may be set in motion by Congress
passing a new law requiring implementation or by an agency itself, upon regularly surveying its
area of legal responsibility and identifying areas that need new regulations.11
Figure 1 sketches the process of informal rulemaking. It starts with a Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (NPRM) including the objective of the rule and how it would modify the current
Code of Federal Regulations. The NPRM is published in the Federal Register, at which point
the agency specifies a period of 30 to 60 days during which the public can submit comments
on the proposed rule. After comments have been received and additional information collected,
the agency may proceed to publish a Final Rule in the Federal Register or issue a Supplemental
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking if the initial rule was modified substantially, in which case further
comments are invited. This notice-and-comment procedure is meant to include the general public
and all interested parties in the crafting of the new rule. Importantly, the agency also publishes in
the Federal Register a discussion of the goals and rationale of the policy, and how the comments
were incorporated into the final rule in the Supplementary Information section of the final rule.
Occasionally, the process of rulemaking requires merging or splitting specific elements of a
rule, issuing interim versions of the rule if the process is delayed, and more generally adapting to
other external factors, including further direction from the legislative branch, and so forth. These
10

Under the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995, lobbying registration and reporting forms only require lobbyists
to list the topic and the agency lobbied (e.g., Trade, the Senate of the United States), in addition to clients and
payments. See Vidal et al. (2012); Bertrand et al. (2014).
11
Agencies may decide to engage in rulemaking under the recommendation of congressional committees, other
agencies, or following a petition from the general public.

8

various additional documents are typically filed in dockets maintained by the regulatory agency.
Upon finalization of the rule, comments represent part of the official record, and rules can be
challenged judicially on procedural or substantive grounds based on comments filed by entities
that participated in the rulemaking. Judicial review is an important constraint to rulemaking
activity in the United States in that it effectively forces regulators to attend to opinions expressed
via commentary.

3

Data

This section introduces our sources and provides a brief overview of the data. For further details
we refer to Appendices A and B. We begin by describing the data on charitable giving by corporate
foundations, followed by the data on public comments on rulemaking. The starting point for our
sample is the set of corporations that have appeared at any point during the period 1995 to 2016
in the Fortune 500 and/or S&P 500 lists, which counts 1398 firms.12

3.1

Charitable giving by foundations

Data on charitable donations by corporate foundations come from FoundationSearch, which digitizes publicly available Internal Revenue Service (IRS) data on the 120,000 largest active foundations in the U.S. We find 629 active foundations that can be matched by name to 474 of the
initial list of 1398 firms.13 As noted in Brown et al. (2006), larger and older companies are more
likely to have corporate foundations, which results naturally from the fixed cost of establishing a
foundation.14
Each charitable foundation must submit Form 990/990 P-F “Return of Organization Exempt
From Income Tax” to the IRS annually, and this form is open to public inspection. Form 990
includes contact information for the foundation, as well as yearly total assets and total grants
paid to other organizations. Schedule I of Form 990, entitled “Grants and Other Assistance
to Organizations, Governments, and Individuals in the United States,” specifically requires the
foundation to report all grants greater than $5,000. For each grant, FoundationSearch reports the
amount, the recipient’s name, city and state, and a giving category created by the database.15
12

The initial number of firms is 1434, but we combine firms that merge during the sample, hence obtaining a
smaller total number.
13
The 629 foundations we find are linked to 474 corporations, since there are instances of multiple foundations
associated with the same corporation.
14
They also find that state-level statutes – in particular laws relating to shareholder primary and the ability of
firms to consider broader interests in business decisions – predict establishment of a foundation. Various endogenous
financial variables are also predictive of foundation establishment. The analysis in Brown et al. (2006) is crosssectional, so their variables are absorbed by the various fixed effects in many of our analyses.
15
The 10 broad categories are: Arts & Culture, Community Development, Education, Environment, Health,

9

While the IRS assigns a unique identifier (Employer Identification Number, EIN) to each nonprofit organization, FoundationSearch does not report this code, so we rely on the name, city and
state information to match a grantee to a master list of all non-profits. This list, called the Business
Master File (BMF) of Exempt Organizations, is put together by the National Center for Charitable
Statistics (NCCS) primarily from IRS Forms 1023 and 1024 (the applications for IRS recognition of
tax-exempt status). The BMF file reports many other characteristics of the recipient organization,
including address, assets and a non-profit sector called the National Taxonomy of Exempt Entities
(NTEE). The results of the matching between all public charities, private foundations or private
operating foundations (designated as 501(c)3 organizations for tax purposes) in the BMF and the
recipients of charitable giving by 2014 Fortune 500 and S&P 500 companies is reported in Bertrand
et al. (2018).

3.2

Comments and rulemaking

The source of data on comments, proposed, final and interim rules, as well as discussion of final
rules is regulations.gov, a website through which the majority of U.S. federal agencies collect
public comments in the notice-and-comment phase of rulemaking.16 The website regulations.gov
API provides a search function for document metadata.
Our research sample consists of all comments posted to regulations.gov in the years 2003-2017.
We use a custom machine learning tool to extract organization names from the comment metadata. The algorithm identified 981,232 comments that appear to be authored by organizations
(as opposed to private individuals) and downloaded the full text of the comments. We are particularly interested in comments submitted by non-profits and by corporations that we observe
in our FoundationSearch sample. The comments are linked to corporations’ and grantees’ names
through a custom name matching tool that implements multiple types of fuzzy matching and
manual corrections.17
The unit of observation is what regulations.gov refers to as a docket. This is a way for agencies
to organize comments that relate to a particular topic. Most straightforwardly, one may think of
a one-to-one correspondence between a rule and a docket. Conceived in this way, as mentioned
above, a docket will contain all comments that pertain to all versions of that rule. An example of
a simple docket is FNS-2006-0044 from the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) which contains a
proposed rule (06-09136) and its corresponding final rule (E8-21293) on “Fluid Milk Substitutions
in the School Nutrition Programs.” All comments in this docket therefore are easily linked to this
regulatory stream. There are more complex cases in which a docket contains multiple proposed
International Giving, Religion, Social & Human Services, Sports & Recreation, Misc Philanthropy.
16
For the complete list, see Appendix tables A.10 and A.11.
17
Available from the authors upon request.

10

rules and notices (see, for example, docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2008-0699, the Environmental Protection Agency’s review of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ozone). We associate
all comments to the same docket given the homogeneity of the topic. The only exception is when
we turn to examine the wording of the discussion of final rules as a function of corporate and
non-profit comments. There, we will consider each rule within the docket separately to ensure
a finer connection between comments by corporations and the exact wording of the final rule in
the docket under discussion, as the multiple rules associated within a docket are discussed and
published separately in the Federal Register. We will elaborate on this distinction in Section 6,
which discusses those results.

3.3

Basic data facts

Recall that our sample starts with the set of companies that appeared at least once in the Fortune
500 or S&P 500 lists between 1996 and 2015. Of the 1398 firms in that sample we find 909 that
have commented at least once in the period 2003-2016.18 This is the sample of firms that forms
the basis of our regressions. We have a total of 22,654 firm comments over 5,792 dockets. Of these
909 firms 414 have a foundation.
In terms of non-profits we start from the 225,180 entities that received at least one grant from
any foundation in our sample over the period 1998-2015. Our sample consists of the 11,531 of
these grantees that comment at least once at any point during the period starting in 2003. We
have a total of 318,841 comments in 8,729 dockets from those grantees.
There is vast heterogeneity among firms in their activity in the commenting phase. The most
actively commenting firm, Boeing, provided comments on 1284 dockets. On average each firm
comments on 18 dockets, but the distribution is skewed: the median firm comments on 6 dockets,
while the firms at the first and third quartile comment on 2 and 17 dockets, respectively. The
distribution of comments among grantees is even more skewed. On average each grantee comments
on almost 5 dockets, but the median is 1 and the third quartile is 3 dockets. The most active
grantee (Center for Biological Diversity) comments on 905 dockets.
Tables A.2 reports the agencies that receive the highest number of comments from grantees and
firms.19 At the top of the list for grantees are the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), the
FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) and the FDA (Food and Drug Administration). The top
three agencies as recipients of grantees’ comments are the FWS (Fish and Wildlife Service), the
NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration), and the HHS (Health and Human
Services Department). It is worth noticing that the EPA, the FAA and the FDA feature in the
top 10 agencies for grantees as well.
18
19

We only consider comments starting in 2003 because this is when the comments database is complete.
Agency acronyms are listed in Appendix tables A.10 and A.11.

11

Finally, we provide some information on the prevalence of commenting behavior of grantees
and their co-commenting with firms in our sample. In our regressions we will often focus on
“recent” donations, defined as donations from a firm to a grantee that occur in the same year, or
one year prior to a public comment on a rule. Consider the set of all firms-years where the firm
has commented at least once and donated recently. We can break the recipients of these recent
donations in to a set of nested groups with increasingly close ties to the firm.
Firms donate to an average of 327 non-profit grantees. Of these, an average of 54 grantees
ever submit a comment in our sample. Within these “commenters”, 28 non-profits ever comment
to one of the same agencies as the firm (not necessarily at the same time or in the same year), 8
ever co-comment on a regulation with the firm, and 1.4 co-comment with the firm that year.
In terms of expenditures, the average total amount spent on donations over a two year period
is $26 million dollars, 26% of which go to grantees that ever comment. Within commenting
grantees, expenditures are biased towards the grantees with closer commenting ties to the firm.
Thus, grantees that never comment to the same agency as the firm receive an average of $103,412
each, and grantees that comment to one of the same agencies as the firm, but never on the same
regulation, receive $156,348 each, while those that ever co-comment with the firm receive an
average of $240,515 each and grantees that co-comment with the firm that specific year receive
$206,994 each.

4

Evidence based on charitable giving and non-profit commenting on regulations

This section focuses on the link between firms and non-profits through charitable grants, and
establishes a relationship between firm-grantee financial ties and their tendency to comment on
the same regulations.
We denote firms/foundations by f ∈ F and grant-receiving non-profits (“grantees”) by g ∈ G.
Let Df gt be an indicator function that takes a value of 1 if we observe a donation from firm f to
grantee g in year t, and 0 otherwise. The indicator function Cf rt is equal to 1 if firm f comments on
regulation r in year t, and 0 otherwise (throughout this section and the following one, “regulation”
or “rule” will refer to a docket). The indicator function Cgrt is defined similarly and is equal to
1 if grantee g comments on regulation r in year t, and 0 otherwise. A graphical representation of
this configuration is described in Figure 2.
We adopt two types of specifications: co-commenting specifications and a regulation specification.

12

4.1

Co-commenting specifications

We begin by relating the event of a firm and a grantee commenting on the same regulation to
a financial tie between the two in the form of a charitable donation. The indicator function
CCf grt is equal to 1 when donor f and grantee g comment on the same regulation r at time t, so
that CCf grt = Cf rt × Cgrt , and 0 otherwise. Our first specification explores a time-invariant link
between co-commenting and donations, aggregating co-commenting to the firm-grantee pair, so
that we define a new indicator CCf g which is equal to 1 if we observe any co-commenting from firm
P P
f to grantee g in our sample, and 0 otherwise. That is, CCf g = I ( r t CCf grt > 0). Similarly,
the indicator variable Df g indicates whether we observe any donation from f to g in our sample.
We first consider the following time-indepentent specification that relates the presence of cocommenting by firm f and grantee g to the presence of a donation within the same pair:
CCf g = β0 + β1 Df g + δf + δg + εf g .

(1)

The specification includes firm fixed effects δf to capture the potential bias resulting, for example,
from the higher probability that large and profitable firms both donate to charities and comment
on multiple regulations. Similarly, we include grantee fixed effects δg , to control, for example, for
the fact that charities that are more successful at fundraising may on average have more resources
to devote to commenting on various regulations. A positive coefficient β1 would indicate that
firm-grantee pairs that are connected by donations are also more likely to comment on the same
regulations.
The results are reported in Table 1. The different columns of Table 1 include different sets of
fixed effects (and clustering dimensions) of increasing levels of stringency. Of particular interest is
column (4), the most conservative specification, that includes both grantee and firm fixed effects.
The firm fixed effects may account for the average propensity of firms to comment and to donate,
which may depend on size and sector. The grantee fixed effects can capture the average level of
commenting activity of the grantee, which may in turn be related to its size and overall resource
endowment. Across all specifications in Table 1,we can see that a grantee and a firm are more
likely to comment on the same regulation when we observe any donation from the firm to the
grantee. The magnitude of this effect is large. The baseline probability of co-commenting for a
firm and a grantee is 2.16%, meaning that of all the possible pairs of grantees and firms only 2.16%
comment on the same rule at any point in time. This probability increases by 4 to 8 percentage
points when we observe a donation connecting firm and grantee. Put differently, the presence of
a donation is associated with a two- to four-fold increase in the probability of co-commenting.
Of course, this cross-sectional pattern of co-commenting may stem from the fact that firms
contribute to non-profits sharing similar objectives and views, or that, more simply, operate in
13

similar sectors. For instance, the Bayer Science & Education Foundation associated with Bayer
US, a pharmaceutical company, may be more likely to donate to healthcare-related research nonprofits, and both Bayer and healthcare-related non-profits may be more likely to comment on
healthcare-related regulation than an average organization.
Our second specification addresses this concern, and further allows us to control for the general
tendency by some firms to comment on certain issues and to contribute to non-profits that operate
in related areas. It does so by focusing on the timing of donations. In particular, we examine
whether co-commenting is more likely in the year immediately following the presence of a donation.
For this, we turn to the following panel specification, which exploits time variation in both cocommenting and donations:
CCf gt = β0 + β1 Df gt−1 + δf g + δt + εf gt

(2)

P
where CCf gt = I ( r CCf grt > 0) indicates whether firm f and grantee g comment on the same
regulation at time t, and Df gt−1 is equal to 1 if we observe a donation from f to g in the concurrent
(t) or preceding (t − 1) year of the comments, 0 otherwise. This specification includes firm-grantee
fixed effects δf g and time fixed effects δt . Therefore, β1 is estimated only employing withinpair variation over time in donations and co-commenting. In particular β1 will detect whether,
controlling for the average tendency of a certain firm f to co-comment with and donate to a
specific non-profit g, we observe co-comments occurring immediately after a donation from f to g
has been made.
Given the coarseness of the data along the time dimension (we only observe year of comment),
it is possible for a comment to be made in, say, January of 2006 and a donation in June 2006;
hence we can only be certain that the lagged-year donation took place prior to co-commenting. In
Table 2, we report results in which we create a dummy that is equal to 1 if we observe a donation
at either t or t − 1, and 0 otherwise.20 Our preferred specification in Table 2 is column (5), where
we include firm-grantee pair fixed effects. This specification exclusively exploits variation within
a firm-grantee pair in donations and in co-commenting. The δf g pair fixed effects control not
only for the higher probability of donation and co-commenting for firms and grantees in the same
sector, but also for the general ideological alignment of firm and grantee that may result in both
donations and co-commenting on similar topics.
We find a robust association between donations in year t−1 and the likelihood of co-commenting
in year t. The magnitude of effects is large in this panel specification. Co-commenting is obviously
more sparse in equation (2) than equation (1): of all firm-grantee-year triples only 0.163% feature
co-commenting. In column (4) of Table 2, the presence of a recent donation is associated with
20

In Appendix Table A.3 we separate contemporaneous and lagged donations and find that lagged donations
strongly predict co-commenting, while contemporaneous donations are a weak predictor of co-commenting.

14

a quadrupling of the probability of co-commenting. In column (5) of Table 2, the presence of a
recent donation is associated with a 81% increase in the likelihood of co-commenting, even after
controlling for the general propensity of a specific firm to give to and as well as co-comment with
a specific grantee. The example provided in the introduction, which described AT&T Foundation
grantees such as GLAAD or a homeless shelter commenting on the AT&T/T-Telecom merger
close on the heals of receiving donations, provide an illustration of the behavior implied by this
statistical evidence (see Peng (2016) for other illustrations).
As a further robustness exercise, in Appendix Table A.4 we augment our preferred specification
with a dummy for whether firm f donated to g in year t + 1. In column (5) of that table, with the
most restrictive set of fixed effects (i.e. pair fixed effects), we find that donations made immediately
after the commenting period are not associated with co-commenting, whereas only immediately
preceding donations are. This pattern further confirms that co-commenting seems to be more
prevalent after we observe a donation from firm to grantee.

4.2

Regulation specification

In the specifications we have considered thus far, we have aggregated co-commenting across different rules within a f g pair or f gt pair-year. We now present an alternative approach that links
commenting by a grantee to donations received by a firm that also comments on the same rule r.
The following “regulation specification” relates the probability of commenting by a grantee on a
regulation r to donations received:
!
X

Cgr = β0 + β1 I

Df g × Cf r > 0

+ δg + δr + ηgr

f

|

{z

DonorCommentgr

}

where
P Crg is equal to 1 if g comments on regulation r (0 otherwise) and DonorCommentgr =
I
f Df g × Cf r > 0 is equal to 1 if g receives a donation from any firm that comments on r,
and 0 otherwise. This specification includes regulation fixed effects δr , which capture how certain
rules are subject to more intense commenting, and grantee fixed effects δg , that account for factors
like resources and size of the non-profit, which may make g both more visible and more likely to
comment on any regulation.
Table 3 reports estimates of β1 under different fixed effects and clustering options. Our preferred specification in column (4) has docket and grantee fixed effects, as well as two-way clustering
on these attributes. When considering all the possible combinations of grantees and rules, we find
a comment in 0.039 percent of the cases. It is not surprising that this number is small, since the
universe of all possible grantee-rule pairings involve non-profits, like the Red Cross, that we would

15

not expect to comment on, say, financial regulation. Starting from this baseline probability of
commenting on a specific rule, we find that the probability that the non-profit comments is three
to five times higher when a donor firm commented on the same rule, a result that accords with
our previous results under specification (2).

5

Quantifying the similarity in content across regulatory
comments

So far the focus of the analysis has been on the propensity to comment on regulation. However, a
crucial implication of our thesis that non-profits may act as strategic advocates for their corporate
donors is that the content of the message delivered by non-profits to regulators may be affected by
financial connections. In particular, upon receipt of (a) charitable grant(s), comments targeted to
federal regulators by non-profits should be closer in content to the messages sent by their corporate
benefactors (relative to the counterfactual of no corporate donations). To provide evidence in this
direction, we build a portfolio of circumstantial findings with the intent of discriminating among
alternative theoretical mechanisms based on how well they match the empirical regularities that
we present.
To build intuition (and without intent to claim any deliberate deception by the parties involved
in this particular instance), consider the example of Bank of America’s donation of $150,000 to
the Greenlining Institute in 2010. While Bank of America is the second largest bank in the United
States by total assets and is a central player in housing finance in the country, the Greenlining
Institute is a non-profit focused on improving access to affordable housing and credit to lowincome families and minorities (African American, Asian American, and Latino, in particular). In
2011 both organizations commented on the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency’s Credit Risk
Retention (CCR) docket,21 as part of one of the regulatory rulemaking streams initiated under the
Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 (Title IX, Subtitle D, Section 941). CCR, also known as the “skin in the
game” rule, imposed a 5 percent retention requirement on all mortgage loans originated by lenders
in the United States to moderate “originate-to-distribute” moral hazard problems pervasive in the
build-up to the 2008 financial crisis.
The main comment submitted by Bank of America22 remarks that, in relation to relaxing the
definition of qualified mortgages exempted from retention requirements on the issuing bank’s balance sheet (i.e. of mortgages deemed safe enough not to warrant the restriction): “...the PCCRA
provision will cause some borrowers to be unable to obtain a loan at all. In the currently tight
private residential mortgage market, borrowers already must provide significant down payments.”
21
22

Docket ID OCC-2011-0002
Document ID OCC-2011-0002-0141

16

The Greenlining Institute provides a similar assessment in its comment,23 suggesting that “by
raising the barrier to affordable home ownership with an unreasonable 20% down payment requirement, we will not only keep families from rebuilding after foreclosure, but we will prohibit an
entire generation of first time borrowers from owning a home, despite lower home prices across
the country.” In sum, both organizations appear to advocate openly for laxer definitions of the
CCR exemptions, limiting the rule’s bite, and allowing assets with substantially lower quality and
higher risk to be exempt – an effort that ultimately succeeded in entirely defanging the rule.24
In this section, we provide a framework for examining the content and textual similarity of
comments filed by non-profits and firms, and show that, upon receipt of a donation from a firm’s
foundation, comments by a non-profit are more similar to those of its donor, suggesting that the
Bank of America-Greenlining example holds more broadly in the data.
We compute approximate measures of semantic similarity of pairs of public comments using
Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) with bag-of-words features. LSI is an established technique borrowed from the natural language processing (NLP) literature, and it has been shown to perform
well on a variety of different document classification and retrieval tasks.25 LSI requires the conversion of text documents into vectors of word counts and applying term frequency–inverse document
frequency feature extraction within each regulatory docket r. Following this preparation phase,
one can compute document-level singular vectors from a singular value decomposition of the text
matrices and take the cosine similarity of any pair of document vectors. This approach provides
a similarity score Sf gr normalized by the standard deviation in each docket r and distributed between -1 and 1 for every pair of texts formed by a comment by firm f and a comment by grantee g
within a given docket. To further demonstrate the validity of our approach, we show in Appendix
B that our measure performs well in a classification task of separating documents from different
regulations and in clustering comments from similar organizations.
Using this comment-pair similarity score as the outcome, we consider a specification of the
form:
Sf gr = β0 + β1 Df gr + δf + δg + δr + εf gr
where the coefficient of interest is β1 and Df gr is indicator variable that equals 1 if firm f donates to
grantee g, 0 otherwise. As the timing of such donations is a useful discriminant for interpretation
of our findings, we will be careful in constructing Df gr under different time horizons. The dataset
we exploit for this analysis includes all possible firm-grantee pairs of comments conditional on
23

Document ID OCC-2011-0002-0353
For a discussion, see Floyd Norris for the New York Times, Oct. 23, 2014, Page B1 “Banks Again Avoid Having
Any ‘Skin in the Game”’, available at https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/24/business/banks-again-avoid-havingany-skin-in-the-game.html
25
See Dumais et al. (1988) and Deerwester et al. (1990). For a more recent discussion of latent semantic analysis,
see Dumais (2004).
24

17

commenting on a docket r.
We begin by exploring the sign and magnitude of the estimated coefficient β1 when the donation
indicator variable takes the value of one in the event of any grant from f to g over our entire time
period. Table 4 reports estimates for β1 across a set of four specifications with an incremental
inclusion of firm, grantee, and docket fixed effects. Coefficients are clustered at the docket, firmgrantee, or double clustered at both levels depending on the specification. The estimates of β1 ,
which capture the increase in units of standard deviations of similarity across comment pairs
within each r, range from 0.25 to 0.09 in the most restrictive specification (all significant at least
at the 1 percent level). This indicates that pairs of comments made by firms and their grantees
are more similar relative to a baseline similarity obtained by pairing comments at random within
a docket.
As with our results on comment propensity in Section 4, the presence of a donation at any
point in our sample period may proxy for some average similarity in the interests and beliefs of a
firm and its grantee. Table 5 thus focuses on donations that take place in either the year in which
the comments are filed (year t) or in the previous fiscal year (t−1). The point estimates are smaller
in magnitude across comparable columns in Tables 5 and 4, but statistically indistinguishable. In
separating explicitly contemporaneous donations and those made in the fiscal year immediately
preceding the comments, as reported in Appendix Table A.5, we observe that precision and magnitude of the effect come from the donations made at time t − 1. The estimates, which capture
the increase in units of standard deviations of similarity across comment pairs within each docket,
range from 0.17 to 0.08 in the most restrictive specification.
Appendix Table A.6 addresses the concern that the timing of donations may be spuriously
related to some underlying tendency of firms and grantees working in related areas of interests, by
controlling in our most restrictive specifications also for North American Industry Classification
System (NAICS) 6 sector code of the firm interacted with the IRS’s National Taxonomy of Exempt
Entities Classification (NTEEC) code of the non-profit. As can be seen in the table, the estimated
coefficient β1 remains precisely estimated and within the confidence intervals of our baseline estimates across specifications when accounting flexibly for such industry pair controls. Finally, notice
that the reduction in sample size for this table results from missing sector information for some
firm-grantee pairs, and that this sample shift also does not affect the point estimates relative to
the baseline specifications. More precisely, we estimate a β1 of 0.073 in column (4) of Table 5 and
of 0.074 in column (1) of Appendix Table A.6, and a β1 of 0.079 for Df gr at time t − 1 in column
(4) of Appendix Table A.5 and of 0.072 in column (3) of Appendix Table A.6.
We also present a placebo exercise that underscores the very specific timing of the link from
donation to comment similarity. In particular, we modify our definition of donations to focus on
the period immediately after the regulatory commenting phase. Appendix Table A.7 reports these
18

results. As can be seen in the table, across specifications with incremental sets of fixed effects
and industry controls, the estimated coefficient β1 appears insignificant and smaller in magnitude
relative to our base estimates.26 This placebo exercise is informative along several dimensions.
As the donation is close in time to the commentary activity, but statistically and economically
insignificant, these findings further assuage the concern that our results may be spuriously driven
by some underlying tendency of firms and grantees operating in related areas. The systematic
timing of excess similarity between comments’ texts just following the disbursement of a charitable
grant offer intuitive support to the logic of some form of suasion being exerted by the donor over
the grantee.
As a final check, we investigate whether firm-grantee co-comments differ in their sentiment.
We do so to assess the possibility that firms and grantees may employ a similar terminology while
nonetheless delivering adversarial messages to regulators.
Our test is based on an analysis of comment sentiment, which relies on established NLP scholarship. Semantic orientation exercises are common in the NLP literature (e.g., the unsupervised
classification of book reviews as positive or negative), including application to economics and finance, for example in the classification of monetary policy announcements as hawkish or dovish,
in the study of the tone of financial news, or in partisan speech (Lucca and Trebbi, 2009; Tetlock,
2007; Tetlock et al., 2008; Gentzkow et al., 2016).27 Using these tools, our goal here is to rule out
the possibility that the comments of non-profits receiving grants use similar words which express
views that are nonetheless in opposition to their corporate benefactors. This specifically rules out
the possibility that donations by firms may reach non-profits intervening on the same issues as the
donor (and therefore using similar terminology), but expressing systematically antagonistic views.
Tables 6 and 7 maintain the same design and structure of fixed effects as Tables 4 and 5,
but replace the similarity score Sf gr with a semantic orientation concurrence score Wf gr as our
dependent variable. The construction of this variable relies on polarity scores defined for each
comment based on the popular AFINN sentiment lexicon, with valence scores ranging between
-5 (negative) and 5 (positive) for each labeled word. For each comment we construct the sum of
valence scores divided by the number of words with non-zero valence scores. Wf gr is defined as
the negative absolute difference between this measure for the pair of comments from firm f and
from grantee g on rule r. The interpretation of the coefficient of interest β1 on Df gr is therefore
the effect of a charitable donation on the alignment of sentiment across firm and non-profit (i.e.
the excess comovement of sentiment in the two comments relative to any randomly generated pair
26

In the last column of the table, we also include donations at t or t − 1, and show that only pre-comment
donations matter, relative to donations at t + 1.
27
In general, by semantic orientation we refer to the direction (polarity) of words, phrases or longer pieces of text
in a semantic space or context (e.g., friendly/adversarial, dovish/hawkish, positive/negative) calculated based on
a reference lexicon of words or n-grams over which directionality is carefully labeled by a pool of researchers.

19

of firm and grantee comments on that rule).28
The results in the tables do not support the view that donations reach grantees expressing
opposing views to the firm providing the grant relative to a random grantee. If anything, the evidence points in the opposite direction: the coefficient β1 is consistently positive in sign, indicating
that firm-grantee comments are more aligned in sentiment. This relationship is significant in the
specifications that link firms and non-profits by the existence of a donation at any point during
our sample period (Table 6). The coefficient β1 is positive, though significant in only one out of
four specifications, for f g pairs linked by donations at year t − 1 or t (Table 7). These findings
are inconsistent with firm and grantee comments carrying antagonistic messages.

6

Comment impact analysis: Evidence from final rule citations

While the preceding sections focus on the frequency and similarity of firm-grantee comments, we
now turn to examining whether firms’ comments – and the similar comments made by grantees
– comments have an impact on rulemaking. As it is typically very hard to assess the effects
of advocacy on policy outcomes (and in general of informational lobbying on government policy
choices), we will focus here on a newly devised approximation for such outcomes by asking how
the final rule was shaped by the commentary. In particular, we aim to establish that when a
firm comments on a rule, the published discussion of the rule by the regulator is closer in content
similarity to the firm’s comments when the firm’s grantees also comment on that rule.
It is important to clarify that the final regulatory text itself is written with a terminology and
structure that makes it very different from comments submitted or the explanation of the rule
itself offered by the regulator in the preamble to the rule. The final regulatory text is designed to
formulate, amend, or repeal sections of the Code of Federal Regulations (5 U.S.C. § 551(5)). The
discussion of the rule itself offers a justification and analysis of the regulator’s decision making
process and intended scope or interpretation of the regulation.29 In fact, the discussion of the
rule tends to be longer and reveals arguments in favor of or against specific choices that may have
been brought forward by, for example, the comments from various entities, firms and grantees, in
persuading the regulator. We therefore focus on this part of the final rule.
As an example consider the concern expressed by Wells Fargo, one the U.S. largest depository institutions, on a specific regulatory burden that appeared implied by the proposed rule
28

In addition, a standardization within rule as for the variable Sf gr is employed for Wf gr , which allows to read
coefficients in units of standard deviations of sentiment alignment across comment pairs within each r.
29
The discussion of the rule is found in the Supplementary Information section, which is part
of the preamble to the final rule and typically constitutes its most important component.
See
https://www.federalregister.gov/uploads/2011/01/the rulemaking process.pdf

20

version of the so called Volcker Rule of the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010. The Volcker Rule aimed
at prohibiting depository institutions from engaging in the use of part of its depository funding
for speculative trading (proprietary trading).30 Wells Fargo expresses concern that the proposal
requires transaction-by-transaction oversight: “We also do not believe that the Proposed Rule’s
transaction-by-transaction approach, which would require analyzing permitted customer trading,
market making, underwriting and hedging activities on a transaction-by-transaction basis, is the
best way for the Agencies to implement the Proposed Rule...”31 The OCC addresses this concern directly and concedes some changes to the rule: “A number of commenters expressed general concern
that the proposed underwriting exemption’s references to a ’purchase or sale of a covered financial
position’ could be interpreted to require compliance with the proposed rule on a transaction-bytransaction basis. These commenters indicated that such an approach would be overly burdensome.
. . . A general focus on analyzing the overall ’financial exposure’ and ’market-maker inventory’ held
by any given trading desk rather than a transaction-by-transaction analysis.” Importantly, also
the Black Economic Council, a recent Wells Fargo grantee, is found to express concerns on the
same rule on grounds of excessive complexity.32
We begin by defining Sf r the similarity score between the discussion of docket r and firm f ’s
comment. In contrast to the score constructed in Section 5, Sf r measures the similarity between
a comment and the discussion of the rule in a docket, rather than the similarity between the texts
of two comments on a rule. Sf r is designed as a proxy for the salience and effectiveness of the
firm’s comment in shaping the regulator’s decisions. As with the previous similarity measure Sf gr ,
we normalize Sf r by the standard deviation in each docket r, so that Sf r is distributed between
-1 and 1 for every pair of texts.33
Dropping time subscripts, let us posit Sf r as function of the commenting effort of the firm and
of grantees connected to the firm by donation:
Sf r = β1

X
g

CCf rg × Df g + β2

X

D f g + β3

g

X

CCf rg + δf + δr + εf r

g

Focusing on the extensive margin of commenting behavior, we can replace all sums with indicator
30

Docket ID OCC-2011-0014
Document ID OCC-2011-0014-0285)
32
Document ID OCC-2011-0014-0024)
33
As in some cases multiple rules may be included in a docket by regulators (including amendments, notices,
etc.) and each regulatory stream can be linked to a final rule, our approach here is to take for each firm and docket
the closest in similarity to the firm’s comment vector. This is meant to more accurately represent the dimension
of the docket the firm more closely commented about. Our results are similar when removing the lowest similarity
score within a docket-firm group and then taking the mean similarity or when keeping only dockets with exactly
one rule document. See Online Appendix for these robustness checks.
31

21

functions and also include firm and docket fixed effects:
!
!
X
X
Sf r = β1 I
CCf rg × Df g > 0 + δf + β2 I
Df g > 0 + δr + β3 I
g

{z

Firm FE

CCf rg > 0

+ εf r

g

g

|

!
X

}

|

{z

Docket FE

}

(3)

The variable of interest is I
g CCf rg × Df g > 0 , which is equal to 1 if we observe a donation
by the firm to a grantee co-commenting on the same rule, and 0 otherwise. If there is excess
similarity between rule discussion and a firm’s comment when grantees connected to the firm
by donation also comment on that rule, we expect β1 to be positive. As we established in the
previous two sections, such comments by non-profits occur around the time of firm donations and
appear to exhibit a systematically higher textual similarity to the comments filed by the grantee’s
benefactors. Here, we aim to establish that corporate benefactors appear to gain in terms of Sf r ,
a proxy that at a minimum captures having the attention of the regulator, but could conceivably
correlate with influence in shaping the final rule text or keeping certain provisions
out. 
P
Let us also clarify that in specification (3) the coefficient on the term I
g Df g > 0 cannot
be separately identified from a firm f fixed effect, since it countswhether the firm ever donates to
P
any grantee. Also the coefficient on the term I
g CCf rg > 0 cannot be separately identified
from a docket fixed effect, as it counts the average level of commenting by grantees for that rule
(only firms commenting on the rule are included in the estimation and all grantees commenting
on r are, by default, co-commenters of every firm also commenting on r). 
As β2 and β3 allow us to

P
CC
×
D
>
0
,
measure the direct effects of each element to the main interaction term I
f
rg
f
g
g
we include firm and docket fixed effects in our key specifications. We also experiment by removing
each set (or both) in order to estimate these direct effects.
As in Section 5, we begin by exploring the sign and magnitude of coefficient β1 when the
donation indicator variable takes value 1 if there is any grant from f to g over our entire time
period, and 0 otherwise. Table 8 reports estimates for β1 across a set of five specifications with
an incremental inclusion of firm and docket fixed effects for specification (3) in columns (1) to (4)
P
and a specification with the continuous variable g CCf rg × Df g in column (5). Coefficients are
clustered by firm or docket, or double clustered at both levels depending on the specification. In
columns (1) to (4), the increments expressed in terms of increases in units of standard deviation of
similarity within each docket range from 4.5 to 23.7 percentage points, indicating that comments
made by firms on rules that also received comments from their grantees appear closer in content
to the final rule discussion.
As the presence of any donation over time is a less accurate indicator of a direct connection
between firms and grantees than recent donations, Table 9 looks at donations that take place in
either the year in which the comment is filed (year t) or in the previous fiscal year (t − 1). In this
P

22

specification, the point estimates of β1 appear more precise and quantitatively sizable, with 0.173
of a standard deviation higher similarity for comments filed by firms with co-commenting grantees
who were recipients of their donations in our preferred column (4). Similar results are obtained
focusing on the intensive margin, as reported in column (5).
Appendix Table A.8 further probes our results on rule-comment similarity by adding controls
for the log number of pages of commentary filed on r by f which, even controlling for firm and
docket fixed effects, turns out to be a strong predictor of similarity between rule discussion and
comment by the firm. The effect of this control is intuitive, in the sense that carefully articulated
comments may capture
more of the attention
of the regulator and translate in higher Sf r . The
P

coefficient on I
based on donations at t or t − 1 remains positive and
g CCf rg × Df g > 0
statistically significant in all specifications in Appendix Table A.8. Contrasting these estimates
with those based on the same variable constructed with donations at any time, included in columns
(2) to (4), shows that the increase in similarity is driven by the co-commenting of a grantee that
received a donation in the current or previous year, i.e., recent donations. When both variables
(constructed with recent donations versus donations at any point in time) are included in columns
(3) and (4), it is evident that recent donations carry the relevant variation.34

7

Getting paid not to comment: The role of hush money

Sections 4-6 focused on the role of donations from corporations to non-profits in generating additional messages that are more similar to the donor’s position. In our final set of results, we
examine whether corporations also use donations for a distinct strategic purpose: to silence opposing opinions. It is plausible to envision an informational lobbying environment in which agents
supporting a specific action opposed by a counterparty may be motivated to suppress these opposing voices (and compensate the counterparty for its silence). For example, in a discussion of
the strategies employed in the multi-year campaign of the tobacco industry Lando (1991) writes:
“The tobacco industry has been effective in purchasing what has been described as ’innocence by
association’. Tobacco industry sponsorship of sports events is notorious. The industry has also
contributed substantially to the arts, to women’s groups, and to organizations representing minorities. These types of pernicious industry activities have been successful in buying the silence or the
tacit support of some groups that have suffered a disproportionate share of the tobacco burden.”
34

In online Appendix table A.9 we also replaced similarity to the final rule discussion with indicators or log 1+
counts of the number of times that a firm is cited in the final rule discussion. We obtain similar qualitative results
as in the analysis in this section. Specifically, when focusing on an indicator variable for being cited or not for a
firm, our results indicate a positive but imprecise relationship when controlling for docket and firm fixed effects, but
when focusing on number of times the firm is cited, the presence of recent donations to co-commenting non-profits
is positive, significant at standard confidence levels, and robust to firm and docket fixed effects, and controlling for
log pages of comments submitted and the any donations over time.

23

Payment in exchange for inaction and silence is commonplace in the market (e.g. noncompete,
nondisclosure agreements, non-disparagement clauses, etc.) and such private agreements or clauses
do not represent per se invalid contracts or violations of free speech. They may be, however, private agreements that are undisclosed to regulators, who may interpret the silence of some parties
to the regulatory process as informative.35
The role of such “negative” strategies is thought to be crucial to the success of special interest
groups in politics. Blocking unfavorable bills from ever seeing the light of day (or committee
discharge) in the U.S. Congress is as much a part of lobbying as facilitating the passage of bills
favorable to an industry. Similarly, interest group comments in rule making often involve aim to
kill unfavorable provisions or stalling the implementation of rules. (“Nothing happening” is almost
always the desirable policy outcome for incumbent industry, see Baumgartner et al., 2009.)
To test for the presence of “hush money” in rule making, we propose an extension of our
empirical framework in Section 4. In particular, we modify the regulation specification in Section
4.2 as follows:
Cgr = β0 + β1 DonorCommentgr + β2 DonorCommentgr × ShareCommentsgR + δg + δr + ηgr (4)
where DonorCommentgr is equal to 1 if grantee g received a donation from a firm that also
commented on the same regulation, and 0 otherwise. ShareCommentsgR is the number (or share)
of comments from g that are directed at rules under agency R over the entire sample. This new
variable captures how common it is for grantee g to comment on rules from agency R.
To understand the intuition behind this test, observe that certain non-profits may have specific
expertise or focus in a specific area of regulation, which we approximate by the identity of the
agency overseeing the rule (e.g., the Sierra Club commenting on rules proposed by the EPA).36
Interacting ShareAgencygR with the donation from a commenting firm, DonorCommentgr , aims
to establish whether such donations have a differential effect on the likelihood of commenting for
grantees that typically comment on rule considered by agency R, versus grantees that normally
do not comment on rules by R. We argue that this interaction is useful for assessing the potential
role of hush money, as within the set of issue experts (high ShareCommentsgR ), it more likely
that donations are made with the aim of inducing silence and muting commentary. A plausible
null hypothesis supporting the presence of hush money is therefore β2 < 0, as charitable donations
may be more likely to be hush money for grantees that routinely comment on rules from R.
Our results based on this specification and reasoning suggest that hush money is not a common
35

Absence of a signal is in fact informative in games of incomplete information in which Bayesian rationality is
assumed. For an applications to elections see Kendall et al. (2015).
36
A similar approach was followed to define issue expertise of individual lobbyists from federal lobbying reports
in Bertrand et al. (2014).

24

strategy in our setting. In Table 10 we present several specifications accounting for the nonlinearity
in equation (4), adding increasingly conservative sets of fixed effects across the six columns. The
evidence points clearly in the direction of donations increasing co-commenting from grantees that
routinely comment on rules from the regulator proposing r. The coefficient β2 > 0 is systematically
positive and highly statistically significant, indicating that firms are more likely to induce – rather
than stifle – comments from such grantees. While this does not completely rule out the existence
of hush money, it suggests that it is at a minimum less prevalent than the co-commenting behavior
documented in Sections 4-6.

8

Concluding remarks

Politicians (and voters) are frequent targets of messages aimed at persuading them of the merits
of specific policy positions. While in most cases the identity of senders is disclosed, allowing an
assessment of the bias and interests of the originators of the message, in other cases it may be
obscured, and deliberately so. These situations range from the use of dark money in U.S. electoral
politics in the aftermath of the Supreme Court’s decisions of Citizens United v. Federal Election
Commission and McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission to the circulation of white papers
by think tanks and non-profits.
In such circumstances, a common trait identified by the qualitative literature reviewed in this
article is the reliance on independent arms-length organizations to extend the credibility of the
positions held by special interests. While in most cases such overlap of intent and opinion is
genuine, one has to be careful in assessing those cases where such support is offered in close
proximity to monetary donations from corporations to advocate non-profits. Such transfers, often
in the form of charitable grants, are virtually undetectable by private citizens and civil servants
without access to detailed tax forms. Thus, these transfers represent potential forms of distortion
that cannot be weighted and assessed in decision making.
In order to provide a quantitative and systematic perspective to this issue, this paper studies
the interaction of non-profit organizations and large corporations within the United States federal
regulatory environment. We offer systematic empirical evidence underscoring several new findings
in the literature on corporate philanthropy and special interest politics. The paper presents
evidence that corporate foundations’ charitable grants reach targeted non-profits just before those
same non-profits engage in public commentary. The availability of a large set of public comments
by non-profits and by corporations on a diverse set of rules and regulations, ranging from banking
to environmental regulation, makes for a rich and virtually untapped empirical environment.
Importantly, the content of the messages simultaneously communicated by non-profits and by
corporations appears systematically closer in terms of textual and semantic similarity in presence
25

of a charitable contribution provided immediately before those comments are filed. While circumstantial, the evidence seems to point to potential concerns in the assessment of prima facie
independent information on the part of targeted regulators, who may be unaware of the philanthropic grants that realize in the backdrop and may interpret similar comments stemming from
different segment of the public spectrum as indicative of merit.
The paper also tries to address the issue of the benefits to large business interests in enlisting
allied advocates who may be perceived as more balanced and less biased. We focus on textual
similarity between the commenting firm and final rule discussion to gauge influence of comments
over policymakers. It appears that the co-commenting patterns of firms and non-profits can offer
additional visibility to the messages sent by the firms themselves measured in terms of comment
similarity to the final rule or even likelihood of citation of a donor firm. As rates of return
for political influence activities are extremely complex to measure, this is an area of statistical
investigation requiring further study. Its exploration remains open to future empirical research.

26

References
Aaron, D. G., Siegel, M. B., 2017. Sponsorship of national health organizations by two major soda
companies. American journal of preventive medicine 52 (1), 20–30.
Acemoglu, D., 2003. Why not a political coase theorem? social conflict, commitment, and politics.
Journal of comparative economics 31 (4), 620–652.
Austen-Smith, D., 1993. Information and influence: Lobbying for agendas and votes. American
Journal of Political Science, 799–833.
Austen-Smith, D., 1995. Campaign contributions and access. American Political Science Review
89 (3), 566–581.
Baron, D. P., 2001. Private politics, corporate social responsibility, and integrated strategy. Journal
of Economics & Management Strategy 10 (1), 7–45.
Baumgartner, F. R., Berry, J. M., Hojnacki, M., Leech, B. L., Kimball, D. C., 2009. Lobbying and
policy change: Who wins, who loses, and why. University of Chicago Press.
Bertrand, M., Bombardini, M., Fisman, R., Trebbi, F., 2018. Tax-exempt lobbying: Corporate
philanthropy as a tool for political influence. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bertrand, M., Bombardini, M., Trebbi, F., 2014. Is it whom you know or what you know? an
empirical assessment of the lobbying process. The American Economic Review 104 (12), 3885–
3920.
Bombardini, M., Trebbi, F., 2011. Votes or money? theory and evidence from the us congress.
Journal of Public Economics 95 (7), 587–611.
Bombardini, M., Trebbi, F., 2012. Competition and political organization: Together or alone in
lobbying for trade policy? Journal of International Economics 87 (1), 18–26.
Brown, W. O., Helland, E., Smith, J. K., 2006. Corporate philanthropic practices. Journal of
corporate finance 12 (5), 855–877.
Crawford, S. P., 2013. Captive audience: The telecom industry and monopoly power in the new
gilded age. Yale University Press.
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S., Furnas, G., Landauer, T., Harshman, R., 1990. Indexing by latent
semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 41 (6), 391–407.

27

Dewatripont, M., Tirole, J., 1999. Advocates. Journal of political economy 107 (1), 1–39.
Dewatripont, M., Tirole, J., 2005. Modes of communication. Journal of Political Economy 113 (6),
1217–1238.
Drutman, L., 2015. The business of America is lobbying: How corporations became politicized
and politics became more corporate. Oxford University Press.
Dumais, S., Furnas, G., Landauer, T., Deerwester, S., 1988. Using latent semantic analysis to improve information retrieval. Proceedings of CHI 88 Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, 281–285.
Dumais, S. T., 2004. Latent semantic analysis. Annual review of information science and technology 38 (1), 188–230.
Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., Taddy, M., 2016. Measuring polarization in high-dimensional data:
Method and application to congressional speech. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Grossman, G. M., Helpman, E., 1994. Protection for sale. The American Economic Review 84 (4),
833–850.
Grossman, G. M., Helpman, E., 2001. Special interest politics. MIT press.
Jacobson, M. F., 2005. Lifting the veil of secrecy from industry funding of nonprofit health organizations. International journal of occupational and environmental health 11 (4), 349–355.
Kang, K., 2016. Policy influence and private returns from lobbying in the energy sector. Review
of Economic Studies 83 (1), 269–305.
Kang, K., You, H. Y., 2016. The value of connections in lobbying. working paper.
Kendall, C., Nannicini, T., Trebbi, F., 2015. How do voters respond to information? evidence
from a randomized campaign. American Economic Review 105 (1), 322–53.
Krishna, V., Morgan, J., 2001. A model of expertise. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2),
747–775.
Laffont, J.-J., Tirole, J., 1993. A theory of incentives in procurement and regulation. MIT press.
Lando, H. A., 1991. Toward a comprehensive strategy for reducing the health burden of tobacco.
British journal of addiction 86 (5), 649–652.

28

Lohmann, S., 1995. Information, access, and contributions: A signaling model of lobbying. Public
Choice 85 (3-4), 267–284.
Lorenz, G. M., 2017. Prioritized interests: Diverse lobbying coalitions and congressional committee
agenda-setting. Tech. rep., working paper.
Lucca, D. O., Trebbi, F., 2009. Measuring central bank communication: an automated approach
with application to fomc statements. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mayer, J., 2017. Dark money: The hidden history of the billionaires behind the rise of the radical
right. Anchor Books.
Peng, V., 2016. Astroturf campaigns: Transparency in telecom merger review. University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform 49 (2).
Potters, J., Van Winden, F., 1992. Lobbying and asymmetric information. Public choice 74 (3),
269–292.
Ross, L. F., Norton, J., Young, S., et al., 2000. Is academic medicine for sale. N Engl J Med
343 (7), 508–10.
Sunstein, C. R., 2012. The office of information and regulatory affairs: myths and realities. Harv.
L. Rev. 126, 1838.
Tetlock, P. C., 2007. Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market.
The Journal of finance 62 (3), 1139–1168.
Tetlock, P. C., Saar-Tsechansky, M., Macskassy, S., 2008. More than words: Quantifying language
to measure firms’ fundamentals. The Journal of Finance 63 (3), 1437–1467.
Vidal, J. B. I., Draca, M., Fons-Rosen, C., 2012. Revolving door lobbyists. The American Economic
Review 102 (7), 3731–3748.

29

Figure 1: Rulemaking process

Individual

comment

comment

Proposed Rule

comment

Notice & Comment
Period (30-60 days)

Firm

30

Non-profit

Final Rule
Discussion +
Regulatory Text

Figure 2: Co-commenting and charitable donations

comment

comment

Proposed Rule

Notice & Comment
Period (30-60 days)

Firm

$$$

31

Non-profit

Final Rule
Discussion +
Regulatory Text

Table 1: Co-commenting - Time-invarying specification
Dependent variable
Mean

Grantee g received
donation from firm f

Grantee g and firm f comment on same regulation×100
2.16
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
8.156***
(0.393)

Fixed Effects
Firm
Grantee

6.044***
(0.506)

6.276***
(0.215)

4.033***
(0.484)

Y

Y
Y

Y

SE Clusters

Grantee

Firm

Grantee

Firm+Grantee

Observations

11,111,716

11,111,716

11,111,716

11,111,716

Notes: The dependent variable is equal to 100 if grantee g and firm f comment on the
same regulation in any year between 2003 and 2016. The independent variable is equal
to one if grantee g received a donation from firm f in any year between 2003 and 2016.
Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under “SE Clusters”.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

32

Table 2: Co-commenting - Recent donation
Dependent variable
Mean

Firm f contributed
to grantee g
in year t or t − 1
Fixed effects
Year
Grantee
Donor
Grantee-Firm Pair

Firm f and grantee g commented on the same regulation in year t
0.163
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
1.153***
(0.028)

0.960***
(0.065)

0.927***
(0.110)

0.728***
(0.121)

0.132***
(0.037)

Y

Y
Y

Y

Y
Y
Y

Y

Y

Y

SE Clusters

Observations

136,400,199

Grantee

Firm

Grantee+Firm

Firm×Grantee
Pair

136,400,199

136,400,199

136,400,199

136,331,013

Notes: The dependent variable is equal to 100 if grantee g and firm f comment on the same regulation in
year t. The independent variable is equal to one if grantee g received a donation from firm f at year t or
t − 1. Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under “SE Clusters”. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1

33

Table 3: Commenting on regulations
Dependent variable
Mean

Grantee g received donation
from any firm commenting on r

Grantee g commented on regulation r × 100
0.039
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.210***
(0.012)

Fixed effects
Grantee
Regulation

0.157***
(0.011)

0.181***
(0.010)

0.122***
(0.014)

Y

Y
Y

Y

SE Clusters

Grantee

Grantee

Regulation

Grantee
+Regulation

Observations

144,628,498

144,628,498

144,628,498

144,628,498

Notes: The dependent variable is equal to 100 if grantee r comments on regulation r. The independent variable is equal to one if grantee g received in any year 2003-2016 a donation from a firm
that commented on r. Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under “SE
Clusters”. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

34

Table 4: Similarity of comments - Any donation
Dependent variable

Grantee g received
donation from firm f

Similarity of comments by grantee g and firm f on same regulation
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.249***
(0.068)

0.161***
(0.027)

0.140**
(0.065)

0.088***
(0.022)

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Fixed Effects
Docket
Firm
Grantee

Y

SE Clusters

Docket

Docket

Firm+Grantee

Firm+Grantee
+Docket

Observations

301,602

301,602

300,817

300,792

Notes: The dependent variable is a similarity index between the comment of firm f and the comment
of grantee g on regulation r, divided by the standard deviation of similarity of all comments relative to
r. The independent variable is equal to one if grantee g received a donation from firm f between 2003
and 2016. Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under “SE Clusters”. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

35

Table 5: Similarity of comments - Recent donation
Dependent variable

Grantee g received donation
from firm f at t or t − 1

Similarity of comments by grantee g and firm f on same regulation
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.172***
(0.058)

0.158***
(0.037)

0.041
(0.039)

0.073***
(0.023)

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Fixed Effects
Docket
Firm
Grantee

Y

SE Clusters

Docket

Docket

Firm+Grantee

Firm+Grantee
+Docket

Observations

301,602

301,602

300,817

300,792

Notes: The dependent variable is a similarity index between the comment of firm f and the comment of
grantee g on regulation r, divided by the standard deviation of similarity of all comments relative to r. The
independent variable is equal to one if grantee g received a donation from firm f in the year when the comment
appears or the year before. Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under “SE
Clusters”. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

36

Table 6: Sentiment - Any donation
Dependent variable

Grantee g received
donation from firm f

Sentiment similarity of comments
by grantee g and firm f on same regulation
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.030*
(0.017)

Fixed Effects
Docket
Firm
Grantee

0.030***
(0.009)

0.020**
(0.008)

0.017***
(0.006)

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y

SE Clusters

Docket

Docket

Firm+Grantee

Firm+Grantee
+Docket

Observations

309,033

308,576

308,184

307,719

Notes: The dependent variable is the difference between the sentiment score assigned
to the comment of firm f and the comment of grantee g on regulation r as described
in Section ??, divided by the standard deviation of this measure within rule r. The
independent variable is equal to one if grantee g received a donation from firm f between
2003 and 2016. Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under
“SE Clusters”. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

37

Table 7: Sentiment - Recent donation
Dependent variable

Grantee g received donation
from firm f at t or t − 1

Sentiment similarity of comments
by grantee g and firm f on same regulation
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.027
(0.019)

0.032***
(0.012)

Fixed Effects
Docket
Firm
Grantee

0.009
(0.015)

0.009
(0.012)

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y

SE Clusters

Docket

Docket

Firm+Grantee

Firm+Grantee
+Docket

Observations

309,033

308,576

308,184

307,719

Notes: The dependent variable is the difference between the sentiment score assigned to the
comment of firm f and the comment of grantee g on regulation r as described in Section 5,
divided by the standard deviation of this measure within rule r. The independent variable is
equal to one if grantee g received a donation from firm f in the year when the comment appears
or the year before. Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under
“SE Clusters”. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

38

Table 8: Rule-comment similarity - Any donation
Dependent variable

At least one grantee
co-commenting and receiving
donation from firm f
in any year

Similarity of rule discussion and comment
by firm f on same regulation r
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.237***
(0.065)

0.173***
(0.038)

0.177***
(0.059)

0.045
(0.056)

Log number of grantees
co-commenting and receiving
donation from firm f
in any year

(5)

0.055
(0.040)

Fixed Effects
Docket
Firm

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

SE Clusters

Docket

Docket

Firm+Dock

Firm+Docket

Firm+Docket

Observations

5,538

5,145

5,367

4,965

4,965

Notes: The dependent variable is a similarity index between the comment of firm f and the discussion of
regulation r, divided by the standard deviation of similarity of all comments relative to r and discussion of
regulation r. The independent variable is equal to one if there is at least one grantee g co-commenting on
regulation r and receiving a grant from firm f in any year. Column 5 reports the coefficient on the logarithm
of one plus the number of such grantees. Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column
under “SE Clusters”. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

39

Table 9: Rule-comment similarity - Recent donation
Dependent variable

At least one grantee g
co-commenting and receiving
donation from firm f
in year t or t − 1

Similarity of rule discussion and comment
by firm f on same regulation r
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.274***
(0.101)

0.261***
(0.052)

0.189***
(0.066)

0.173***
(0.062)

Log number of grantees
co-commenting and receiving
donation from firm f
in year t or t − 1

(5)

0.112**
(0.052)

Fixed Effects
Docket
Firm

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

SE Clusters

Docket

Docket

Firm+Grantee

Firm+Docket

Firm+Docket

Observations

5,538

5,145

5,367

4,965

4,965

Notes: The dependent variable is a similarity index between the comment of firm f and the discussion of regulation
r, divided by the standard deviation of similarity of all comments relative to r and discussion of regulation r. The
independent variable is equal to one if there is at least one grantee g co-commenting on regulation r and receiving
a grant from firm f in year t or t − 1. Column 5 reports the coefficient on the logarithm of one plus the number
of such grantees. Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under “SE Clusters”. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

40

Table 10: Hush money
Dependent variable
Mean
(1)
DonorCommentgr

0.086***
(0.014)

DonorCommentgr
×N umberCommentsgR

0.150***
(0.027)

DonorCommentgr
×ShareCommentsgR

Grantee g commented on regulation r × 100
0.039
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.058***
(0.007)

0.042***
(0.009)
0.167***
(0.009)

2.560***
(0.149)

Fixed effects
Grantee
Regulation

Y

SE Clusters

Grantee

Observations

144,628,498

0.035***
(0.008)

0.024
(0.017)

(6)
-0.000
(0.010)

0.150***
(0.028)
2.540***
(0.185)

Y

2.517***
(0.232)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Regulation

Grantee
+Regulation

Grantee
+Regulation

144,628,498

144,628,498

144,628,498

Y

Y

Grantee

Regulation

144,628,498

144,628,498

Notes: The dependent variable is equal to 100 if grantee r comments on regulation r. The DonorCommentgr is equal to
one if grantee g received in any year 2003-2016 a donation from firm that commented on rule r. Standard errors are clustered
at the level indicated in each column under “SE Clusters”. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

41

A
A.1

Appendix: Regulation comments
Overview

Our data on regulatory comments comes from regulations.gov. Under the Administrative Procedures Act (APA), federal agencies must provide a means for the public to submit comments on
proposed rules and other regulatory changes. Regulations.gov is a shared platform that is now
used by most federal agencies to facilitate submission and public review of comments. Information
about submitted comments, including the original text and attachments, can be viewed through
a web browser. The site also provides an API that allows more efficient data access, particularly
for collecting simple comment metadata such as the title of the comment and posted date.
Our sample starts with the the complete collection of metadata for all comments posted to
regulations.gov in the years 2003-2017 (inclusive). This is a total of 6,871,697 unique documents.
From these, we identify 981,232 comments that appear to be authored by organizations rather
than private individuals (“org comments”). We download the complete text for all org comments
using common file formats, giving us about 90% of comment text for the org comment sample.

A.2

Collecting metadata

The regulations.gov API provides a search function for document metadata. We retrieved the
metadata for all public submission documents posted since the site came online in 2003, and
include all years up to and including 2017. Some agencies have begun digitizing older comments
and posting them to regulations.gov retroactively. But an EPA spokesperson stated (in personal
email correspondence) that this work is currently incomplete, and that the text of some older
comments will never be released digitally since the submitters were not aware of this possibility
at the time. Thus we consider data on pre-2003 comments on regulations.gov unreliable and do
not include them.

A.3

Identifying org comments

Authorship information can appear in three different metadata fields: “title”, “organization”, or
“submitterName”. Comments appear to fall into two main types: those that contain “organization” and/or “submitterName” information, and those that only contain authorship information
in the title. First, we drop all comments that have “submitterName” information, but no organization. These appear to be written by private individuals. For the remaining comments, we
look for an organization name in either the organization field or the title (if the organization field
is blank). We use a custom neural network-based classifier to extract organization names from
42

the selected field (classification is necessary for the organization field because it contains many
false positives such as “self” or “none”). The classifier converts each title string to ASCII characters and predicts whether each character is part of an organization string. Contiguous chunks
of characters with predicted probability greater than 0.5 are counted as organization names. The
classifier is multi-layer bi-directional Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), implemented in PyTorch 37 .
Code is available on the Brad Hackinen’s github page38 . The classifier is trained on almost 9000
manually constructed training examples. This training set was constructed iteratively by starting
with easy to parse titles, fitting the neural network, estimating the classifier’s uncertainty from
the total entropy of the character-level predicted probabilities, reviewing a sample of high-entropy
titles, adding them to the training set, and repeating until the error rate was acceptably low. We
also manually classified an additional set of 1000 random titles as a test set. The results of the
test are shown below. 93% of titles are classified without error. 83% of titles with an organization
are extracted exactly correctly, while 98.5% of titles with no org are extracted correctly (in other
words, the classifier avoids 98.5% of false positives).
Table A.1: Organization name extraction accuracy
Sample
All test titles
Test titles containing org
Test titles with no org

Count
1000
371
629

Character Accuracy
0.970
0.935
0.991

String Accuracy
0.928
0.830
0.985

Notes:Character accuracy is the average fraction of characters classifier correctly
in each title. String accuracy is the fraction of titles with every character correctly
classified

A.4

Collecting comment text

Comments on regulations.gov can have comment text in two locations: a “text” field in the
comment metadata, or in one or more attachments. The “text” field contains text that submitters
have entered on a web form. It is often as brief as “see attached”. Most substantial text is
contained in the comment attachments where submitters can upload PDFs, word documents,
other other file formats. We download all attachments of the following formats: PDF, MS Word
8, MS Word 12, and simple .txt files. The majority of attachments are in PDF format.
We use the XpdfReader pdftotext 39 command-line utility to extract text from most PDFs.
Some PDFs contain only images of each page. In this case we must fall back on Optical Character
Recognition (OCR), which we implement with a combination of GhostScript 40 (to render page
37

https://pytorch.org/
https://github.com/bradhackinen/subex
39
https://www.xpdfreader.com/pdftotext-man.html
40
https://www.ghostscript.com/
38

43

images) and Tesseract-OCR 41 . We use Apache Tika 42 to extract text from MS Word formats, and
the chardet 43 Python package to detect formatting of simple text files. All the tools are open
source.

B

Appendix:Construction of comment similarity measures

In sections 5 and 6 of the paper we compare the content of firm comments with grantee comments
and regulator discussion text. In the first case, our goal is to capture similarities between in the
policies advocated for (or against) in by different commenters. In the second, it is to measure how
much attention the regulator has paid to different comments. Complete solutions to these problems
(in the sense of replicating what a literate and informed human could deduce from reading the
text) are currently beyond the frontier of natural language processing (NLP) technology. Instead,
we approximate these notions with a simple and robust method of text analysis called Latent
Semantic Indexing (or sometimes Latent Semantic Analysis) with bag-of-words features. The
basic recipe is as follows: After extracting and cleaning the comment text (to remove headers,
page numbers, etc), each comment is converted into a vector of word counts. Very rare and very
common words are dropped completely, and the remaining counts are weighted by a standard termfrequency-inverse-document-frequency (tf-idf) function to emphasis the words that are most useful
in distinguishing between documents in each regulation. These weighted count vectors are then
summarized by computing document-level singular vectors from a singular value decomposition
of the feature-document matrix (this is the “latent” part of LSI, and generally improves the
performance beyond using the raw feature vectors). Finally, the pairwise document similarity is
computed as the cosine similarity between the document LSI vectors. The rest of this section
explains these steps in greater detail, and describes a docket classification test we conducted to
verify that the measure is informative.

B.1

Sample construction

We perform our analysis at the docket level. For each docket where at least one firm or one grantee
comments, we load all organization comment text documents (initially treated as separate even if
they are from the same author), and also discussion text from all linked rule documents. If there
are at least three documents in total, we process the text and perform LSI to compute similarity
measures.
41

https://github.com/tesseract-ocr
http://tika.apache.org/
43
https://pypi.org/project/chardet/
42

44

Comment text is “cleaned” in by a Python script that attempts to identify and remove addresses and other header material that appear before the body text, tail sign-off and other material
that appear after the body text, as well as repeated headers and footers (including page numbers)
that appear on multiple pages. The script does not always succeed in removing the desired material (the comments are too varied in format to cover every possible case), but it is intended to
remove some noise from the data.
Regulator discussion text is identified in the following way: First we load all rules that follow one or more comments in the docket (see appendix X on Federal Register document linking)
and construct a separate discussion text document for each Federal Register rule document. We
immediately drop Agency, Action, Dates, Summary, Addresses, Contact sections, as well as all
appendices and tables of contents. Then we search for the strings “comment” and “letter” in all
paragraphs and footnotes, and count a paragraph or footnote as discussion text if it appears under
the same 2-level header as an instance of those strings. In other words, if the word “commenters”
appears in the third paragraph under the heading “SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: V. Discussion of Final Rule”, every paragraph and footnote located under that heading will be included.

B.2

LSI implementation

LSI is essentially the application of singular-value decomposition (SVD) to a document-feature
matrix. We follow a standard approach in constructing this document-feature matrix from word
counts, and use on the excellent Gensim44 python package for efficient implementation of these
steps. First, each document is converted to lower case and words are stemmed (meaning removing
common prefixes and suffixes, including pluralization so that “House” and “houses” both become
“hous”). This step increasing the probability that closely-related words will be matched across
documents. Next we identify every sequence of alphanumeric characters that are unbroken by
white-space or other punctuation (except “-”) as a word and count the number of occurrences of
each word in each document. We drop all words that appear in more than 70% or less than 20% of
documents (this seemingly arbitrary step is important for good results with LSI and the numbers
were chosen based on experiment in a docket classification test task). Finally, we re-weight the
word counts in each document using term-frequency-inverse-document frequency (tf-idf) weighting
with the following formula:
D
wij = fij ln( )
di
where fij is the count of word i in document j, di is the number of documents containing word i,
D is the total number of documents in the docket. The matrix of wij entries then form a (W × D)
feature-document matrix M (where W is the number of distinct words).
44

https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/index.html

45

Recall that SVD decomposes the matrix M into the product of three matrices: M = U ΣV ∗ where
U is (W × W ) and V is (D × D). We use an algorithm45 that can compute the first k singular
values and associated columns of U and V . If k < min(W, D) then the resulting decomposition
forms a rank-k approximation of M . The word “latent” in “Latent Semantic Analysis” refers to
the idea that compressing the full feature-document matrix to a lower-dimensional approximation
squeezes synonyms into the same singular vectors and improves overall quality of the document
model. In practice, researchers have found that values of k around 200-400 appear work well in
large samples of documents. However, k is bounded above by the number of separate documents
D, and we have many dockets with fewer than 300 comments. As a general solution, we choose k
according to the following formula:
k = min(D − 2, 50)
So the LSI vectors have higher rank in large dockets, but we keep the maximum value a bit
low so that the approximations are not wildly different in dockets of different sizes. Our object of
interest is the resulting (D × k) matrix V . We describe each row as a document LSI vector.

B.3

Similarity measures

Once the document LSI vectors are computed, estimating the similarity between comments from
firms and grantees is straightforward. We compute organization-level vectors by summing the
LSI vectors for all documents associated with that organization, and define the pairwise comment
similarity as cosine similarity of the organization-level vectors.

B.4

Rule similarity

Estimating the similarity between the rule discussion and an organization’s comment(s) is only
slightly more complicated. In the case that there are multiple rules linked to a docket, we first
construct all the comment-rule pairs and keep only those for which the comment was posted before
the rule was published. Then we perform the same summing procedure to aggregate document
LSI vectors associated with multiple sources of comment text submitted by the same organization,
and compute similarity with the rule as the cosine similarity between the rule LSI vector and the
organization-level vector.
45

https://pypi.org/project/sparsesvd/

46

C

Appendix: Additional tables and figures

We report here various additional figures and tables mentioned in the text.
Table A.2: Top Agencies by Number of Comments
Top 30 agencies
in firms comments
EPA
FAA
FDA
OSHA
PHMSA
NHTSA
CMS
EERE
DOT
OCC
FMCSA
IRS
NLRB
USTR
CFPB
EBSA
HHS
USCG
FWS
AMS
HUD
APHIS
FSIS
TSA
FRA
FHWA
LMSO
BOEM
BIS
EIB

Number of
comments
8099
3870
1942
1245
745
724
721
709
541
466
451
444
366
336
328
302
276
222
208
181
163
152
144
129
109
108
102
95
94
91

Top 30 agencies
in grantees comments
FWS
NOAA
HHS
CMS
EPA
ED
FDA
FAA
FNS
FSIS
APHIS
HUD
IRS
CFPB
AMS
OSHA
FHWA
SSA
NHTSA
EERE
DOT
BOEM
ICEB
DOJ
USCG
OMB
FMCSA
DOS
OPM
NLRB

Number of
comments
76404
69171
60969
47215
13556
5105
4773
3485
2821
2436
2232
1910
1733
1361
1310
1192
1095
1064
1001
936
925
909
861
824
750
748
708
667
649
616

Notes: This table reports the 30 top agencies as ranked by the number of
comments they receive by firms (first two columns) or by grantees (last two
columns).

47

Table A.3: Co-commenting in time-varying sample - Contemporaneous and lagged donations
Dependent variable
Mean

Firm f and grantee g commented on the same regulation in year t × 100
0.163
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Firm f contributed to
grantee g in year t

0.746***
(0.040)

0.614***
(0.041)

0.587***
(0.041)

0.451***
(0.096)

-0.010
(0.042)

Firm f contributed to
grantee g in year t − 1

0.964***
(0.042)

0.819***
(0.044)

0.798***
(0.044)

0.649***
(0.111)

0.188***
(0.045)

Y

Y
Y

Y

Y
Y
Y

Y

Fixed effects
Year
Grantee
Donor
Grantee-Firm Pair

Y

Y

SE Clusters

Observations

125,918,520

Grantee

Firm

Grantee
+Firm

Firm×Grantee
Pair

125,918,520

125,918,520

125,918,520

125,860,865

Note: The dependent variable is equal to 100 if grantee g and firm f comment on the same regulation in
year t. The independent variable is equal to one if grantee g received a donation from firm f either at year t
(respectively, t−1). Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under “SE Clusters”.***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

48

Table A.4: Co-commenting in time-varying sample - Future donations
Dependent variable
Mean

Firm f and grantee g commented on the same regulation in year t × 100
0.163
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Firm f contributed to
grantee g in year t + 1

0.557***
(0.038)

0.452***
(0.049)

0.447***
(0.081)

0.339***
(0.087)

-0.016
(0.042)

Firm f contributed to
grantee g in year t or t − 1

0.866***
(0.032)

0.715***
(0.051)

0.699***
(0.098)

0.543***
(0.104)

0.142***
(0.040)

Y

Y
Y

Y

Y
Y
Y

Y

Fixed effects
Year
Grantee
Donor
Grantee-Firm Pair

Y

Y

SE Clusters

Observations

125,918,520

Grantee

Firm

Grantee
+Firm

Firm×Grantee
Pair

125,918,520

125,918,520

125,918,520

125,860,865

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under “SE Clusters”. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1

49

Table A.5: Similarity - Contemporaneous and lagged donations
Dependent variable

Similarity of comments by grantee g and firm f on same regulation
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Grantee g received donation
from firm f at t

0.046
(0.046)

0.052
(0.034)

-0.036
(0.035)

0.012
(0.017)

Grantee g received donation
from firm f at t − 1

0.169***
(0.054)

0.141***
(0.035)

0.085**
(0.039)

0.079***
(0.027)

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Fixed Effects
Docket
Firm
Grantee

Y

SE Clusters

Docket

Docket

Firm+Grantee

Firm+Grantee
+Docket

Observations

301,602

301,602

300,817

300,792

Notes: The dependent variable is a similarity index between the comment of firm f and the comment of
grantee g on regulation r, divided by the standard deviation of similarity of all comments relative to r. The
independent variable is equal to one if grantee g received a donation from firm f in the year when the comment
appears (respectively, the year before). Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column
under “SE Clusters”. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

50

Table A.6: Similarity - Sector Control
Dependent variable

Similarity of comments by grantee g and firm f
on same regulation
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Grantee g received donation
from firm f at t or t − 1

0.074***
(0.026)

0.058***
(0.021)

Grantee g received
donation from firm f at t

0.020
(0.023)

0.010
(0.021)

Grantee g received
donation from firm f at t − 1

0.072**
(0.030)

0.067**
(0.030)

Fixed Effects
Docket
Firm
Grantee
NAICS code × NTEEC code

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

SE Clusters
Firm
Grantee
Docket
NAICS code × NTEEC code

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

162,735

162,735

162,735

162,735

Observations

Notes: The dependent variable is a similarity index between the comment of firm f and
the comment of grantee g on regulation r, divided by the standard deviation of similarity of
all comments relative to r. The independent variable is equal to one if grantee g received a
donation from firm f in the year when the comment appears or the year before. Standard
errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under “SE Clusters”. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1

51

Table A.7: Similarity - Future Donation
Dependent variable

Grantee g received donation
from firm f at t + 1

Similarity of comments by grantee g and firm f on same regulation
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.010
(0.050)

0.039
(0.030)

0.030
(0.058)

0.027
(0.036)

0.010
(0.031)

-0.030
(0.036)

Grantee g received donation
from firm f at t or t − 1
Fixed Effects
Firm
Grantee
Docket
NAICS code × NTEEC code
SE Clustering
Firm
Grantee
Docket
NAICS code × NTEEC code
Sample with sector codes
Observations

0.069***
(0.025)

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y

Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

175,660

175,643

162,735

162,735

300,817

300,792

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under “SE Clusters”. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1

52

Table A.8: Rule-comment similarity - Robustness
Dependent variable

Similarity of rule discussion and comment
by firm f on same regulation r
(1)

At least one grantee g
co-commenting and receiving
donation from firm f
in year t or t − 1

0.118**
(0.058)

Log number of pages of comments
submitted by firm f

0.405***
(0.024)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.186***
(0.066)

0.131**
(0.061)

0.406***
(0.024)

At least one grantee g
co-commenting and receiving
donation from firm f
in any year

0.405***
(0.024)

0.027
(0.055)

-0.028
(0.059)

-0.027
(0.058)

Fixed Effects
Docket
Firm

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

SE Clustering

Firm+Docket

Firm+Docket

Firm+Docket

Firm+Docket

Observations

4,385

4,385

4,965

4,385

Notes: The dependent variable is a similarity index between the comment of firm f and the discussion of
regulation r, divided by the standard deviation of similarity of all comments relative to r and discussion of
regulation r. The independent variables are the same as in tables 8 and 9. Standard errors are clustered at the
level indicated in each column under “SE Clusters”. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

53

Table A.9: Citations of Firm in Rule Discussion
Dependent variable

At least one grantee g
co-commenting and receiving
donation from firm f
in year t or t − 1

Citation of firm f ’s name in
Discussion of rule r
Cited(Y/N)
(1)

Log (1+Citations)
(2)

Cited (Y/N)
(3)

Log(1+Citations)
(4)

0.017
(0.013)

0.043*
(0.024)

0.021
(0.014)

0.059**
(0.028)

-0.005
(0.011)

-0.032
(0.022)

0.028***
(0.007)

0.049***
(0.013)

At least one grantee g
co-commenting and receiving
donation from firm f
in any year
Log number of
pages of comments
submitted by firm f
Fixed Effects
Docket
Firm

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

SE Clusters

Firm+Docket

Firm+Docket

Firm+Docket

Firm+Docket

Observations

4,965

4,965

4,385

4,385

Note: Standard errors are clustered at the level indicated in each column under “SE Clusters”. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1

54

Table A.10: List of Agencies on regulations.gov (A-F)
ACF

Children and Families Administration

DOI

Interior Department

AHRQ

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

DOJ

Justice Department

AID

Agency for International Development

DOL

Employment Standards Administration

AMS

Agricultural Marketing Service

DOS

State Department

AOA

Aging Administration

DOT

Transportation Department

APHIS

Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service

EAB

Economic Analysis Bureau

ARS

Agricultural Research Service

EAC

Election Assistance Commission

ASC

Appraisal Subcommittee

EBSA

Employee Benefits Security Administration

ATBCB

Archit. and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board

ED

Education Department

ATF

Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives Bureau

EDA

Economic Development Administration

ATSDR

Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry

EEOC

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission

BIA

Indian Affairs Bureau

EERE

Off. Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy

BIS

Industry and Security Bureau

EIB

Import Export Bank of the United States

BLM

Land Management Bureau

EOIR

Executive Office for Immigration Review

BOEM

Ocean Energy Management Bureau

EPA

Environmental Protection Agency

BOP

Prisons Bureau

ESA

Employment Standards Administration

BOR

Reclamation Bureau

ETA

Employment and Training Administration

BPD

Public Debt Bureau

FAA

Federal Aviation Administration

BSEE

Safety and Environmental Enforcement Bureau

FAR

Federal Acquisition Regulation System

CCC

Commodity Credit Corporation

FBI

Federal Bureau of Investigation

CDC

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

FCIC

Federal Crop Insurance Corporation

CDFI

Community Development Financial Institutions Fund

FDA

Food and Drug Administration

CFPB

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency

CMS

Centers for Medicare Medicaid Services

FFIEC

Federal Financial Institutions Exam. Council

CNCS

Corporation for National and Security Service

FHWA

Federal Highway Administration

COE

Engineers Corps

FINCEN

Financial Crimes Enforcement Network

COLC

U.S. Copyright Office, Library of Congress

FISCAL

Bureau of the Fiscal Service

CPSC

Consumer Product Safety Commission

FMCSA

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration

CSREES

Coop. State Research, Education, and Extension Service

FNS

Food and Nutrition Service

DARS

Defense Acquisition Regulations System

FRA

Federal Railroad Administration

DEA

Drug Enforcement Administration

FS

Fiscal Service

DHS

Homeland Security Department

FSA

Farm Service Agency

DOC

Commerce Department

FSIS

Food Safety and Inspection Service

DOD

Defense Department

FSOC

Financial Stability Oversight Council

DOE

Energy Department

FTA

Federal Transit Administration

55

Table A.11: List of Agencies on regulations.gov (F-Z)
FTC

Federal Trade Commission

OJP

Justice Programs Office

FWS

Fish and Wildlife Service

OMB

Management and Budget Office

GIPSA

Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Adm.

ONRR

Natural Resources Revenue Office

GSA

General Services Administration

OPM

Personnel Management Office

HHS

Health and Human Services Department

OPPM

Procurement and Property Management, Office of

HHSIG

Inspector General, Health and Human Serv Dept

OSHA

Occupational Safety and Health Administration

HRSA

Health Resources and Services Administration

OSM

Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement Office

HUD

Housing and Urban Development Department

OTS

Thrift Supervision Office

ICEB

Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau

PBGC

Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation

IHS

Indian Health Service

PCLOB

Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board

IRS

Internal Revenue Service

PHMSA

Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Adm.

ITA

International Trade Administration

PTO

Patent and Trademark Office

LMSO

Labor-Management Standards Office

RBS

Rural Business-Cooperative Service

MARAD

Maritime Administration

RHS

Rural Housing Service

MMS

Minerals Management Service

RITA

Research and Innovative Technology Administration

MSHA

Mine Safety and Health Administration

RUS

Rural Utilities Service

NHTSA

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

SAMHSA

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Adm.

NIFA

National Institute of Food and Agriculture

SBA

Small Business Administration

NIGC

National Indian Gaming Commission

SLSDC

Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation

NIH

National Institutes of Health

SSA

Social Security Administration

NIST

National Institute of Standards and Technology

TREAS

Treasury Department

NLRB

National Labor Relations Board

TSA

Transportation Security Administration

NOAA

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

TTB

Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau

NPS

National Park Service

USC

United States Courts

NRC

Nuclear Regulatory Commission

USCBP

U.S. Customs and Border Protection

NRCS

Natural Resources Conservation Service

USCG

Coast Guard

NSF

National Science Foundation

USCIS

U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services

NTIA

National Telecommunications and Information Adm.

USDA

Agriculture Department

NTSB

National Transportation Safety Board

USPC

Parole Commission

OCC

Comptroller of the Currency

USTR

Trade Representative, Office of United States

OFAC

Foreign Assets Control Office

VA

Veterans Affairs Department

OFCCP

Federal Contract Compliance Programs Office

VETS

Veterans Employment and Training Service

OFPP

Federal Procurement Policy Office

WCPO

Workers Compensation Programs Office

OJJDP

Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Office

WHD

Wage and Hour Division

56

