                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




TRANSITIONAL DYNAMICS IN AGGREGATE MODELS OF INNOVATIVE INVESTMENT

                                      Andrew Atkeson
                                        Ariel Burstein
                                  Manolis Chatzikonstantinou

                                      Working Paper 25321
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25321


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2018




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Andrew Atkeson, Ariel Burstein, and Manolis Chatzikonstantinou. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Transitional Dynamics in Aggregate Models of Innovative Investment
Andrew Atkeson, Ariel Burstein, and Manolis Chatzikonstantinou
NBER Working Paper No. 25321
November 2018
JEL No. O3,O4

                                          ABSTRACT

What quantitative lessons can we learn from models of endogenous technical change through
innovative investments by firms for the impact of changes in the economic environment on the
dynamics of aggregate productivity in the short, medium, and long run? We present a unifying
model that nests a number of canonical models in the literature and characterize their positive
implications for the transitional dynamics of aggregate productivity and their welfare implications
in terms of two sufficient statistics. We review the current state of measurement of these two
sufficient statistics and discuss the range of positive and normative quantitative implications of
our model for a wide array of counterfactual experiments, including the link between a decline in
the entry rate of new firms and a slowdown in the growth of aggregate productivity given that
measurement. We conclude with a summary of the lessons learned from our analysis to help
direct future research aimed at building models of endogenous productivity growth useful for
quantitative analysis.

Andrew Atkeson                                   Manolis Chatzikonstantinou
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 9381                                 Bunche Hall 8365
UCLA                                             Box 951477
Box 951477                                       UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                       Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER                                         mhatzikonstantinou@gmail.com
andy@atkeson.net

Ariel Burstein
Department of Economics
Bunche Hall 8365
Box 951477
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
arielb@econ.ucla.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.econ.ucla.edu/arielb/transitionappendix.pdf
1      Introduction
The Economics Nobel Prize Committee recently honored the contributions of Paul Romer
and others in developing models of endogenous technical change through innovative in-
vestments by firms.1 What quantitative lessons have we learned from these models re-
garding how changes in policies or in the economic environment, such as the extent of
monopoly profits, the costs of firm entry, or the rate of population growth, affect aggre-
gate productivity growth through their impact on firms’ incentives to engage in these
investments in innovation? To date, the quantitative implications of these models for
counterfactual analysis of the transitional dynamics of aggregate productivity have not
received as much attention as their implications for long-run growth.2 Moreover, there
is a great deal of uncertainty regarding the quantitative implications of these models for
the analysis of positive questions such as: to what extent are the driving factors respon-
sible for the decline in firm entry rates observed in the US economy over the past several
decades also responsible for the disappointing growth in aggregate productivity observed
over this same time period?
    In this paper, we look to summarize the current state of knowledge regarding the
quantitative implications of models of endogenous technical change through innovative
investment by firms for the transitional dynamics of aggregate productivity. To do so,
we build on our work in Atkeson and Burstein (2018) (henceforth AB2018) to present
a model that nests many of the canonical models of the interaction of firms’ innovative
investments and aggregate productivity that can be used to study, quantitatively, the dy-
namics of aggregate productivity in response to a variety of counterfactual changes in
policies and the economic environment.3 We characterize, up to a first-order approxima-
tion, the implications of our model for the equilibrium relationship between the transi-
tional dynamics of aggregate productivity and innovative investment measured by the
    1 Seethe surveys of this literature by Jones (2005), Acemoglu (2009), Aghion et al. (2014), Aghion et al.
(2015), Akcigit (2017), and the Nobel Committee (2018).
   2 The insights from these models of endogenous technical change have not been widely applied by pol-

icy institutions in analyses of the impact of policy changes on macroeconomic dynamics over the short- and
medium-term horizons. For example, the Congressional Budget Office relies on variants of the Solow neo-
classical growth model in their 10- and 25-year forecasts of the budget and economic outlook. The Bureau
of Economic Analysis has begun to incorporate measures of firms’ investments in intangible capital into
the national income and product accounts starting in 2013 (see e.g. Corrado et al. 2009).
   3 For examples of analyses of the impact of tax policies on aggregate productivity through their impact

on firms’ investments in innovation, see McGrattan and Prescott (2005), Peretto (2007), Acemoglu (2009),
Jaimovich and Rebelo (2017), and Ferraro et al. (2017). Karahan et al. (2016) study the impact of changes in
the growth rate of the labor force on firm entry, and Comin and Gertler (2006), De Loecker and Eeckhout
(2017) and Edmond et al. (2018) study the macroeconomic implications of changes in markups. Important
contributions in the public finance literature on the impact of tax policy on business entry (entrepreneur-
ship) include Gentry and Hubbard (2005), Cullen and Gordon (2006) and Giroud and Rauh (2015).


                                                                                                           1
innovation intensity of the economy, the allocation of labor to research, or the entry rate
of new firms.4 We use this approximate solution to highlight two sufficient statistics that
play a key role in shaping our model’s quantitative positive and normative implications.
We illustrate the range of quantitative answers implied by our model to our counterfac-
tual experiments given plausible measures of these statistics. We see our results as a use-
ful benchmark for future research aimed at developing models of endogenous technical
change that are useful for quantitative policy analysis.
    Our model, which extends the model of firm dynamics in Garcia-Macia et al. (2016),
features innovative investments by firms that may be directed either at acquiring prod-
ucts new to those firms or at improving the productivity with which these firms produce
one of their current products. Firms acquire new products either by inventing products
that are new to society as a whole (as in models of growth through expanding varieties)
or by inventing a better technology for producing a product currently produced by some
other incumbent firm (as in neo-Schumpeterian models of innovation through business
stealing).5 We nest a wider class of models of the spillovers from innovative investment
in the literature than that in AB2018. Specifically, in addition to the semi-endogenous
growth framework of Jones (2002), we nest models that use what are referred to as second
generation endogenous growth technologies for research.6
    To develop our sufficient statistics, we solve analytically for a first-order approxima-
tion to the model-implied path of aggregate productivity following an increase in the
innovation intensity of the economy (and the aggregate allocation of labor to innovative
investment) induced by a policy change that has a uniform impact on the incentives of
incumbent and entering firms to invest in innovation. The first of our sufficient statistics,
which we term the impact elasticity, is the elasticity of the growth of aggregate produc-
tivity between this period and the next with respect to a given change in the log of the
labor input allocated to research. The second of our sufficient statistics, which we refer
to as the extent of intertemporal knowledge spillovers in research, determines the persistence
of this impulse to aggregate productivity; that is, the rate at which the level of aggregate
productivity returns to its baseline growth path.7 We show how these sufficient statis-
   4 See   Fernald and Jones (2014) for a similar approach to modeling the transition dynamics of aggregate
productivity and the allocation of labor to research.
    5 As noted in Nobel Committee (2018), the existence of business stealing has the important implication

that equilibrium investment in innovation may be too high from a social perspective since business stealing
amounts to a negative spillover to other firms.
    6 See, for example, Peretto (1998), Young (1998), Dinopoulos and Thompson (1998), Howitt (1999), and

Ha and Howitt (2007).
    7 In the limit, with full intertemporal knowledge spillovers, the half-life of the level of aggregate produc-

tivity in our model is infinite. In this case, if we abstract from the dynamics of physical capital, the growth
rate of aggregate productivity jumps immediately to its new long-run level following a change in policies.


                                                                                                               2
tics shape the model’s quantitative implications for the transitional dynamics of aggre-
gate productivity following not only uniform changes in innovation subsidies, but also
changes in markups and changes in corporate taxes with equal expensing of innovative
investment by entering and incumbent firms. We also show that these sufficient statistics
shape our model’s normative implications for the welfare consequences of these changes
in the economic environment.
    How can one measure these two sufficient statistics? The impact elasticity of the model
is measured using data on firm dynamics — in particular, data on the contribution of firm
entry to aggregate productivity growth relative to the share of innovative investment car-
ried out by entering firms on the economy’s balanced growth path. Our second sufficient
statistic, the extent of intertemporal knowledge spillovers, is much harder to measure
because it requires one to estimate whether the half-life of a shock to aggregate produc-
tivity is a decade, a century, or a millennium.8 We show that uncertainty regarding the
extent of intertemporal knowledge spillovers is not very important for positive quantita-
tive analysis of the medium-term dynamics (e.g., 20 years) of aggregate productivity in
response to the changes in the economic environment that we consider. In contrast, this
uncertainty in measurement of intertemporal knowledge spillovers is much more impor-
tant for the normative implications of our model since these implications are driven by
the model’s predictions for the long-term response of aggregate productivity to policy
changes or other changes in the economic environment.
    We next consider the transitional dynamics of aggregate productivity in our model
in response to policy changes or other changes in the economic environment that do not
have a uniform impact on the incentives of incumbent and entering firms to invest in in-
novation, but instead lead, in the long term, to changes in the share of innovative invest-
ment carried out by entering versus incumbent firms. In this case, a number of additional
forces come into play in shaping the model’s transitional dynamics, because one must use
the full model to compute its counterfactual implications for our sufficient statistics and
the level and growth rate of aggregate productivity on the new balanced growth path
to which the economy converges. We illustrate the additional mechanisms at work in
our model with an analysis of the impact of a change in corporate profit taxes when the
expensing of innovative investment for tax purposes is not the same for incumbent and
   8 The  specific form of intertemporal knowledge spillovers in research was central to the debate in the
literature 20 years ago about scale effects in endogenous growth models. See the surveys in Jones (2005), Ha
and Howitt (2007), and Akcigit (2017). While interest in this debate in the literature has diminished, we find
that the issues raised there are central to understanding the normative implications of counterfactual policy
experiments in our model. See Bloom et al. (2017) for a recent empirical contribution to the measurement
of intertemporal knowledge spillovers.



                                                                                                            3
entering firms.
    We finally use our model to interpret quantitatively the joint dynamics of firm entry
and aggregate productivity. Recent research has focused attention on the observation
that the rate of entry of new firms in the US economy has declined substantially in re-
cent decades (see, e.g., Decker et al. 2014 and Alon et al., 2017). Viewed through the lens
of our model, this decline in firm entry reflects reduced investment in innovation by en-
tering firms relative to investments by incumbent firms. We use our analytical results
and sufficient statistics to examine the quantitative implications of our model for the re-
lationship between firm entry rates and aggregate productivity, given different possible
driving factors behind these phenomena. We consider three candidate explanations for
the decline in the entry rate of new firms in the model: a uniform increase in the cost
of innovation for incumbent and entering firms, an increase in the cost of innovation for
entering firms relative to incumbent firms, and a decline in the population growth rate.
In each case, we choose the magnitude of the change in costs or demographics to account
for a large decline in the entry rate of fixed size over a 20-year period. We then consider
the quantitative implications of different specifications of our model for the associated
cumulative change in aggregate productivity. In almost all of the cases that we consider,
a large decline in entry over a 20-year period is associated with a modest cumulative de-
cline in the level of aggregate productivity. Thus, our model implies that these factors
likely account for only a modest portion of the decline in aggregate productivity growth
over the past two decades.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present our model
and discuss the models in the literature that are nested in our framework. In Section 3,
we characterize the growth rates and levels of variables on the balanced growth path of
the model. In Section 4, we characterize our model’s implications for the equilibrium
relationships between the transitional dynamics of aggregate productivity and those of
the innovation intensity of the economy, the allocation of labor to research, or the rate
of entry by new firms. We use these formulas for the model’s transitional dynamics to
highlight which features of the data on firm dynamics and the aggregate economy are
critical for identifying the parameters of the model that are key to its dynamic implica-
tions. In Section 5, we describe the counterfactual experiments that we conduct with the
model and the results we obtain regarding the short- and long-term responses of aggre-
gate productivity and welfare induced by these various experiments. In Section 6, we
examine our model’s implications for the cumulative change in aggregate productivity
associated with a gradual decline in the rate of entry of new firms over a 20-year period.
We conclude with a summary of the lessons learned from our analysis to help direct fu-


                                                                                         4
ture research aimed at building models of endogenous productivity growth useful for
quantitative analysis. In a supplemental online appendix, we present a full description
of our model, proofs of our propositions, the calibration of the model parameters, and a
wide range of supporting technical material.


2    The Model
The model is specified so that it is possible to aggregate production and various types
of innovative investment across heterogeneous firms. It is this aggregation that makes
analysis of our model’s transitional dynamics tractable. We present the key elements of
the model here and point out the assumptions we make to allow for aggregation. Further
details regarding our model and the definition of equilibrium are provided in the online
appendix. In this section, we also discuss some of the models in the literature that are
nested in our model.
    There are three types of goods: a final good used for consumption and investment
in physical capital, a second final good that we term the research good that is the input
into innovative investment by firms, and differentiated intermediate goods produced by
innovating firms.


The Final Consumption Good The representative agent has standard preferences over
                           βt
final consumption ∑∞  t=0 1−γ Lt (Ct /Lt )
                                           1− γ
                                                , with β < 1 and γ > 0. Population Lt grows
exogenously at rate exp( g Lt ) = Lt+1 /Lt .
    Output of the final consumption good, Yt , is produced as a constant elasticity of substi-
tution (CES) aggregate of the output of a continuum of differentiated intermediate goods,
with the elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods equal to ρ > 1. At each
date t, the technology with which any particular intermediate good can be produced is
summarized by its productivity index z. Production of an intermediate good with pro-
ductivity index z is carried out with physical capital, k, and labor, l, according to

                                 yt (z) = zk t (z) α lt (z)1−α ,                           (1)

where 0 < α < 1. For each intermediate good that can be produced at time t, we refer
to the technology with the highest value of z as the frontier technology for this good. In-
termediate goods are produced by firms that own the exclusive rights to use the frontier
technology for producing one or more intermediate goods.
    The productive capacity of the economy at time t is determined by its population Lt , its


                                                                                            5
current stock of physical capital Kt , and the measure of intermediate goods with frontier
technology indexed by z, which we denote by Mt (z). Total labor hours employed in the
production of intermediate goods is denoted by l pt Lt , with l pt ∈ [0, 1] representing the
fraction of the population engaged in current production. The constraints on production
labor and physical capital require that l pt Lt = ∑z lt (z) Mt (z) and Kt = ∑z k t (z) Mt (z).
    We make the following standard assumptions to allow for simple aggregation of cur-
rent production. In each period, physical capital and labor are freely mobile across in-
termediate goods producing firms, and the markup µ ≥ 1 of price over marginal cost
charged by intermediate goods firms is constant across intermediate goods and over
time.9 With these assumptions, aggregate output of the final good can be written as
                       1− α
Yt = Zt (Kt )α l pt Lt       , where Zt is given by

                                           "                        #1/(ρ−1)
                                    Zt =       ∑ z ρ − 1 Mt ( z )              .                        (2)
                                                z


Throughout this paper, we refer to Zt as aggregate productivity at time t. We refer to Mt =
                                                                        ρ −1
∑z Mt (z) as the total measure of products available, and to the ratio Zt /Mt as the average
productivity index of existing intermediate goods (specifically, the average of zρ−1 across
                                                     ρ −1
intermediate goods). We refer to st (z) = zρ−1 /Zt as the size of a product with frontier
technology z. This is because the share of revenue and physical capital and production
employment at t associated with this product in equilibrium is given by st (z).


The Research Good The second final good in this economy is the input used for inno-
vative investment by firms. Output of the research good is produced using research labor
hours lrt Lt , according to
                                              φ −1
                                  Yrt = Art Zt lrt Lt .                               (3)

Here, Art represents the stock of freely available scientific progress, which grows at an
                                          φ −1
exogenous rate g At = ḡ A .10 The term Zt     with φ ≤ 1 reflects intertemporal knowledge
   9 We   assume that it is technologically possible for latent competitors to copy the frontier technology
for each intermediate good but that intellectual property protection forces them to use a version of the
technology with productivity that is fraction 1/µ̄ of the productivity of the frontier technology for that
good. With Bertrand competition and limit pricing, the gross markup µ charged by the incumbent producer
of each product is the minimum of the monopoly markup, ρ/ (ρ − 1), and the technology gap between the
frontier and the latent technology, µ̄. When we consider a change in the equilibrium markup, we assume
that it is due to a change in policy regarding protection of intellectual property determining µ̄.
   10 Some papers in the theoretical literature on economic growth with innovating firms assume that aggre-

gate productivity growth is driven entirely by firms’ expenditures on R&D (Griliches 1979, p. 93). As noted
in Corrado et al. (2011) and Akcigit (2017) this view ignores the productivity-enhancing effects of invest-
ments by actors other than business firms. We capture all of these other productivity-enhancing effects with


                                                                                                          6
spillovers in the production of the research good, as in the model of Jones (2002). Us-
                                                φ −1
ing the language of Bloom et al. (2017), Art Zt      denotes the productivity with which
research labor Lrt translates into a real flow of “ideas" Yrt available to be applied to in-
novative investment. If φ < 1, then increases in the level of aggregate productivity Zt
reduce research productivity in the sense that “ideas become harder to find." Because the
impact of advances in Zt on research productivity is external to any particular firm, we
call it a “spillover.” The parameter φ indexes the extent of this spillover. While this is
a negative spillover, our model also features the classic positive spillovers from research
that new ideas build on old ones built into the specification of the technology through
which investment of the research good translates into innovations.


Innovation Innovative investment is undertaken by intermediate goods producing firms.
We refer to those firms producing intermediate goods at t that also produced at t − 1 as
incumbent firms. We refer to those firms at t that are new (and hence did not produce
intermediate goods at t − 1) as entering firms. There are three types of innovative invest-
ments: (i) new firms invest to enter, each acquiring the frontier technology to produce a
single product that is new for that firm, (ii) incumbent firms invest to acquire the frontier
technologies for products that are new to those firms, and (iii) incumbent firms invest to
improve the frontier technologies of their existing products.
    We now describe the assumptions that generate a tractable relationship between these
investments and the dynamics of the total measure of products Mt and aggregate pro-
ductivity Zt , summarized in equations (6) and (7) below.

                                                                                             −ψ
Innovation by Entering Firms Each entering firm at t must invest Mt units of the
                                                                    1− ψ
research good to acquire a product at t + 1, with ψ ≤ 1. Let xet Mt      denote the total use
of the research good by entering firms. Then, xet Mt is the measure of products acquired
by entering firms at t + 1, where xet denotes the ratio of products acquired by entering
firms at t + 1 relative to the total measure of products at t.
    As we discuss in our review of nested models below, two values of ψ are typically
considered in the literature. The first value is ψ = 1. In this case, the resources required
to create one new product through entry fall with the number of existing products. The
Ar . Akcigit et al. (2013) consider a growth model that distinguishes between basic and applied research and
introduce a public research sector. As we discuss below, the only role served by the exogenous growth of
scientific progress Art in our analysis is that, by adjusting the parameter ḡ A , we can target a given baseline
growth rate of output in the balanced growth path for a given growth rate of population, ḡ L , as we vary the
parameters φ and ψ.




                                                                                                               7
second value is ψ = 0. In this case, the resources required to create one new product
through entry are independent of the number of existing products.
    The frontier technology newly acquired by an entering firm may apply to an inter-
mediate good that was previously produced by an incumbent firm or may apply to an
intermediate good that is new to society. Specifically, with probability δe , the intermedi-
ate good acquired by the entrant at t + 1 was already being produced by an incumbent
firm at t, but with a lower productivity index than the new frontier technology for that
good acquired by the entrant. Since identical intermediate goods are perfect substitutes
in the production of the final consumption good, competition in the product market be-
tween the entering firm and the previous incumbent producer of this intermediate good
implies that the previous incumbent producer ceases production of the good. In this case,
the innovative investment by the entering firm does not result in a net increase in the total
measure of products available Mt+1 . Instead, it only results in a positive increment to the
                                                           ρ −1
average productivity index across existing products Zt+1 /Mt+1 . As is common in the
literature, we say that this intermediate good that is new to the entering firm represents
business stealing from an incumbent firm.11
    With the complementary probability 1 − δe , this newly acquired frontier technology
allows this entering firm to produce an intermediate good that is new to society as a
whole. In this case, the innovative investment by the entering firm results in a net increase
in the total measure of products available Mt+1 . As is common in the literature, we say
that this intermediate good that is new to this entering firm represents a contribution to
productivity through expanding varieties.
    Let the average value of z0ρ−1 across all products obtained by entering firms at t + 1
                             ρ −1                               ρ −1
be given by Ez0ρ−1 = ηe Zt /Mt .12 Note that the term Zt /Mt is the average value
of zρ−1 across existing intermediate goods at t. Hence, in the model, there is a positive
spillover from the average value of zρ−1 across existing products at t to the expected value
of productivity z0ρ−1 for entering firms at t + 1. These assumptions imply that the fraction
of products at t + 1 produced by entering firms is given by xet Mt /Mt+1 and the share of
                                                                 ρ −1 ρ −1
production employment in entering firms is given by xet ηe Zt /Zt+1 . The term ηe is an
  11 We  assume that the probability that a new product acquired by either an entering or an incumbent firm
is stolen from another incumbent firm is an exogenous parameter. A richer model might aim to make this
probability endogenous.
   12 The productivity index z0 for stolen products in entering firms is drawn as an increment over the previ-

ous frontier technology of an existing intermediate good in a manner similar to that in Klette and Kortum
(2004) and other standard quality ladder models. The productivity index z0 for products that are new to
society in entering firms is drawn by imperfect copying of the frontier technology for existing intermediate
goods in a manner similar to that in Luttmer (2007). The transitional dynamics of the measure of prod-
ucts and aggregate productivity implied by our model do not depend on the specifics of these assumptions
regarding draws of z0 for entering firms beyond our assumption regarding the average value of z0ρ−1 above.


                                                                                                            8
exogenous parameter that determines the average size of products produced by entering
firms relative to the average size of all products at t + 1.


Innovation by Incumbent Firms to Acquire Products An incumbent firm that owns
the frontier technology z for producing a particular intermediate good possesses the ca-
pacity to acquire the frontier technology on additional goods new to that firm through
innovative investment. The investment technology is specified so that to attain any given
probability of acquiring a new product at t + 1, a firm must invest xmt (z) in proportion
                     1− ψ
to the term st (z) Mt . Hence, if ψ = 1, then the investment to attain a given probability
of gaining a new product is proportional to the size of the product st (z). If ψ = 0, then
the required investment is proportional to the ratio of zρ−1 to its average value across ex-
                    ρ −1
isting products, Zt /Mt . We show in the online appendix that, in equilibrium, incum-
                                                          1− ψ               1− ψ
bent firms choose to invest in proportion to st (z) Mt . Thus, if xmt Mt          is aggregate
investment by incumbent firms in obtaining new goods, then the probability that incum-
bent firms gain a new product for each product that they currently produce is given by
1 − exp (−h ( xmt )) , where h(·) is a strictly increasing and concave function with h(0) = 0
and h( x ) < 1 for all x ≥ 0.13 As is the case with entering firms, new products acquired by
incumbent firms may be stolen from other incumbent firms (with probability δm ) or are
new to society (with probability 1 − δm ).
    Let the average value of z0ρ−1 across all products obtained by entering firms at t + 1
                             ρ −1
be given by Ez0ρ−1 = ηm Zt /Mt . Note that these assumptions imply that the fraction of
products at t + 1 that are newly acquired by incumbent firms is given by (1 − exp (−h( xmt ))
× Mt /Mt+1 , and the share of production employment at t + 1 in products newly acquired
                                                               ρ −1 ρ −1
by incumbent firms is given by (1 − exp (−h( xmt )) ηm Zt /Zt+1 . The term ηm is an ex-
ogenous parameter that determines the average size of products newly acquired by in-
cumbent firms relative to the average size of all products.


Innovations by Incumbent Firms to Improve Continuing Products Incumbent firms
lose existing products due to exogenous exit and business stealing by entering and other
incumbent firms.14 We refer to the products that they retain from period t to t + 1 as
  13 Inthe online appendix, we present the equations of our model with the length of a time period in
calendar time as a parameter. We use the exponential function to denote rates per unit of time so that
we can derive the standard continuous time expressions for the equations of the model in the limit as the
length of a time period in our model shrinks to zero. As discussed below, several important economic
implications of the model are derived as the length of a time period in the model measured in units of
calendar time shrinks to zero.
  14 We do not consider here the endogenous exit of products due to fixed operating costs, which is featured

in other papers in the literature but makes the model less tractable analytically.


                                                                                                          9
continuing products.
     Incumbent firms can invest to improve the frontier technology for their continuing
products. This investment technology is specified so that to attain any given percentage
growth in this frontier technology, the firm must invest at a rate xct (z) in proportion to
        1− ψ
st (z) Mt . The interpretation of the parameter ψ is the same as above. We show in the
                                                                                      1− ψ
appendix that, in equilibrium, incumbent firms invest in proportion to st (z) Mt . Thus,
        1− ψ
if xct Mt    is aggregate investment by incumbent firms in improving their products, the
expected growth rate of the frontier technology for continuing products with productivity
index z satisfies Ez0ρ−1 /zρ−1 = exp (ζ ( xct )) . We assume that ζ (·) is a strictly increasing
and concave function, with ζ ( x ) > 0 for all x ≥ 0. In terms of observables, these assump-
tions imply that, in expectation, surviving products in incumbent firms grow in size at a
                                 ρ −1  ρ −1
common rate of exp (ζ ( xct )) Zt /Zt+1 .
     With these definitions, we can write the resource constraint for the research good as

                                                       1− ψ
                                 ( xct + xmt + xet ) Mt       = Yrt .                        (4)

Dynamics of M and Z We now characterize the dynamics of the measure of intermedi-
ate goods Mt and aggregate productivity Zt as functions of innovation rates by entering
and incumbent firms.
    The evolution of the total measure of products Mt is determined by the rate at which
incumbent firms lose the frontier technologies for products that they produced at t and
the rate at which incumbent and entering firms gain the frontier technologies for products
new to these firms. Consider first the rate at which incumbent firms lose products. For
each product that they produce at t, incumbent firms can lose its frontier technology at
t + 1, due to either exogenous exit (with probability (1 − exp (−δ0 ))) or business stealing.
Since xet is the ratio of the measure of products gained by entering firms relative to the
measure of existing products produced by incumbent firms Mt , incumbent firms lose a
fraction δe xet of their existing products to business stealing by entrants. Likewise, since
(1 − exp (−h ( xmt ))) is the ratio of the measure of new products obtained by incumbent
firms to the measure of existing products in incumbent firms, incumbent firms lose a
fraction δm (1 − exp (−h ( xmt ))) of their existing products to business stealing by other
incumbent firms. Let exp(−δct ) denote the probability that a product remains in the same
incumbent firm at t + 1, where δct = δc ( xmt , xet ) is defined by the equation

             exp(−δc ( xmt , xet )) = exp (−δ0 ) − δm (1 − exp (−h ( xmt ))) − δe xet .      (5)

Adding back in the measures of new products obtained by entering and incumbent firms

                                                                                             10
as described above, we get that the corresponding evolution of the total measure of inter-
mediate products Mt is given by log Mt+1 − log Mt = H ( xmt , xet ) where

            H ( xmt , xet ) ≡ log (exp (−δc ( xmt , xet )) + 1 − exp (−h ( xmt )) + xet ) .   (6)

The evolution of aggregate productivity can be expressed as a weighted average of the
average values of z0ρ−1 at t + 1 across the three types of products: new products obtained
by entering firms, new products obtained by incumbent firms, and continuing products
in incumbent firms, with the weights given by the fractions of products in each category.
This weighted average is given by

                          ρ −1                                          ρ −1
                         Zt+1
                                                    
                                               Mt                      Zt
                                = exp (−δct )          exp (ζ ( xct ))       +
                         Mt + 1               Mt + 1                    Mt
                                                      ρ −1                  ρ −1
                                            Mt         Zt           Mt         Zt
                    (1 − exp (−h ( xmt )))          ηm       + xet          ηe       ,
                                           Mt + 1       Mt         Mt + 1       Mt
where the three terms on the right hand side of this expression correspond to a weight in
square brackets times an average value of z0ρ−1 for continuing products in incumbent
firms, new products in incumbent firms, and new products in entering firms respec-
tively. This equation then implies that the evolution of aggregate productivity is given
by log Zt+1 − log Zt = G ( xct , xmt , xet ) where

                                          G ( xct , xmt , xet ) ≡                             (7)

            1
               log (exp (−δct ) exp (ζ ( xct )) + ηm (1 − exp (−h ( xmt ))) + ηe xet ) .
           ρ−1
    Note that equations (6) and (7) imply that the dynamics of the total measure of prod-
ucts Mt and aggregate productivity Zt depend only on three aggregate indicators of inno-
vative investment: xct , xmt , and xet . It is not necessary to record further attributes of the
measure Mt (z) describing the distribution of frontier productivities across intermediate
goods. It is this result that makes the transitional dynamics of the model tractable.
    Mechanically, equations (6) and (7) are derived from assumptions that ensure that in
each period of the transition, incumbent firms lose and gain products at common rates
regardless of the frontier technologies for those products, and that the expectation of
z0ρ−1 for continuing products in incumbent firms, products newly acquired by incum-
bent firms, and products newly acquired by entering firms are each common proportions
of the average value of zρ−1 for products last period. These assumptions imply that data


                                                                                              11
on the dynamics of products within firms generated by the model satisfy certain regular-
ities. These include a strong version of Gibrat’s law at the product level for incumbent
firms — in expectation, incumbent firms lose products at a common rate regardless of
the current size of the product, and continuing products in incumbent firms grow at a
rate independent of current size. A related property holds for new products gained by
incumbent firms — in expectation, the number of products in an incumbent firm grows at
a common rate independent of the current number of products in that firm, and the con-
tribution of newly acquired products to the growth rate of incumbent firms is common
across firms each period. Finally, on a balanced growth path, the average size of entering
firms is constant. These implications of our model are similar to those of the model of
Garcia-Macia et al. (2016). Our model also implies that the research intensity of firms,
measured as the ratio of sales to expenditure on innovative investment, is independent of
size and that the value of firms is directly proportional to size.15
    In addition, we must also assume that all aggregate spillovers affecting the produc-
tivity of research labor in producing innovations are specified in terms of these same two
aggregates Mt and Zt .


The Allocation of Innovative Investment in Equilibrium In the appendix, we fully
describe the market structure, policies, and equilibrium in our model economy. Here
we focus in particular on deriving equilibrium relationships between policies and the
levels of the three types of innovative investment by firms in this economy that we use
in characterizing the transitional dynamics of our model economy. These equilibrium
relationships are presented in equations (8), (12), and (13) below.
    Intermediate goods producing firms hire production labor and rent physical capital to
produce intermediate goods according to the technology in equation (1). They set prices
pt (z) at a markup of µ > 1 over their marginal cost of production. Standard arguments
give that, in equilibrium, these firms expend a fraction (1 − α)/µ of revenue pt (z)yt (z) on
wages for production labor and a fraction α/µ of revenue on rental payments for physical
capital. A fraction (µ − 1)/µ of revenue is left over as pre-tax variable profits. These same
arguments imply that aggregate output is split into wage payments to production labor,
rental payments for physical capital, and aggregate variable profits in the same manner.
    The research good is produced by competitive firms (or in-house by intermediate good
  15 Several recent papers in the literature aim to account for deviations of firm- and product-level data
from some of these extreme regularities, but these papers typically focus on the balanced growth paths of
their models. See, for example, Lentz and Mortensen (2008), Luttmer (2011), Akcigit and Kerr (2018), and
Acemoglu et al. (2018). It is an open question whether these more complex models show, quantitatively,
significantly different transitional dynamics from those that we derive below.


                                                                                                       12
producing firms) using the technology in equation (3). These firms take the productiv-
                                                            φ −1
ity of research labor as determined by Art and Zt                as given. They hire research labor
                                                                                               φ −1
at wage Wt and sell the research good at price Prt . In equilibrium, Prt = Wt /Art Zt .
Because the technology in equation (3) is constant returns to scale, the wage bill for re-
search exhausts revenues, so these research good producing firms earn no profits. That
is, Prt Yrt = Wt lrt Lt in all periods t.
    These results regarding factor shares imply a simple relationship between the innova-
tion intensity of the economy as measured by the ratio of spending on the research good
to output , irt ≡ PrtYYt rt , and the allocation of labor between research and current production
given by
                                               lrt     µ
                                                    =      irt .                                 (8)
                                               l pt   1−α
   For each intermediate good that they manage, intermediate goods firms choose inno-
vative investment to maximize the expected discounted present value of dividends. In
the appendix, we show that the dividend associated with a product with frontier technol-
ogy z is given by Dt (z) = Dt st (z), where

                      µ−1                                  1− ψ
  Dt = (1 − τcorp )           1 + τy Yt − 1 − τcorp λ I Prt Mt [(1 − τc ) xct + (1 − τm ) xmt ] ,
                         µ
                                                                                               (9)
where τc and τm are rates at which incumbent firms’ innovative investments are subsi-
dized, τcorp is the corporate profits tax rate, λ I is the rate at which incumbent firms can
expense their innovative investment for tax purposes, and τy is a production subsidy.16
    We compute the expected discounted value of the dividends associated with a product
as follows. Each existing product remains in the same incumbent firm at t + 1 with prob-
ability exp(−δct ) and has expected size conditional on continuing in the same firm equal
                         ρ −1   ρ −1
to exp(ζ ( xct ))st (z) Zt /Zt+1 . In addition, this firm anticipates acquiring a new product
                                     ρ −1 ρ −1
with expected size of ηm st (z) Zt /Zt+1 with probability (1 − exp(−h( xmt ))). Thus, the
expected discounted present value of dividends associated with a product of size st (z) at
t inclusive of the dividend at t is directly proportional to the size of the product; that is, it
can be written as Vt st (z), where the factor of proportionality Vt satisfies the recursion

                                ρ −1
                              Zt
 Vt = Dt + exp(− Rt )Vt+1       ρ −1
                                       [exp (−δct ) exp (ζ ( xct )) + ηm (1 − exp (−h ( xmt )))] , (10)
                              Zt+1
  16 We introduce this production subsidy to allow us to undo the distortion in incentives for physical
capital accumulation arising from markups and the corporate profits tax in some of our counterfactual
experiments.



                                                                                                    13
with Rt denoting the interest rate.
   In equilibrium, entering firms must earn non-positive profits, so

                                                                                    ρ −1
                                                  1− ψ                           Zt
                      1 − τcorp λ E (1 − τe ) Prt Mt       ≥ exp (− Rt ) Vt+1           η,
                                                                                    ρ −1 e
                                                                                                        (11)
                                                                                  Zt+1

where this expression is an equality if there is positive investment in entry in period t.
   Combining (11) (assuming positive entry in period t) and the first-order condition for
the optimal choice of xmt (to maximize the right-hand side of equation 10) implies a static
equation determining xmt given by
                                      
                         1 − τcorp λ I (1 − τm ) ηe
                                                   = exp (−h ( xmt )) h0 ( xmt ) .                     (12)
                         1 − τcorp λ E (1 − τe ) m
                                                 η

This condition implies that xmt is constant in any period in which entry is positive.17
Likewise, in any period t with positive entry, the first-order condition for the optimal
choice of xct to maximize the right hand side of (10) can be combined with (11) to obtain
a static equation relating xet , xmt , and xct given by
                             
                1 − τcorp λ I (1 − τc )
                                       ηe = exp (−δc ( xmt , xet )) exp (ζ ( xct )) ζ 0 ( xct ) .      (13)
                1 − τcorp λ E (1 − τe )

Since xmt is constant in all periods t in which entry is positive, equation (13) defines an
implicit function xc ( xet ) that determines xct as a function of xet in every period in which
entry is positive. In the appendix, we show that the derivative dxc /dxe approaches zero
in the limit as the length of a time period in the model approaches zero. In this case, in
the continuous time limit, equation (13) implies that xct is also constant in any period in
which entry is positive.
  17 Equation  (12) follows from the assumption that the entry margin is linear in the sense that entry is
replicable: a doubling of investment in entry xet in period t doubles the measure of new products obtained
by entering firms at t + 1. This replicability implies, through equation (11), that the ratio of the value of
a product of a given size next period to the cost of another unit of the research good is pinned down by
policies (if entry is positive). Because incumbent firms have strictly convex costs of investing to acquire
a new product, this implies that this type of innovative investment by incumbent firms is held fixed at
the level that equates the marginal cost of acquiring another product for incumbent firms to the marginal
benefit, which is fixed over time from the zero-profits entry condition. Equation (13) below follows from
the same argument.




                                                                                                          14
Nested Models
Our model has two important features shared by several commonly used models in the
literature.
    The first important feature of our model is that it permits sufficient aggregation in
equilibrium so that the evolution of aggregate productivity and the total measure of
products is a simple function of a few types of aggregate innovative expenditure as
in equations (6) and (7). A number of commonly used expanding varieties and neo-
Schumpeterian models in the literature share this aggregation property. Each of these
models focuses on a subset of the types of innovative investment considered in our model.
In nesting these models, we are able to study the extent to which consideration of differ-
ent types of innovative investment affect the transitional dynamics of the model. We now
discuss these models.
    Expanding varieties models assume that there is no business stealing and hence all
new products acquired by incumbent and entering firms are new products for society,
expanding the measure of products Mt . We nest such models by setting δe = δm = 0.
Luttmer (2007) is an example of an expanding varieties model in which there is only in-
novative investment in entry. Atkeson and Burstein (2010) is an example of an expanding
varieties model in which there is innovative investment in entry and by incumbent firms
in continuing products. Luttmer (2011) is an example of an expanding varieties model in
which there is innovative investment in entry and in the acquisition of new products by
incumbent firms.
    Neo-Schumpeterian models based on the quality ladder framework typically assume
δe = δm = 1 and δ0 = 0. With these assumptions, the measure of products Mt is constant
over time. Grossman and Helpman (1991) and Aghion and Howitt (1992) are examples of
neo-Schumpeterian models in which there is only innovative investment in entry. Klette
and Kortum (2004) is an example of a neo-Schumpeterian model in which there is inno-
vative investment in entry and by incumbent firms in acquiring new products (new to
the firm, not to society). Acemoglu and Cao (2015) is an example of a neo-Schumpeterian
model in which there is innovative investment in entry and by incumbent firms in im-
proving their own products.
    The second important feature of our model is that it allows for a simple and flexible
reduced-form specification of the technology for producing real innovative investment
(what we call the technology for research) that nests three specifications of this technology
that have played an important role in the literature. Specifically, equations (3) and (4) can




                                                                                          15
be combined into a single constraint on real innovative investment per product

                                                            φ −1    ψ −1
                                xct + xmt + xet = Art Zt           Mt      lrt Lt .                      (14)

We focus on three specifications of this technology for research that have played an impor-
tant role in the literature (see Jones (2005) and Ha and Howitt (2007) for a more extensive
discussion).
   The first specification of the technology for research that we consider has φ = 0.96
and ψ = 1. We refer to this first specification as the first generation endogenous growth
specification of the technology for research. As we show below and as discussed in Jones
(2005), with φ close to 1 and ψ = 1, the economic implications of our model with this
technology for research for the first century of a transition to a new balanced growth path
resemble the transitional dynamics of a fully endogenous growth model with a research
technology with φ = 1 and ψ = 1.
   The second specification of the technology for research has φ = −1.67 and ψ = 1.
This specification is similar to that in Jones (2002), Kortum (1997), and Segerstrom (1998).
In this specification of the technology for research, “ideas become harder to find” in
the sense that increases in aggregate productivity Zt relative to the pace of scientific
progress Art lead to a reduction in the productivity of labor allocated to research in
producing real innovative investment per product. We refer to this specification as the
Jones/Kortum/Segerstrom (J/K/S) semi-endogenous growth specification of the research
technology.
   The third specification of the technology for research has φ = 0.96 and ψ = 0. This
specification is similar to that in Peretto (1998), Young (1998), Dinopoulos and Thompson
(1998), Howitt (1999), and Ha and Howitt (2007).18 In this specification, increases in the
mass of products Mt relative to the pace of scientific progress Art lead to a reduction in
the productivity of labor allocated to research in producing real innovative investment
per product. We refer to this as the second generation endogenous growth specification of the
technology for research.


3       Balanced Growth Path
We now describe how to solve for a balanced growth path (BGP) of this economy given
policies and model parameters. We use this solution procedure in our counterfactual
    18 In
      the literature, it is typical to parameterize the research technology with φ = 1 and ψ = 0. Again, the
implications of the model for the transition in the first century are not substantially altered with φ = 0.96.


                                                                                                           16
policy experiments below. On a BGP, policies are constant, the exogenous sequences for
Art and Lt grow at constant rates ḡ A and ḡ L , and the fraction of the population engaged in
current production is constant over time at l¯p . Output, physical capital, and consumption
grow at a common rate ḡY . Aggregate productivity and the measure of products grow at
rates ḡZ and ḡ M . Innovative investments of each type remain constant over time at x̄c , x̄m ,
and x̄e .


BGP growth rates To solve for BGP growth rates, it is useful to consider the variable Jt ≡
  1− φ 1− ψ
Zt Mt        together with the physical capital stock Kt as the endogenous state variables of
the economy. Since innovative investment rates are constant over time on a BGP, equation
(14) implies that the growth rate of J on a BGP depends only on the sum of the growth of
scientific progress and population and not on policies:

                             ḡ J = (1 − φ) ḡZ + (1 − ψ) ḡ M = ḡ A + ḡ L .                        (15)

    As discussed above in our description of the models nested in our framework, we
restrict parameters to φ < 1 and ψ ≤ 1. Note that if ψ = 1, then the growth rate of pro-
ductivity along the BGP, ḡZ , is also independent of policies. More generally, the division
of the growth of J into components arising from growth in aggregate productivity and
growth in the number of products depends on the parameters φ and ψ and on policies
due to the impact of these parameters on the mix of innovative investment on a BGP,
which is determined as follows.
    The value of x̄m on a BGP with positive entry is determined from equation (12), while
the implicit function x̄c ( xe ) is determined from equation (13). Note that policies enter
into these two equations. The BGP level of x̄e is then determined as the solution to the
equation g J ( x¯e ) = ḡ J , where g J (.) is defined as

                   g J ( xe ) ≡ (1 − φ) G ( x̄c ( xe ) , x̄m , xe ) + (1 − ψ) H ( x̄m , xe ) .        (16)

In the appendix we present conditions under which the right hand side of this expression
is strictly increasing in x̄e so at most one positive solution to this equation exists.
     Once one solves for innovative investments on the BGP, x̄c , x̄m , and x̄e , the growth
rates of aggregate productivity and the measure of products are given by the functions
G and H evaluated at these levels of innovative investments: ḡZ = G ( x̄c ( x̄e ), x̄m , x̄e ) and
ḡ M = H ( x̄m , x̄e ). The growth rate of aggregate output is ḡY = ḡZ /(1 − α) + ḡ L .19
  19 If
     φ < 1, the growth rate of aggregate productivity on the BGP is independent of the levels of scientific
knowledge and population, Art and Lt .


                                                                                                        17
BGP levels We describe in the appendix how to use the equations for the value function
(10) and the zero profits at entry condition (11) on a BGP to solve for the value of p̄r , which
                                                         1− ψ
is defined as the BGP value of the ratio prt ≡ Prt Mt /Yt . The BGP value of the research
intensity of the economy is then given by īr = p̄r ( x̄c + x̄m + x̄e ) , and the BGP allocation
of labor l¯r / 1 − l¯r is obtained from equation (8). The BGP level of Jt , given levels of Art
                      

and Lrt , can be calculated from equation (14).
    When ψ = 1, this equation is sufficient to pin down the BGP level of productivity Z̄t .
More generally, with ψ < 1, there is a continuum of pairs of Z̄t and M̄t , each consistent
with the same BGP value of J̄t . The particular values of Z̄t and M̄t that arise on a particular
BGP depend upon the initial conditions of the economy Z0 and M0 and the transition
path that the economy takes to converge to the BGP. Specifically, an equilibrium sequence
of innovative investments { xct , xmt , xet } implies, through the functions G and H defined
above, a sequence of growth rates of Zt and Mt . This sequence of growth rates can then
be used to trace out the paths for the levels of Zt+1 and Mt+1 from their initial conditions
to their levels on the BGP, as described in the next section.


4    Transitional Dynamics of Aggregate Productivity
We now consider the equilibrium relationship implied by our model for the dynamics of
aggregate productivity and the transition path of research labor {lrt Lt } (or equivalently,
from equation (8), a transition path for the innovation intensity of the economy). This ex-
ercise is analogous to a growth accounting exercise relating the equilibrium dynamics of
labor productivity to a given transition path for investment in physical capital in a stan-
dard growth model. Our aim is to study which parameters of our model determine its
implications for the short- and long-term responses of aggregate productivity to changes
in the allocation of labor to research induced by a change in policies or other features of
the economic environment. We then use these results to develop formulas for the equi-
librium relationship between the dynamics of aggregate productivity and the transition
path of entry rates as measured by the share of employment and output in newly entered
firms.
    Consider the paths of quantities Zt = {Yrt , xet , xmt , xct , Jt+1 , Zt+1 , Mt+1 } given initial
conditions for J0 , Z0 , M0 , and a path of research labor {lrt Lt }. We consider paths for
research labor {lrt Lt } such that the fraction of labor allocated to research converges to a
BGP value l¯r and population converges to a BGP path { L̄t }. We construct a first-order
approximation to the paths for the variables in Zt relative to the BGP values of these
variables to which the economy is converging.

                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                 (1−τcorp λ I )(1−τm )
    We assume that, along the transition to the BGP, the ratios of policies
                                                                                                 (1−τcorp λE )(1−τe )
     (1−τcorp λ I )(1−τc )
and                         remain constant. Under this assumption, xmt = x̄m along the transi-
     (1−τcorp λE )(1−τe )
tion path (determined by equation 12), and the implicit function x̄c ( xe ) (defined in equa-
tion 13) does not vary over time in every period with positive entry. The results we de-
velop below are conditional on the assumption that the transition path to the BGP has
positive entry in every period.
    When we construct our first order approximation to the transitional dynamics of our
model economy, we make use of the following elasticities of the growth rates of Z, M, and
J with respect to changes in investment in entry around the BGP to which the economy is
converging. Define the elasticity of the growth of aggregate productivity with respect to
changes in investment in entry evaluated on the BGP to which the economy is converging
as                                                                                                      
                           ∂                               d               ∂
            ΘG =              G ( x̄c ( xe ) , x̄m , xe )     xc ( xe ) +     G ( x̄c ( xe ) , x̄m , xe ) x̄e , (17)
                         ∂xc                              dxe             ∂xe
where dxd e xc ( xe ) is computed from equation (13) and all derivatives are evaluated at xe =
x̄e . Similarly, define the elasticity of the growth in the number of products with respect to
changes in investment in entry by

                                                      ∂
                                            ΘH =         H ( x̄m , x̄e ) x̄e .                                   (18)
                                                     ∂xe

From the definition of Jt , we can define the elasticity Θ J of the growth rate of J with
respect to changes in investment in entry as

                                      Θ J = (1 − φ ) Θ G + (1 − ψ ) Θ H .                                        (19)

    Our first-order approximation to the dynamics of aggregate productivity is obtained
as follows. Equations (14) and (13) together with xmt = x̄m imply that the equilibrium
change in investment in entry is, to a first-order approximation,

                                      log lrt − log l¯r + (log Lt − log L̄t ) − (log Jt − log J̄t ) ,
                                                                                                 
      (log xet − log x̄e ) = A                                                                                   (20)

where                                                                                  !
                                           x̄c + x̄m + x̄e                 1
                                A≡                                 d
                                                                                             .                   (21)
                                                  x̄e             dxe xc   ( x̄e ) + 1
Define
                                                    Θ ≡ AΘ J .                                                   (22)


                                                                                                                   19
Then, combining equation (20) and a first-order approximation to equation (16) around
x̄e , we have

 log Jt+1 − log J̄t+1 = Θ     log lrt − log l¯r + (log Lt − log L̄t ) + (1 − Θ) (log Jt − log J̄t ) .
                                                                   

                                                                                                (23)
The initial condition of this AR1 process for J, log J0 − log J̄0 , is given (since the BGP level
J̄t and growth rate ḡ J are both pinned down).
     Using equation (23), we develop the following analog of Proposition 6 from AB2018
regarding the dynamics of the variable Jt as the standard moving average of past per-
turbations to the allocation of labor to research, lrt Lt , and its initial condition in period
t = 0.

Proposition 1. From the AR1 representation (23), we have that to a first-order approximation,
the dynamics of log Jt in the transition to a BGP with positive entry are given by



                             t
                            ∑ Θ (1 − Θ ) j        log lrt− j − log l¯r + log Lt− j − log L̄t +
                                                                                          
   log Jt+1 − log J̄t+1 =                                                                        (24)
                            j =0

                        + (1 − Θ) t+1 (log J0 − log J̄0 ) .

   In the appendix we show that, once we solve for the dynamics of Jt , the dynamics of
aggregate productivity and the measure of products are given by

                                                      ΘG
                                 log Zt − log Z̄t =      (log Jt − log J̄t )                     (25)
                                                      ΘJ

                                                      ΘH
                             log Mt − log M̄t =          (log Jt − log J̄t ) .                   (26)
                                                      ΘJ
We also use equations (25) and (26) to solve for the BGP levels Z̄t and M̄t to which the
economy converges, given initial conditions Z0 and M0 .
    For many of our policy experiments, we make use of the following corollary to Propo-
sition 1.

Corollary 1. Suppose the economy starts at t = 0 on some initial BGP, there is a change in
the economic environment that leaves the growth rates { g At } and { g Lt } unchanged, and the
allocation of innovative investment x̄c , x̄m , x̄e is unchanged across BGPs. Then, to a first order
approximation, the dynamics of aggregate productivity relative to its initial BGP path are given



                                                                                                  20
by
                                                     t
                                                    ∑ (1 − Θ ) j
                                                                                           
             log Zt+1 − log Z0 − t ḡZ = AΘG                           log lrt− j − log lr0 .               (27)
                                                    j =0


Two sufficient statistics We see from equation (27) that, under the conditions of Corol-
lary 1, the dynamics of aggregate productivity relative to its trend on the initial BGP can
be summarized by two statistics. We refer to the first of these statistics, AΘG , as the impact
elasticity of aggregate productivity at t + 1 with respect to a change in research labor at
t. Note that ΘG is the corresponding impact elasticity of aggregate productivity at t + 1
with respect to a change in investment by entrants at t. We refer to the second of these
statistics, 1 − Θ, as the extent of intertemporal knowledge spillovers in research. This second
statistic captures the persistence of the response of aggregate productivity to a one-time
policy-induced reallocation of labor to research.
    Observe that the impact elasticity of an increase in labor devoted to research on aggre-
gate productivity relative to its new BGP level is independent of the specification of the
research good technology indexed by φ and ψ. Instead, it is determined by the parameters
that shape our model’s implications for firm dynamics and the allocation of innovative in-
vestment across incumbent and entering firms. Specifically, the elasticity ΘG is bounded
above by

                 1 G ( x̄c , x̄m , x̄e )ρ−1 − G ( x̄c , x̄m , 0)ρ−1
                                                                                               
                                                                       1                   δe
           ΘG ≤                                                     =                   1−          S̄e ,   (28)
                ρ−1               exp ((ρ − 1) ḡZ )                  ρ−1                  ηe

where S̄e denotes the share of production employment in entering firms on the BGP. Note
that this bound on ΘG can be interpreted as a measure of the contribution of firm entry
to aggregate productivity growth on the BGP. The parameter A is bounded below by
the inverse of the share of innovative investment by entering firms in total innovative
investment. As we show in the appendix, both ΘG and A converge to these bounds as
our model approaches a continuous time model, shrinking the length of a time period in
units of calendar time to zero. Likewise, the elasticity Θ H is given by the contribution of
entry to the growth in the measure of products, that is,

                                 H ( x̄m , x̄e ) − H ( x̄m , 0)
                         ΘH =                                   = (1 − δe ) F̄e ,                           (29)
                                          exp( ḡ M )

where F̄e denotes the fraction of products produced by newly entered firms. If products
in entering firms are small relative to the average product (ηe < 1), as is the case in our
calibration, then S̄e < F̄e , which implies ΘG < Θ H .


                                                                                                             21
    In contrast, the persistence of this impact, which is determined by the parameter 1 − Θ
in equation (22), is sensitive to the parameters φ and ψ of the research good technology,
governing the extent of intertemporal knowledge spillovers. This is because the elastic-
ity Θ J , defined in equation (19), depends on these parameters. In our calibration, ΘG is
substantially smaller than Θ H . As a result, the persistence parameter, 1 − Θ, is substan-
tially smaller when φ ≈ 1 and ψ = 0 (as with the second generation endogenous growth
research technology) compared to when ψ = 1 and φ  1 (as with the J\K\S research
technology). We discuss the quantitative implications of these observations when we
consider the transitional dynamics for aggregate productivity implied by various specifi-
cations of our model.


Impact of a change in entry rates on aggregate productivity growth We use the re-
sults above to characterize the model-implied relationship between observed entry rates,
measured as the share of employment in entering firms, and the dynamics of aggregate
productivity observed along a transition of the economy to a new BGP. Specifically, let the
growth rates and investment levels on the new BGP to which the economy is converging
                     0 , x̄ 0 , x̄ 0 , and x̄ 0 . Let Θ0 , Θ0 , and Θ0 be the corresponding elasticities
be given by ḡz0 , ḡm      c      m          e        G    H        J
defined in equations (17), (18), and (19). Let Set+1 denote the share of production employ-
ment in entering firms in period t + 1 and S̄e0 the corresponding share on the new BGP to
which the economy is converging. Since this employment share of entrants is given by
                ρ −1       ρ −1
Set+1 = xet ηe Zt /Zt+1 , we have

log Set+1 − log S̄0 e = log xet − log x̄ 0 e + (ρ − 1) log Zt − log Z̄t0 − (ρ − 1) log Zt+1 − log Z̄t0+1 .
                                                                                                      


Then, from this equation and equations (20), (22), (23), and (25), we have that

                                                                 Θ0G
   log Zt+1 − log Z̄t0+1 − log Zt − log Z̄ 0 t =                            log Set+1 − log S̄e0 . (30)
                                                                                               
                                                          1 − ( ρ − 1) Θ G
                                                                         0


This formula implies that transition paths of the share of employment in entry are related
in equilibrium to cumulative changes in aggregate productivity relative to its BGP initial
trend by

                                        Θ0G           t
                                                     ∑      log Sej+1 − log S̄e0 + t ḡ0 Z − ḡ Z . (31)
                                                                                                
  log Zt+1 − log Z0 − t ḡ Z =
                                  1 − (ρ − 1)Θ0G
                                                 
                                                     j =0


To apply this formula, one must specify a particular counterfactual change across BGPs
in policies or the economic environment that gives rise to a change in the BGP to which

                                                                                                     22
the economy then converges, with corresponding values of ḡ0Z , S̄e0 , and Θ0G . We illustrate
the use of this formula with specific counterfactual experiments in Section 6.


Impact of a change in population growth on aggregate productivity growth When we
consider a decline in the growth rate of population as a potential driving force behind the
decline in the rate of investment in entry, we make reference to the following result on the
impact of changes in the growth rate of population on the BGP growth rate of aggregate
productivity (proved in the appendix):

                               d ḡZ   Θ               1
                                      = G =                         .                              (32)
                               d ḡ L  ΘJ   (1 − φ ) + (1 − ψ ) Θ
                                                                ΘG
                                                                  H


We use equation (32) to compute a first-order approximation to the decline in the BGP
growth rate of aggregate productivity corresponding to a 1 percentage point drop in the
BGP population growth rate. For the first generation endogenous growth and the J/K/S
technologies, since they have ψ = 1, ΘG /Θ J = 1/(1 − φ). With φ = 0.96, the first
generation endogenous growth research technology implies a catastrophic decline in the
BGP growth rate of aggregate productivity. This is simply a reflection of the well -known
finding that this research technology in the limiting case of φ → 1 cannot accommodate
any growth in research labor on a BGP. With φ = −1.67, the J/K/S research technology
predicts a decline in productivity growth of −0.0037. With the second generation endoge-
nous growth technology for research, the decline in BGP productivity growth depends on
the specific values of ΘG and Θ H . From equation (32), and since Θ H
                                                                  ΘG does not depend on
                                               d ḡ
the research technology, it follows that d ḡZ is increasing in ψ for given φ. With the sec-
                                             L
ond generation endogenous growth technology, changes in the growth rate of population
have a smaller impact on aggregate productivity growth on the BGP because the growth
rate of the measure of products adjusts, as described in Ha and Howitt (2007).20


5       Counterfactual Experiments
We now consider counterfactual experiments that alter the BGP and compute the model-
implied transition path for aggregate variables in our economy. We first consider a uni-
form subsidy to innovation. We next consider a change in the equilibrium markup due to
changes in policies governing patents and intellectual property. In these first two coun-
terfactual experiments, the conditions for Corollary 1 are satisfied. We next consider a
    20 In
      the appendix, we report the transition path of the economy to a gradual decline in the growth rate
of population under the J/K/S and second generation endogenous growth research technologies.


                                                                                                     23
change in the corporate profits tax. In this experiment, the policy change results in a
change in the allocation of innovative investment on the new BGP relative to the alloca-
tion of this investment on the initial BGP to which the model is calibrated. Hence, in this
experiment, Corollary 1 does not apply. Instead, the equilibrium transitional dynamics of
the model are characterized by Proposition 1 applied on the new BGP.
    We calibrate all specifications of our model as described in greater detail in the ap-
pendix. We set the elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods in production to
ρ = 4. As discussed above, the elasticities ΘG and Θ H on the initial BGP can be identified
by calibrating our model to match data on firm dynamics. We consider two specifica-
tions of these parameters. In the first, we assume that there is no business stealing (i.e.,
δe = δm = 0). This specification is of interest because it delivers the maximum values
of ΘG and Θ H consistent with data on the shares of employment and products in enter-
ing firms. In our second specification, we set the business stealing parameters δe = δm
so that the contribution of entrants to aggregate productivity growth in equation (28) is
equal to that estimated in Akcigit and Kerr (2018). As described in our calibration sec-
tion in the online appendix, to calibrate the parameter A on the initial BGP, we measure
expenditures on innovation by incumbent firms using NIPA data and infer expenditures
on innovation by entering firms from equation (11). We consider the three specifications
of the technology for research described in Section 2. This gives us a total of six model
specifications to consider.


Uniform innovation subsidy We first consider the impact of a permanent increase in
innovation subsidies τc , τm, and τe which is uniform in the sense that it leaves the ratios
(1 − τc )/(1 − τe ) and (1 − τm )/(1 − τe ) unchanged. Note that equations (12), (13), (15),
and (16) which determine the BGP growth rate of J and the allocation of investment on
a BGP, are not altered by a uniform change in innovation subsidies. Thus, if we hold all
other parameters and policies fixed, we find that the new BGP has the same allocation
of innovative investment x̄c , x̄m , and x̄e and hence the same growth rates of aggregate
productivity and the measure of products. Thus, this experiment satisfies the conditions
in Corollary 1. In addition, the employment shares and fractions of products in entering
firms are also unchanged from the old to the new BGP.
    In contrast, on the new BGP, the economy has a higher innovation intensity of the
economy, measured as the ratio of expenditures on innovative investment relative to out-
put as a result of the subsidy. This innovation intensity of the economy on the new BGP
is found by solving for the new BGP level of p̄r . From equation (8), we find that the new
BGP has a higher fraction of labor allocated to research l¯r . We pick the increase in innova-


                                                                                           24
                                               P RODUCTIVITY         P RODUCTIVITY         Half-Life
        R ESEARCH T ECHNOLOGY                   AT 20 YEARS           AT 100 YEARS         IN YEARS
          F IRST G ENERATION EG
             no business stealing                    0.0557                0.2604             7561
           with business stealing                    0.0216                0.0980            20794
      JONES /K ORTUM /S EGERSTROM
             no business stealing                    0.0292                0.0374              110
           with business stealing                    0.0165                0.0354              287
        S ECOND G ENERATION EG
             no business stealing                    0.0112                0.0112              33
           with business stealing                    0.0053                0.0054              41

Table 1: Permanent 10% increase in research labor: 20- and 100-year response and half-life
of aggregate productivity

tion subsidies so that the allocation of labor to research increase by 10% in the new BGP
(i.e., log l¯r0 − log l¯r = 0.10).
    To calculate the dynamics of aggregate productivity using equation (27), we assume
for simplicity that the allocation of labor to research increases at t = 0 by 10% and stays at
this elevated level permanently.21 In Table 1, we report the level of aggregate productivity
relative to its prior trend at horizons of 20 and 100 years using equation (27). We also
report the half-life of a one-time impulse to aggregate productivity as determined by 1 −
Θ to illustrate the implied extent of intertemporal knowledge spillovers.
    To interpret these results, note that the (annualized) impact elasticity AΘG implied by
our data on firm dynamics and by our measurement of the share of innovative investment
undertaken by entering firms, is 0.0282 without business stealing and 0.0102 with busi-
ness stealing. Therefore, the response on impact of aggregate productivity growth at an
annual frequency relative to the initial BGP trend with respect to a reallocation of labor to
research of size log lr0 − log l¯r = 0.10 is 0.00282 (that is, aggregate productivity would be
0.28% percent higher after the first year) if there is no business stealing and 0.00102 with
business stealing. As discussed above, these implications of our model are independent
of the specification of the technology for research.
    In contrast, the specification of the research technologies as indexed by φ and ψ has a
  21 In the online appendix, we report the transition path of the economy to a uniform increase in innovation

subsidies, taking into account the transitional dynamics of the allocation of labor to research, rather than
assuming a once-and-for-all 10% increase. The responses of aggregate productivity at 20 and 100 years
along the equilibrium transition path are similar to those shown in our experiment in Table 1. That is,
consideration of the endogenous timing of the reallocation of labor to research induced by the subsidy does
not substantially alter the quantitative implications of the model for aggregate productivity. The responses
of aggregate output are smaller than the corresponding responses of aggregate productivity because the
amount of labor allocated to current production is permanently reduced.


                                                                                                          25
tremendous impact on the implications of the model for the persistence of any impulse
to aggregate productivity (which is determined by 1 − Θ). We see that for the first gen-
eration endogenous growth specification of the research technology, an impulse to the
growth rate of aggregate productivity from a permanent reallocation of labor to research
is essentially permanent. This implies that the cumulative response of aggregate produc-
tivity relative to its initial trend after 20 and 100 years is equal to 20 and 100 times the
response of aggregate productivity growth on impact, respectively. For the J/K/S and
second generation endogenous growth specifications of the research technology, this is
no longer the case. In these cases, because impulses to the growth rate of aggregate pro-
ductivity decay over time, the cumulative impact of a long-lasting reallocation of labor
to research on aggregate productivity does not grow linearly with the time horizon. As
discussed above, in our calibration, ΘG is substantially smaller than Θ H . As a result, the
persistence parameter 1 − Θ is substantially smaller with the second generation endoge-
nous growth research technology compared to the J\K\S research technology. Hence, our
model has dramatically different positive implications for the impact of a long-lasting re-
allocation of labor to research on the level of aggregate productivity relative to trend after
100 years, depending on the specification of the technology for research. As a quantitative
matter, these differences in the model’s positive implications for aggregate productivity
are much smaller at a 20-year horizon.


Welfare We now consider the normative implications of our model given a uniform
change in innovation subsidies that results in a reallocation of labor to research. The
direct effect of a reallocation of labor to research on welfare is negative as it results in a
reduction in current production labor and hence of current output. This reallocation of
labor to research results in a welfare gain to the extent that the discounted present value
of the impulse to aggregate productivity generated by this reallocation outweighs the
direct cost in terms of lost output. As we have seen from Corollary 1, the shape of this
impulse is determined by our two key sufficient statistics, the impact elasticity, AΘG , and
the persistence parameter, 1 − Θ.
    We can use this logic to compute the allocation of labor to research on the BGP of our
economy once the optimal uniform innovation subsidy has been put in place. If the econ-
omy is on a BGP corresponding to the constrained socially optimal uniform innovation
subsidy (i.e., the planner can make uniform changes to innovation subsidies but cannot
change the subsidy to entrants relative to incumbents), then a one-time policy-induced
perturbation to the fraction of labor allocated to research at t and the induced dynam-
ics of aggregate productivity as described in equation (27) should result in no change in


                                                                                           26
welfare; that is, the loss of current output arising from a reallocation of labor to research
should balance the gains from the resulting dynamic response of aggregate productivity.
In the appendix we show that the allocation of labor to production and research on the
BGP corresponding to the optimal uniform innovation subsidy is given by

                     l¯r∗                      exp (( ḡY − R̄))
                                 
                               1
                          =         AΘ G                               .                 (33)
                     l¯∗p     1−α        1 − exp (( ḡY − R̄)) (1 − Θ)

Note, again, the important role of our two key sufficient statistics, together with the elas-
ticity of aggregate output with respect to production labor 1 − α and the gap between the
interest rate and the growth rate in shaping the normative implications of our model.
    In Table 2, we present the consumption-equivalent welfare gain from the uniform in-
novation subsidies considered above. As anticipated by our previous discussion, these
normative implications of our model are highly sensitive to the specification of the tech-
nology for research because the model’s implications for the extent of intertemporal knowl-
edge spillovers 1 − Θ are highly sensitive to the specification of this technology.
    We see that the uniform increase in innovation subsidies considered here leads to a
significant increase in welfare in the specification of the model with the first generation
endogenous growth research technology, a more moderate increase in welfare with the
J/K/S research technology, and a decline in welfare with the second generation endoge-
nous growth research technology. This ranking of the welfare gain across models is sim-
ply a consequence of the ranking of the persistence parameter, 1 − Θ, implied by these
models since the impact elasticity, AΘG , is invariant to the research technology. These
different specifications of the research technology also lead to very different implications
for the constrained optimal allocation of labor to research on a BGP. For the first genera-
tion endogenous growth research technology, the BGP allocation of labor under the opti-
mal uniform innovation subsidy has half of the labor force or more engaged in research.
For the J/K/S technology, at least one-quarter of the labor force should be engaged in
research. For the second generation endogenous growth technology, the portion of the
labor force that should be engaged in research is roughly equal to or even less than the
current allocation of labor to research to which the model is calibrated.


Increase in the markup µ We now conduct a counterfactual experiment in which the
markup µ increases permanently due to a change in policy regarding the protection of
intellectual property. A permanent increase in the markup µ has qualitatively the same
effects as a uniform increase in innovation subsidies. This is because equations (12), (13),
(15), and (16), which determine the BGP growth rate of J and the allocation of investment

                                                                                          27
                                                C ONS . E QUIVALENT     Optimal
               R ESEARCH T ECHNOLOGY                 W ELFARE            l¯r∗ /l¯∗p
                F IRST G ENERATION EG
                   no business stealing                 1.230             2.407
                 with business stealing                 1.076             0.969
            JONES /K ORTUM /S EGERSTROM
                   no business stealing                 1.029             0.418
                 with business stealing                 1.019             0.332
              S ECOND G ENERATION EG
                   no business stealing                 0.999             0.141
                 with business stealing                 0.992             0.067

        Table 2: Welfare implications of uniform increase in innovation subsidies

on a BGP, are not altered by a uniform change in the markup. Thus, the new BGP has the
same allocation of innovative investment x̄c , x̄m , and x̄e as the initial BGP, and hence the
same growth rates of aggregate productivity and the measure of products. In addition,
firm dynamics as measured by employment shares and fractions of products in entering
firms are also unchanged from the old to the new BGP. So, Corollary 1 applies to this
counterfactual experiment.
    As was the case with a uniform increase in innovation subsidies, on the new BGP the
economy has a higher level of p̄r as a result of the increase in markups, which implies a
higher innovation intensity of the economy, measured as the ratio of expenditures on in-
novative investment relative to output and a higher fraction of labor allocated to research.
    We report the results from this experiment in the online appendix. We calibrate the in-
crease in markups so that the change in the allocation of labor to research from the initial
to the new BGP is the same as the change we considered with the uniform innovation sub-
sidies. These similar perturbations to the allocation of labor to research produce similar
responses of the level of aggregate productivity relative to its original trend at horizons
of 20 and 100 years. However, because markups are higher in this case, the response of
aggregate output at the 20- and 100-year horizons is smaller that is the case with uni-
form innovation subsidies since the increase in markups discourages the accumulation of
physical capital.


A reduction in corporate profits tax rate The impact of a permanent reduction in corpo-
rate profits tax rate τcorp depends upon the details of expensing of innovative investment
for tax purposes for incumbent firms and entering firms, as indexed by λ I and λ E . This is
true for two reasons. First, the extent of expensing alters the impact of a given change in


                                                                                           28
the corporate profits tax rate on the incentives to engage in innovative investment. Sec-
ond, differences in the ability of incumbent and entering firms to expense expenditures on
innovative investment mean that a given change in the tax rate alters the mix of incentives
for these different types of firms to engage in innovative investment.
    Consider first the case with equal expensing by both entrants and incumbents (i.e.,
λ I = λ E ). Here, as in the case with uniform innovation subsidies and the change in the
markup, the allocation of investment on the new BGP x̄c , x̄m , and x̄e and BGP growth
rates are not altered by a change in the corporate tax rate τcorp . In this case, the impact of
a reduction in the corporate tax rate on the innovation intensity of the economy depends
on the extent of expensing. If there is full expensing (i.e., λ I = λ E = 1), then a change
in the corporate profits tax rate leaves net-of-tax variables profits unchanged relative to
net-of-subsidy innovation costs, so p̄r , the innovation intensity of the economy, and the
share of labor in research do not change on the new BGP. Thus, all variables on the new
BGP are equal to what they were on the old BGP except that the economy accumulates
more physical capital if investment on physical capital is partially expensed. If there is
only partial expensing of innovative investments (i.e., λ I = λ E < 1), then a reduction
in the corporate profits tax rate raises net-of-tax variable profits relative to net-of-subsidy
innovation costs, which results in an increase in p̄r , in the innovation intensity of the
economy, and in the share of labor in research on the new BGP. As is the case with a
uniform innovation subsidy and the change in markup, the magnitude of the effect of
the corporate profits tax change on aggregate productivity is determined by the induced
change in the allocation of labor to research.
    Consider next the case in which the expensing of investment by entrants is less than
that for incumbents (i.e. λ I > λ E ). In this case, a change in the corporate profits tax rate
has an impact on the allocation of investment on the new BGP. This is because equations
(12) and (13) are altered by the change in τcorp . Specifically, under these assumptions, if the
corporate profits tax rate is reduced, the term (1 − τcorp λ I )/(1 − τcorp λ E ) rises. From these
equations, we see that a reduction in the tax rate leads to a fall in innovative investments
by incumbents x̄c and x̄m from the initial BGP to the new BGP, since the functions h and
ζ are strictly concave. Since the BGP growth rate of J is not altered by the tax change, this
implies an increase in investment by entrants x̄e from the initial BGP to the new BGP.
    This reallocation of investment implies that we cannot directly apply Corollary 1. In-
stead, we must compute the dynamics of J given in Proposition 1. In particular, the BGP
level of J (i.e., J̄0 ) is affected. Hence, from equation (25), for a given path of research labor,
the change in aggregate productivity relative to its initial trend, log Zt+1 − log Z0 − t ḡZ ,
can be higher or lower than what we found in the previous experiments in which Ȳr = Yr0 .


                                                                                                29
Note that in the case in which the research technology has ψ = 1, the BGP growth rate
of aggregate productivity ḡZ is unchanged by a change in corporate profits taxes. In
contrast, when ψ = 0, as is the case with the second generation endogenous growth tech-
nology for research, the BGP growth rate of aggregate productivity changes.
    We now illustrate some of these effects with a specific experiment, shown in Table 3.
We set the corporate profit tax rates τcorp as in Barro and Furman (2018) and assume that
incumbent firms can deduct all of their innovative investments (λ I = 1), while entering
firms cannot (λ E = 0) since they are not incorporated at the time of their investments.
Further details are given in the appendix. As we now discuss, the implications of the
model for the impact of the tax cut on aggregate productivity and welfare are highly
sensitive to the amount of business stealing and the specification of the technology for
research.
    Consider first the results under the first two research technologies (with ψ = 1), in
which case the growth rate of aggregate productivity is unchanged between BGPs. We
see in the top four rows of Table 3 that aggregate productivity relative to its initial BGP
trend rises when there is no business stealing and falls when there is business stealing.
This occurs even though the change in tax policy induces a similar reallocation of labor
to research across these model specifications.22 In the third specification of the research
technology (with ψ = 0), reported in the bottom two rows of Table 3, the BGP growth rate
of aggregate productivity falls on the new BGP. As a result, the reduction in aggregate
productivity (and welfare) can be very large at long-term horizons.23
    To this point, we have used Proposition 1 and its Corollary 1 to study quantitatively
the relationship in equilibrium between the transition path of the allocation of labor to
research (or equivalently, from equation (8), the research intensity of the economy) and
the transition path of aggregate productivity. In the next section, we use equation (31) to
study quantitatively the relationship in equilibrium between the transition path for entry
rates, as measured by the share of production labor employed in entering firms, and the
transition path for aggregate productivity.
  22 This finding is related to the results in Acemoglu and Cao (2015).
  23 Note  that our welfare results imply that the allocation of innovative investment is far from optimal,
especially under the second generation endogenous growth technology for research. Peretto (2007) also
discusses this impact of changes in corporate profits tax rates on the BGP growth rate of aggregate produc-
tivity in a model with a second generation endogenous growth research technology.




                                                                                                        30
                                       P RODUCTIVITY       P RODUCTIVITY      C ONS . E QUIV.
      R ESEARCH T ECHNOLOGY             AT 20 YEARS         AT 100 YEARS        W ELFARE
        F IRST G ENERATION EG
           no business stealing              0.053              0.265              1.193
         with business stealing              -0.023             -0.103             0.913
    JONES /K ORTUM /S EGERSTROM
           no business stealing              0.035              0.038              1.027
         with business stealing              -0.02              -0.03               0.97
      S ECOND G ENERATION EG
           no business stealing              -0.042             -0.315             0.732
         with business stealing              -0.056              -0.33             0.751

Table 3: Corporate profits tax experiment: 20- and 100-year response of aggregate pro-
ductivity and equivalent variation in consumption

6     Declining Entry Rates and Aggregate Productivity
The entry rate of new firms in the United States, measured as the share of employment in
new firms, has fallen dramatically over the past several decades. What are the implica-
tions of this decline in the entry rate for the evolution of aggregate productivity over these
past decades? To use our model to answer this question, one must take a stand on the na-
ture of the change in policies or the economic environment that has driven this decline
in the entry rate. In this section, we consider three alternative counterfactual changes
in policies or the economic environment that might account for the observed decline in
entry. For each counterfactual, we use the first-order approximation to the dynamics of
aggregate productivity developed in equation (31) to illustrate how different assumptions
regarding the technology for research and the driving force behind the decline in entry
lead to different conclusions regarding the associated evolution of aggregate productivity.
    Note that we can rewrite the term ∑tj=0 log Sej+1 − log S̄e0 in equation (31) as the sum
                                                                    

of ∑tj=0 log Sej+1 − log Se0 and (t + 1) (log Se0 − log S̄e0 ) . In each counterfactual exercise,
                              

we assume that the economy starts on the BGP corresponding to our baseline calibration
with a share of employment in entering firms of Se0 = 2.7%, and for illustrative purposes,
we assume that from period t = 0 to t = 19, this share falls so that ∑19          t=0 log Set+1 −
log S0 = −5. A fall in entry of this magnitude corresponds to a decline in the share of
employment in entrants on an annual basis from 2.7% to 1.64% occurring in equal log
steps over 20 years (so −5 = 20  2 (log 0.0164 − log 0.027)).
    In our first counterfactual exercise, we assume that the decline in entry is driven by
a decrease in innovation subsidies that is uniform in the sense that (1 − τc )/(1 − τe ) and
(1 − τm )/(1 − τe ) are unchanged across the initial and new BGPs. As we showed above,

                                                                                                31
such a decrease in innovation subsidies lowers the long-run innovation intensity of the
economy and the long-run level of aggregate productivity, but it leaves BGP levels of in-
vestment x̄c0 , x̄m
                  0 , and x̄ 0 unchanged. This implies that the entry share S̄0 and growth rate of
                             e                                                e
                                0
aggregate productivity ḡZ are also unchanged. That is, in this counterfactual exercise, the
decline in the entry share and the growth rate of aggregate productivity is a temporary,
transitional phenomenon.
    In our second counterfactual exercise, we assume that the decline in entry is driven by
a decrease in innovation subsidies for entry, with subsidies for innovative investment by
incumbents left unchanged. Such a change in policies has effects similar to our corporate
profits tax experiment above in that it leads to a reallocation of innovative investment
from the initial to the new BGP, with investment in entry falling permanently relative to
investment by incumbents. In this experiment, we choose the decline in entry subsidies
so that the entry share on the new BGP, S̄e0 , falls from 2.7% to 1.64% (log Se0 − log S̄e0 = 0.5).
In this experiment, as in the corporate profits tax experiment above, the growth rate of
the aggregate productivity on the new BGP, ḡ0Z , is equal to that on the initial BGP if one
uses the first generation endogenous growth research technology or the J/K/S research
technology and differs from that on the initial BGP if one uses the second generation
endogenous growth research technology.
    In our third counterfactual exercise, we assume that the decline in entry is driven by
a decline in the BGP growth rate of population, ḡ0L , chosen in each specification so that
the entry rate on the new BGP is S̄e0 = 1.64%. Here, the decline in the population growth
rate results in both a decline in the new BGP growth rate of aggregate productivity (as
described in equation (32)) and a reduction in investment in entry with little or no change
in innovative investment by incumbent firms.24
    We report results from these three experiments in Table 4 in the specifications of the
model with business stealing. We report results for the model without business stealing
in the appendix. For each experiment and each specification of the research technology,
we report the inputs Θ0G , log S̄e0 − log S0 , and ḡ0Z − ḡZ needed to implement the formula in
equation (31) for the model-implied cumulative change in aggregate productivity relative
to initial trend over the first 20 years of transition, log Z20 − log Z0 − 20 ḡZ , associated with
the decline in the entry rate specified above.
    We draw three lessons from the results in Table 4. First, if the decline in the employ-
ment share of new firms is the result of a decline in innovative investment by entrants
  24 Forthis experiment, we do not report results for the first generation endogenous growth research tech-
nology since this specification implies that changes in population growth are associated with implausibly
large changes in aggregate productivity growth (see equation 32).



                                                                                                        32
 E XPERIMENT                R ESEARCH T ECH .     Θ0G    log S̄e0 /Se0   ḡ0 Z − ḡ Z   logZ20 /Z0 − 20 ḡZ
 U NIFORM I NNOVATION TAX   F IRST G EN . EG     0.003        0                0             -0.0176
                            J/K/S                0.003        0                0             -0.0176
                            S ECOND G EN . EG    0.003        0                0             -0.0176
 E NTRY TAX                 F IRST G EN . EG    0.0021      -0.5               0             0.0106
                            J/K/S               0.0021      -0.5               0             0.0106
                            S ECOND G EN . EG   0.0021      -0.5           0.0256            0.5316
 D ECLINE IN P OP.G ROWTH   F IRST G EN . EG       -           -               -                 -
                            J/K/S               0.0021      -0.5          -0.0014            -0.0168
                            S ECOND G EN . EG   0.0021      -0.5          -0.0014            -0.0168

  Table 4: Reduction in firm entry and aggregate productivity: with business stealing

with no change in innovative investment by incumbents, as in our first experiment with
a uniform tax on innovative investment, then the predicted decline in aggregate produc-
tivity over a 20 year horizon is relatively small (less than 2% with business stealing and
less than 5% without business stealing, as reported in the appendix).
    Second, if the decline in the employment share of new firms is the result of a realloca-
tion of innovative investment, decreasing investment by entrants and raising innovative
investment by incumbents, as in our second experiment with a tax on innovative invest-
ment by entrants, then the model predicts an increase in aggregate productivity over a 20
year horizon. This predicted increase is small if the long run growth rate is unchanged
as with the J/K/S research technology. This predicted increase can be extremely large
if the long run growth rate changes as with the Second Generation Endogenous Growth
technology for research. The intuition for this result is as follows. At the new levels of
innovative investment for incumbents and entrants induced by the entry tax, the econ-
omy can sustain the same or even higher BGP growth rate of aggregate productivity with
a much smaller share of employment in entering firms. In our second experiment, the
employment share of entrants in the 20 years of the transition is higher than the new BGP
share of employment. Thus, since our model predicts that innovative investment by in-
cumbents rises immediately to its new BGP level with the imposition of the entry tax,
it also predicts that productivity should grow faster than its BGP growth rate as long as
observed entry in the transition is above the new BGP level of entry.
    Third, if the decline in the employment share of new firms is the result of a decline
in the population growth rate, then the model’s prediction for the response of aggregate
productivity over 20 years is the sum of two separate effects, one negative and one posi-
tive. For the two technologies for research that we consider, a reduction in the population




                                                                                                  33
growth rate reduces the BGP growth rate of productivity.25 If the economy adjusts to its
new BGP growth rate immediately (by having the entry rate drop immediately to the new
BGP employment share in entering firms), then the decline in aggregate productivity at
20 years should be 20 times the reduction in the BGP growth rate of productivity. But, to
the extent that the employment share of entrants is above its BGP level during the first
20 years of the transition, then, as in our entry tax experiment, the model predicts an
offsetting positive impact of entry on productivity during the transition to the new BGP.


7      Conclusion
In this paper, we have shown how to characterize the transitional dynamics for aggregate
productivity associated with policy-induced transition paths for the allocation of labor to
research and entry rates of new firms implied by a variety of models of firms’ investments
in innovation. We have shown that when the change in policy leading to the transition has
a uniform impact on incentives for innovative investment by both entering and incum-
bent firms, these transitional dynamics can be characterized in terms of two sufficient
statistics: the impact elasticity of aggregate productivity with respect to a change in the
allocation of labor to research or a change in entry, and the persistence of the response of
aggregate productivity to that impulse. We have shown how the normative implications
of these models for uniform innovation subsidies are also determined by these two suffi-
cient statistics. We have shown how to discipline the first of these sufficient statistics, the
impact elasticity, using data on firm dynamics and model-based inference of the share of
innovative investment undertaken by entering firms. We have discussed the challenge of
disciplining the second of these sufficient statistics due to uncertainty regarding the na-
ture and magnitude of intertemporal knowledge spillovers in research. Finally, we have
considered policy experiments for which the transitional dynamics depend on additional
model details beyond our two sufficient statistics because these policy changes lead to a
reallocation of innovative investment between incumbent and entering firms.
    What have we learned from our model about the transitional dynamics of aggregate
productivity in response to changes in policies and the associated welfare implications of
those changes in policies? We offer three conclusions from our analysis.
    25 Note
          that our finding that a decline in entry rates driven by a change in the growth rate of population
has the same impact on aggregate productivity growth under the J/K/S and second generation endoge-
nous growth specifications is driven by our assumption that the change in the population growth rate is
endogenously chosen to match a given decline in the entry rate on the new BGP. From equation (32), we
see that the impact of a given change in the population growth rate on BGP growth rates of aggregate
productivity is sensitive to the specification of the technology for research.


                                                                                                         34
    First, for policy changes or other changes in the economic environment that have a
uniform impact on the incentives of incumbent and entering firms to invest in innova-
tion, the short- and medium-term (up to 20-year) impacts on aggregate productivity of
such policy changes are likely to be modest. We see this in the first column of Table 1,
which reports the change in aggregate productivity over a 20-year horizon from a sub-
stantial and permanent reallocation of labor to research (or, equivalently, an increase in
the innovation intensity of the economy). Likewise, as reported in the uniform innova-
tion tax experiment in Table 4, large declines in firm entry rates do not have a substantial
impact on aggregate productivity over a 20 year period if they have been induced by
policies that have a uniform impact on innovation incentives.
    Second, the quantitative implications of current models for the long-run and welfare
impacts of policies that have a uniform impact on the incentives to invest are highly un-
certain — as indicated in Table 1 for the response of aggregate productivity at a horizon
of 100 years and for welfare in Table 2. This is because there is considerable uncertainty
about the extent of intertemporal knowledge spillovers in the production of the research
good. Thus, it is difficult to come to firm conclusions about the normative implications
of our model for innovation policies absent further progress in measuring intertemporal
knowledge spillovers in research.
    Third, there is also a great deal of uncertainty regarding the impact of changes in
policies or the economic environment that induce, in the long run, increased investment
in entry relative to investment by incumbents. As we see in Table 3, with either of our
first two specifications of the technology for research, a cut in corporate tax rates that
reallocates innovative investment toward entry due to differences in expensing of that in-
vestment may raise or lower aggregate productivity depending on the extent of business
stealing. With the second generation endogenous growth specification of the technol-
ogy for research, the negative spillovers from product creation through entry on research
productivity are so large that they imply that such a cut in the corporate profits tax rate
would, by stimulating entry, have a devastating negative impact on aggregate productiv-
ity and welfare. Likewise, in Table 4, we see that with this technology for research, an
entry tax that permanently reduces the entry rate has a large beneficial impact on aggre-
gate productivity.
    In order to obtain sufficient aggregation to allow for analytically tractable transitional
dynamics, our model abstracts from some of the richness in recently developed models of
innovative investment with heterogeneous firms, including those in Lentz and Mortensen
(2008), Luttmer (2011), Lentz and Mortensen (2016), Peters (2016), Acemoglu et al. (2018),
and Akcigit and Kerr (2018). These models feature additional forces regarding the effi-


                                                                                           35
ciency of the allocation of innovative investment across firms beyond those that we con-
sider in our model. One important challenge for future research in this area is to find
reliable metrics for evaluating the positive implications of these richer models for the
transitional dynamics of aggregate productivity and the normative implications of these
models for which types of firms should be doing relatively more innovative investment
and which types of firms should be doing less.


References
Acemoglu, Daron, Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton University Press, 2009.

   and Dan Cao, “Innovation by Entrants and Incumbents,” Journal of Economic Theory, May 2015, 157 (C),
  255–294.

  , Ufuk Akcigit, Harun Alp, Nicholas Bloom, and William Kerr, “Innovation, Reallocation, and
  Growth,” American Economic Review, November 2018, 108 (11), 3450–91.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction,” Econometrica,
  March 1992, 60 (2), 323–351.

  , Ufuk Akcigit, and Peter Howitt, “What Do We Learn From Schumpeterian Growth Theory?,” in
  Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 2, pp. 515-563, Elsevier,
  2014.

  ,   , and   , “The Schumpeterian Growth Paradigm,” Annual Review of Economics, August 2015, 7 (1),
  557–575.

Akcigit, Ufuk, “Economic Growth: The Past, the Present, and the Future,” Journal of Political Economy,
  December 2017, 125 (6), 1736–1747.

   and William R. Kerr, “Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations,” Journal of Political Economy, 2018,
  126 (4), 1374–1443.

  , Douglas Hanley, and Nicolas Serrano-Velarde, “Back to Basics: Basic Research Spillovers, Innovation
  Policy and Growth,” Working Paper 19473, National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2013.

Alon, Titan, David Berger, Robert Dent, and Benjamin Pugsley, “Older and Slower: The Startup Deficit’s
  Lasting Effects on Aggregate Productivity Growth,” Working Paper 23875, National Bureau of Economic
  Research September 2017.

Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, “Aggregate Implications of Innovation Policy,” Staff Report 459,
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 2018.

   and Ariel Tomas Burstein, “Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and International Trade,” Journal of Political
  Economy, June 2010, 118 (3), 433–484.



                                                                                                    36
Barro, Robert J. and Jason Furman, “The Macroeconomic Effects of the 2017 Tax Reform,” Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity, Spring 2018, 49 (1), 257–345.

Bloom, Nicholas, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb, “Are Ideas Getting Harder to
  Find?,” Working Paper 23782, National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2017.

Comin, Diego and Mark Gertler, “Medium-Term Business Cycles,” American Economic Review, June 2006,
  96 (3), 523–551.

Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, “Intangible Capital and U.S. Economic Growth,” Re-
  view of Income and Wealth, September 2009, 55 (3), 661–685.

  , Peter Goodridge, and Jonathan Haskel, “Constructing a Price Deflator for R&D: Calculating the Price
  of Knowledge Investments as a Residual,” Technical Report 11-03, The Conference Board, Economics
  Program, October 2011.

Cullen, Julie Berry and Roger Gordon, “Tax Reform and Entrepreneurial Activity,” Tax Policy and the Econ-
  omy, 2006, 20, 41–71.

De Loecker, Jan and Jan Eeckhout, “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic Implications,”
  Working Paper 23687, National Bureau of Economic Research August 2017.

Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “The Role of Entrepreneurship in US
  Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2014, 28 (3), 3–24.

Dinopoulos, Elias and Peter Thompson, “Schumpeterian Growth without Scale Effects,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Growth, December 1998, 3 (4), 313–335.

Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Yi Xu, “How Costly Are Markups?,” Working Paper 24800,
  National Bureau of Economic Research July 2018.

Fernald, John G. and Charles I. Jones, “The Future of US Economic Growth,” American Economic Review,
  May 2014, 104 (5), 44–49.

Ferraro, Domenico, Soroush Ghazi, and Pietro Peretto, “Implications of Tax Policy for Innovation and
  Aggregate Productivity Growth,” April 2017.

Garcia-Macia, Daniel, Pete Klenow, and Chang-Tai Hsieh, “How Destructive is Innovation?,” Working
  Paper 22953, National Bureau of Economic Research, December 2016.

Gentry, William M. and R. Glenn Hubbard, “"Success Taxes," Entrepreneurial Entry, and Innovation,”
  Innovation Policy and the Economy, 2005, 5, 87–108.

Giroud, Xavier and Joshua Rauh, “State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity: Evidence from
  Establishment-Level Data,” Working Paper 21534, National Bureau of Economic Research September
  2015.

Griliches, Zvi, “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to Productivity
  Growth,” Bell Journal of Economics, Spring 1979, 10 (1), 92–116.


                                                                                                      37
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, MIT Press, 1991.

Ha, Joonkyung and Peter Howitt, “Accounting for Trends in Productivity and R&D: A Schumpeterian
  Critique of Semi-Endogenous Growth Theory,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, June 2007, 39 (4),
  733–774.

Howitt, Peter, “Steady Endogenous Growth with Population and R&D Inputs Growing,” Journal of Political
  Economy, August 1999, 107 (4), 715–730.

Jaimovich, Nir and Sergio Rebelo, “Nonlinear Effects of Taxation on Growth,” Journal of Political Economy,
   February 2017, 125 (1), 265–291.

Jones, Charles I., “Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas,” American Economic Review, March
  2002, 92 (1), 220–239.

  , “Growth and Ideas,” in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth,
  Vol. 1, pp. 1063-1111, Elsevier, 2005.

Karahan, Fatih, Benjamin Pugsley, and Aysegul Sahin, “Demographic Origins of the Startup Deficit,” in
  “Technical Report,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2016.

Klette, Tor Jakob and Samuel Kortum, “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,” Journal of Political
  Economy, October 2004, 112 (5), 986–1018.

Kortum, Samuel S., “Research, Patenting, and Technological Change,” Econometrica, November 1997, 65
  (6), 1389–1420.

Lentz, Rasmus and Dale T. Mortensen, “An Empirical Model of Growth Through Product Innovation,”
  Econometrica, November 2008, 76 (6), 1317–1373.

  and     , “Optimal Growth Through Product Innovation,” Review of Economic Dynamics, January 2016, 19,
  4–19.

Luttmer, Erzo G. J., “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  August 2007, 122 (3), 1103–1144.

  , “On the Mechanics of Firm Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 2011, 78 (3), 1042–1068.

McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott, “Taxes, Regulations, and the Value of U.S. and U.K. Corpo-
 rations,” Review of Economic Studies, July 2005, 3 (72), 757–796.

Nobel Committee, “Economic Growth, Technological Change, and Climate Change: Scientific Background
  on the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2018,” Technical Report,
  The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences October 2018.

Peretto, Pietro F., “Technological Change and Population Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth, December
  1998, 3 (4), 283–311.




                                                                                                          38
  , “Corporate Taxes, Growth and Welfare in a Schumpeterian Economy,” Journal of Economic Theory,
  November 2007, 137 (1), 353–382.

Peters, Michael, “Heterogeneous Markups, Growth and Endogenous Misallocation,” Unpublished Paper,
  Yale University 2016.

Segerstrom, Paul S., “Endogenous Growth without Scale Effects,” American Economic Review, December
  1998, 88 (5), 1290–1310.

Young, Alwyn, “Growth without Scale Effects,” Journal of Political Economy, February 1998, 106 (1), 41–63.




                                                                                                        39
