NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTMENT RETURNS AND DISTRIBUTION POLICIES OF
NON-PROFIT ENDOWMENT FUNDS
Sandeep Dahiya
David Yermack
Working Paper 25323
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25323

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018, Revised May 2019

For helpful comments we thank Turan Bali, Jeff Busse, Kent Daniel, Edwin Elton, Wayne
Ferson, Mark Flannery, Martin Gruber, Jay Ritter, Michael Ryngaert, Jialan Wang (conference
discussant), Quan Wen, and seminar participants at the 2019 American Finance Association
annual meeting, the 2019 Q-Group conference, American University, University of Delaware,
Erasmus University Rotterdam, University of Florida, Georgetown University, New York
University, and the University of Western Australia. Research assistance by Rainier Go and
Pranav Marupudi is greatly appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Sandeep Dahiya and David Yermack. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Investment Returns and Distribution Policies of Non-Profit Endowment Funds
Sandeep Dahiya and David Yermack
NBER Working Paper No. 25323
December 2018, Revised May 2019
JEL No. G11,G35,L31
ABSTRACT
We present the first estimates of investment returns and distribution rates for U.S. non-profit
endowment funds, based on a comprehensive sample of 29,762 organizations drawn from
Internal Revenue Service filings for 2009-2017. Non-profit endowments badly underperform
market benchmarks, with median annual returns 4.46 percentage points below a 60-40 mix of
U.S. equity and Treasury bond indexes, and statistically significant alphas of -1.10% per year.
Smaller endowments have less negative alphas than larger endowments, but all size classes
significantly underperform. Higher education endowments, the majority of the $0.7 trillion asset
class, do significantly worse than funds in other sectors. Distribution ratios are conservative, well
below the funds’ long-run returns. Donors increase contributions when endowment returns are
strong, with an elasticity of about 0.18 between net-of-market investment returns and new
donations.

Sandeep Dahiya
McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
Sandeep.Dahiya@georgetown.edu
David Yermack
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
dyermack@stern.nyu.edu

Investment Returns and Distribution Policies
of Non-Profit Endowment Funds

I. Introduction
Endowment funds are repositories for gifts and operating surpluses generated by nonprofit organizations. Often described by their parent organizations as “nest eggs” or “rainy day
funds,” endowments invest in stocks, bonds, and alternative asset classes such as hedge funds
and private equity, and they pay income to their parents to subsidize operating costs and capital
expenditures. In recent decades, many endowments have grown rapidly due to an influx of gifts
as well as riskier investment policies that have increased their returns. Probably the best-known
example is Yale University, which in 2018 reported having grown to $29.4 billion with an
annualized return of 11.8% per year over the prior 20 years.1 The exponential growth of Yale’s
and other high-profile universities’ endowments has led to scrutiny of the objective functions of
their parent organizations2 and, as of 2018, a new 1.4% federal income tax on a portion of their
profits.
Yet little is known about the overall size, performance, and use of endowments in the
non-profit sector. The small number of papers on endowment returns have typically focused
1

https://news.yale.edu/2018/10/01/investment-return-123-brings-yale-endowment-value-294-billion. The same
source indicated that annual endowment distributions currently represent more than one-third of Yale’s net revenue,
indicating the vital role its endowment plays in supporting the university’s operating and capital budgets.

2

“There is an old joke that describes Harvard as a $37 billion hedge fund with a university attached.” Barry
Ritholtz, “The Day Harvard Stopped Being a Hedge Fund,” Bloomberg View, January 26, 2017.

1

only on funds that support major universities. These studies all rely on self-reported information
from voluntary samples that take no account of selection bias or survivorship bias. The best
known study, Lerner, Schoar and Wang (2008), uses annual data from the National Association
of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO) and studies an opt-in sample that
increased from 533 schools in 1993 to 726 in 2005 (the NACUBO sample had 809 schools in
2017 and 802 in 2018). The NACUBO source is also used by Brown, Garlappi and Tiu (2007).
Cejnek, Franz, Randl and Stoughton (2014) provide a literature review of the extensive academic
and trade research into the university endowment sector, which seems to have crowded all other
non-profit endowment research to the sidelines.
This paper presents a comprehensive survey of endowment returns and distribution
policies for the period 2009-2017 in all U.S. non-profit sectors. We use data provided by nonprofit organizations in annual Form 990 filings with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and our
extraction of data from these filings yields a sample of 189,842 annual endowment observations
reported by 29,762 organizations in all non-profit sectors. To our knowledge, the only other
paper to use this IRS data up to now is Yermack’s (2017) study of a much smaller sample of 120
major art museums. Within the universe of non-profits, colleges and universities account for 6%
of the observations and 54% of the assets, and one of our conclusions is that they are not
particularly representative. In our study, the subclass of higher education institutions
significantly under-performs the community of other non-profit endowments that support
organizations in diverse areas such as the arts, human services, health care, and religion, among
others, and the disappointing returns reported by educational institutions to the IRS appear to
belie those touted in commercial surveys that have made their way into the press and academic
papers.

2

Overall the funds in our study earn negative abnormal investment returns. The median
annual investment return for endowments is 4.78% between 2009-2017. Weighting our
observations by the time periods in which they occur, the benchmark returns on ten-year
Treasury bonds are 4.08% per year and the equity market index returns 12.68% per year over the
same measurement periods. In other words, the typical endowment fund under-performs a 60-40
combination of the equity and Treasury bond market indexes by about 4.46 percentage points
annually. On a risk-adjusted basis, we use the standard Fama-French-Carhart four factor model
to estimate alphas of -1.10% for our entire sample, statistically significantly below the 1% level,
with the lowest alpha estimates applying to the largest size cohorts.
These poor investment results largely agree with those for other investor classes, which
typically exhibit zero or negative alpha estimates in standard performance attribution regression
models. See, e.g., the well known research into mutual funds by Fama and French (2010),
individual investors by Barber and Odean (2000), hedge funds by Brown, Goetzmann, and
Ibbotson (1999), and private equity by Franzoni, Nowak, and Phalippou (2012), among many
other performance measurement studies.
We study the distribution policies of non-profit endowments to their parent organizations,
which resemble the shareholder dividend policies that are an important research topic in
corporate finance. We find that most endowments have conservative distribution policies that
imply payouts below their long-run expected returns, and well below the actual returns realized
during the sample period for our study. These cautious distribution policies would tend to cause
endowments to grow without limit over time. The smallest endowment funds make no payouts
at all in most years, implying that organizations seek to grow them to a critical mass before
tapping them as a permanent funding source. For the very largest endowments, those with asset

3

values above $100 million, distributions occur almost every year, with mean and median
distribution rates near 4.5%, which appears to have become a heuristic that enjoys wide
acceptance in the non-profit sector without much theoretical justification.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a description of
the dataset. Section III analyzes endowment funds’ investment returns, and Section IV analyzes
their distribution policies. Section V studies whether donations to the parent organization
respond positively to good investment returns in the endowment. Section VI concludes the
paper.

II. Data description
Our data come from Form 990, a document filed annually with the IRS by most nonprofit operating organizations in the U.S. Since 2008, Part V of Schedule D for Form 990 has
required those organizations with endowment funds to provide annual data including the fund
balance at the beginning of the year, contributions, distributions, administrative expenses, and
net investment earnings. These data are a matter of public record, but obtaining them for a large
sample of organizations has been impractical up to now, because online databases of information
from Form 990 filings such as Guidestar have all omitted coverage of this schedule.
We use Form 990 data that has been posted by the IRS since 2016 on Amazon Web
Services (AWS) as a result of a lawsuit filed by Carl Malamud, an advocate for transparency in
the nonprofit sector.3 The website hosts annual schema of all electronic Form 990 filings

3

The data are downloadable by the public from https://aws.amazon.com/public-datasets/irs-990/, although we found
that considerable effort is required to parse the files, extract the relevant variables, and clean the data before it is
suitable for large-sample research. A description of Malamud’s successful federal lawsuit to compel the IRS to
disclose the data in this way can be found at https://sunlightfoundation.com/2016/06/16/irs-opens-up-form-990-dataushering-nonprofit-sector-into-the-age-of-transparency/.

4

beginning in 2011. The electronic filing requirements, which have been phased in gradually
since 2006, today cover all but the smallest public charities. We believe our sample, especially
in the most recent years, covers substantially all of the endowment assets in the United States,
since smaller organizations are far less likely than larger ones to maintain endowments.
However, a major exception occurs for religious organizations, which generally do not file
financial disclosure forms with government regulators due to the constitutional principle of
separation of church and state.4
We create our sample by downloading all available data on the AWS website, which has
almost 1.5 million organization-year observations. Most of these charities are too small to have
permanent endowments, and almost 1.3 million of the filings have the Schedule D, Part V data
for endowments left blank. Among the remaining observations, we drop all filings where the
beginning balance or ending balance are blank or reported as zero or negative; most of these
observations probably represent partial years in which charities either create or liquidate their
endowment funds. We also drop about 28,000 observations for which the investment gains/loss
data item is blank or zero and the beginning and ending endowment values are identical. These
are likely cases in which an endowment holds only illiquid assets, such as real estate or nonpublic company stock, that are not marked-to-market each year. For purposes of reporting our
results in calendar time, we assign each filing to the calendar year that includes the final month

4

It is not clear how large religious organizations’ endowment funds might be, but it is possible they are much
smaller than those in sectors such as higher education. The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, surely one
of the wealthiest religious non-profits in the U.S., voluntarily publishes excerpts form audited financial reports each
year on its website at https://archny.org/financial-reports. For the most recent period ended August 31, 2017, the
Archdiocese reported unrestricted net assets (presumably subsuming its several endowment funds) of $138 million
and additional restricted net assets of $124 million. These totals are orders of magnitude below the fund balances
held by major research universities. The most significant wealth of religious organizations may be held in real estate
and fine art rather than financial investments. Endowment assets may also be held by individual parishes and not
consolidated into the balance sheets of central administrative entities.

5

of its chosen fiscal year, and we collect all annual data for organizations with reporting periods
ending up to December 31, 2017.5
We cull out duplicate observations in which the same endowment fund is reported
multiple times. In the most common situation, two or more legally separate entities with
different employer identification numbers (EINs) may report data for the same endowment fund,
which is apparent due to identical entries in all cells of the Schedule D, Part V. For a large
number of such observations, the organizations have such close names or descriptions that their
connection is obvious, but other cases would not be apparent without research.6 In all these
cases of seemingly duplicate endowment data, we retain only one observation, using data for the
filing organization that reports the largest amount for Total Revenues for the filing year. This
choice seems appropriate since it is not unusual for endowments to be held by satellite entities,
such as trusts or foundations, with no revenue of their own, while providing support to operating
entities, such as universities or museums, that use the endowment distributions alongside other
revenue sources. Dropping these duplicates reduces the sample size by 3,686 charity-year
observations. A second data problem arises when one organization makes duplicate or amended
filings on the AWS database, which we can identify from the organization’s EIN. In these cases,
the later filings typically correct reporting errors or inconsistencies. We create an adding up
identity, in which the end-of-year endowment balance should equal the starting balance, plus
5

Unlike for-profit companies that tend to have fiscal years coinciding with the calendar and ending in December,
the most common fiscal year-end for non-profits is June 30, which is used by 42% of all observations in the sample.
An additional 38% have December fiscal years, and the other 20% are scattered among the remaining 10 calendar
months.
6

For example, the connection between Concordia University Wisconsin (EIN 390833608) and Concordia
University Wisconsin Foundation (EIN 396077337) is immediately obvious, while the link between Indiana State
University Foundation Inc. (EIN 356045550) and Sycamore Foundation Holdings Inc. (EIN 263673809) requires
some research to validate. Some of the filing duplications are extensive, such as those for ServiceSource, an
organization that provides employment opportunities for people with disabilities and has a single endowment fund
that is reported on the IRS filings of 11 separate affiliate organizations.

6

additions, plus investment gains (or losses), less distributions, and less fees if reported
separately. In cases of multiple filings with different values for the same entity, we retain the
one with the least deviation from this identity.
Schedule D, Part V includes space for organizations to report up to four years of
historical endowment data alongside the current year, and we download this historical
information when available, increasing our sample size by almost one-third. In 499 cases, this
retroactive data includes also includes corrections with respect to prior years, which we are able
to use to fix observations that had inconsistent or incomplete data when originally filed.
We edit or exclude a small number of observations that have further data problems. In
some cases, organizations report financial data with the wrong sign. For the relatively small
minority (4.2%) of observations that do not exhibit an exact adding-up constraint as described
above, we change data entries with a negative value to a positive one if doing so will resolve the
discrepancy. We drop all remaining observations for which the discrepancy is more than de
minimus.7 Finally, we drop the top and bottom 0.1% of observations for annual investment
return, as calculated by our method described below, reducing our sample size by a total of 380,
and 75 observations that have irregular annual reporting periods that include fewer than 360 or
more than 370 days. We obtain a final sample of 189,842 annual observations for 29,762 filers,
with up to nine annual observations for each of them between 2009-17.
Table 1 shows that the sample sizes gradually increase up to 2013 and then level off at
around 23,300 endowments per year. The growth in annual observations likely occurs due to the
gradual adoption of electronic filing by organizations during the sample period. The shortfall in

7

We calculate the difference between the end-of-year fund balance and the sum total of beginning balance, plus
contributions, plus net investment gains, minus distributions, minus any reported expenses. We then divide this
difference by the start-of-year balance plus 50% of contributions. If the discrepancy is below 1%, we retain the
observation (4,613 cases), and if it exceeds 1%, we drop it (3,232 cases).

7

observations for 2017 compared to 2013-16 is due to the long filing deadlines permitted for some
organizations and follow-on delays for the IRS to digitize and post individual returns. As filings
are added by the IRS in the future, we expect the number of available 2017 observations to equal
or exceed those for prior years, and a small number of additional observations may emerge for
prior years for organizations that file their disclosures very late. In all, we have data for 29,762
unique filing organizations, and the annual sample size peaks at 23,335 in 2015.
Our analysis focuses on the rates of return earned by endowment funds. As reported to
the IRS, investment returns are based on dividends, interest, and capital appreciation of the
fund’s assets rather than only realized gains. An organization can either include its expenses as
part of a report of Net Investment Earnings on Line 1c of this schedule, or it can report Gross
Investment Earnings on Line 1c while listing Administrative Expenses separately on Line 1f.
For the minority of organizations that follow the latter practice, we calculate net investment
earnings by subtracting any value reported on Line 1f from Line 1c. We then calculate the
annual investment return by taking the ratio of net investment earnings over the sum of start-ofyear assets plus one-half of contributions. Contributions generally include bequests, gifts, and
other funds deposited into endowments, and our calculation implicitly assumes that the typical
contribution is received halfway through the fiscal year and that any distributions from the fund
do not occur until year-end. We test the importance of these timing assumptions in sensitivity
analysis reported below, and we find that they have no material effect on our results.
Due to these limitations of the available data, our calculations of investment performance
lack the precision of measures such as the time-weighted returns commonly used to evaluate
professional asset managers. A further limitation to our analysis arises from the absence of
information about asset allocation, which is not a mandatory disclosure on the IRS Form 990,

8

although for some organizations it can be obtained through a careful reading of certain schedules
and appendices (these tend to present the data in narrative form, so that downloading a large
sample is impractical). Ideally we would also like to have more data about the oversight and
governance of each endowment, including whether the organization delegates authority to an
outside investment manager, but Form 990 does not require this information either.
Table 1 presents further detail about the distribution of endowment assets by year and by
industry sector. Aggregate U.S. endowment assets appear to have surpassed $700 billion as of
2016, and slightly more than half of this total is held by colleges and universities in the higher
education sector, with the next largest holdings in the “Education (other)” sector that includes
private secondary schools. Organizations with their main operations in the arts, hospitals, other
healthcare sectors, social services, and other “Public and Social Benefit” areas account for most
of the rest of the endowment funds. As shown in the table, several hundred religious
organizations also file disclosures even though many could avail themselves of reporting
exemptions.
Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the sample. The table shows endowment data
for the sample of 189,842 observations alongside basic financial data for 145,651 fiscal years of
their parent organizations. We have significantly more observations for annual endowment
performance due to the availability of up to four years of historical performance data for
endowment funds on Schedule D, Part V, as noted above. The typical endowment size is quite
small, with a mean of $27.5 million and median of $1.2 million, but the largest funds run into the
tens of billions, with a maximum value of $36.4 billion (Harvard University, 2016). Outside the
education sector, the largest funds are the MasterCard Foundation ($9.4 billion as of 2017) and
the Shriners Hospitals for Children ($7.3 billion as of 2014). The median annual net investment

9

return, calculated according to our method, is 4.78%, and the median distribution ratio is lower,
2.37%.

III. Investment returns
This section presents our analysis of investment returns. Subsection III.A includes some
basic overview statistics and comparisons with equity and debt market benchmarks. Subsection
III.B uses the Fama-French four-factor model to estimate the risk-adjusted abnormal returns for
endowment funds, and we analyze these results in size cohorts. Subsection III.C investigates the
relation between endowments’ abnormal returns and their geographic proximity to financial
centers. In subsection III.D we analyze endowments in the healthcare industry to study whether
their returns exhibit a negative association with stocks in the industry, a result that would imply a
risk management strategy in endowment asset allocation. Subsection III.E investigates the
returns of endowments in the higher education sector; we study these funds separately due to
their prominence in prior research on the subject.

A. Overview of endowment returns
Table 3 presents summary statistics for annual endowment returns for the entire sample
and four subsamples partitioned by size. We use average start-of-year assets for each fund to
determine membership in the size cohorts. For comparison we show returns on the Center for
Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) value-weighted equity index, the CRSP 10-Year U.S.
Treasury Bond Index, and a “balanced portfolio” comprised of 60% of the equity index and 40%

10

of the Treasury bond index.8 All index returns are aligned with the fiscal year reporting periods
for each endowment, which accounts for slight differences in the benchmark returns for the four
size cohorts. Data in the table represent medians and inter-quartile ranges for 12-month
reporting periods and should not be interpreted as compound annual returns for the 2009-2016
period, because observations are not uniformly distributed through time. Many endowments’ 12month reporting periods end in June or December, and the number of observations generally
rises over time to reflect increasing compliance with IRS electronic filing requirements
especially by smaller organizations. We do not report mean returns because the data are heavily
influenced by a small number of extreme outliers, many of which appear to be the result of
erroneous reporting by a few endowments.
Data in Table 3 show a fairly dismal pattern of endowment returns. The median return
for the entire sample is 4.78%, which falls not only 446 basis points below the 60-40 balanced
portfolio return, but also just 70 basis points above the 10-Year Treasury bond return. In other
words, the typical endowment fund would have earned almost identical returns if its trustees had
followed a simplistic investment strategy of holding 100% Treasury bonds and taken no equity
market risk whatsoever. Most of our sample period was characterized by a bull market in
equities, as our data begins in 2009 when asset values were depressed near their minimum points
following the onset of the global financial crisis. At the same time, bonds earned strong returns
due to a Federal Reserve policy of driving market interest rates to sustained record low levels.
Endowment funds appear to have sat on the sidelines and missed most of this run-up in both
stock and bond prices, implying that many funds may have held large amounts of cash and
equivalents. More than 40% of the endowments have a June fiscal year-end. These endowments
8

The 60% - 40% combination of the equity and bond indexes is a heuristic commonly used to evaluate the
performance of asset managers. For example, Barber and Wang (2013) refer to “the 60/40 stock/bond portfolio used
as a performance benchmark by many endowments.”

11

generated a mean annual return of 5.23% and median annual return of 4.03%. For comparison,
the CRSP value weighted index over the same period generated a mean annual return of 11.60%,
while the CRSP 10 year U.S. Treasury index returned an annual average of 4.51%, with returns
weighted according to the number of observations in each year. Repeating this analysis for a
sample of endowments with December fiscal year-end (38% of the sample) yields very similar
estimates of underperformance relative to the equity and debt benchmarks. For the interested
reader, the Appendix presents a more detailed version of Table 3, with the performance statistics
reported for all observations with 12-month fiscal reporting periods ending in each of the 108
months during the 2009-2017 sample. Within the four size cohorts of Table 3, we find that the
largest endowment funds, those with assets greater than $100 million, exhibit the highest median
returns, an outcome that runs counter to the conclusions of our analysis of endowments’ riskadjusted abnormal returns below.

B. Risk-adjusted abnormal returns
To estimate risk-adjusted abnormal returns, we use the standard four-factor model of
Fama and French (1993) and Carhart (1997):
ExcessReturni ,t   i   i , RMRF ln(1  RMRFt )   i , SMB ln(1  SMBt )
  i , HML ln(1  HMLt )   i ,UMD ln(1  UMDt )   i ,t

(1)

The Excess Return is estimated as [ln(1  Ri ,t )  ln(1+R f ,t )] , where Ri, t is the annual return for
endowment i for year t, defined as the 12-month fiscal reporting period for that non-profit
organization. RMRFt is the excess return on a value-weighted market portfolio annualized over
the same 12-months. SMBt, HMLt, and UMDt are the zero-investment factor returns for size,

12

book-to-market and one-year momentum stock return, respectively. These are also annualized
over the same 12-month period as the endowment’s fiscal year.
We face a challenge in implementing this model, because it requires estimating five
parameters, including the alpha intercept term, separately for each endowment fund, but our
2009-2017 sample period yields at most nine annual observations of performance data per fund.
Our overall sample includes 189,842 annual observations for 29,762 endowments, and we
subsample the 17,028 endowment funds that have at least seven annual observations. This
subsample includes 138,769 endowment-years, or about 73% of the overall sample, and it
probably imparts a slight positive bias to our estimates of alpha, since those charities with
uninterrupted patterns of filing annual reports are probably the most financially successful.9
We start by estimating the OLS model described in equation (1) using the time-series
annual returns for each of the 17,028 endowments, Thus, for each non-profit organization i we
estimate






ExcessReturni ,t   i   i , RMRF ln(1  RMRFt )   i ,SMB ln(1  SMBt )




  i , HML ln(1  HMLt )   i ,UMD ln(1  UMDt )  e i ,t


^

(2)
^

^

^

For each endowment i , we save the coefficient estimates (  ,  RMRF ,  SMB ,  HML ,  UMD ) as


well as the time series of residuals ( ei ,t ). The cross-sectional average of alpha across the 17,028
endowments fund is reported in the first row of the first column of Table 4.
To test the statistical significance of these alpha estimates, we employ the bootstrap
methodology described by Kosowski et al. (2006), and the description in the following passages

9

We observe that many of the endowments that have fewer than seven observations simply have not filed their
Form 990 returns for the entire sample period, or the documents have not yet been uploaded by the IRS to Amazon
Web Services, and we expect these observations to become available for research purposes at some point in the
future.

13

closely adheres to that source. For each non-profit endowment i, we draw a sample (with
replacement) of the residuals of that fund estimated from equation (2) above. This yields
pseudo-time series of resampled residuals {e(b) i,t }, where b indexes the bootstrap iteration
number. Thus, we scramble the time order of residuals for each endowment.
For the next step we create a time series of pseudo endowment returns imposing the
condition of zero alpha:


b



 ExcessReturni ,t    i , RMRF ln(1  RMRFt )   i , SMB ln(1  SMBt )




  i , HML ln(1  HMLt )   i ,UMD ln(1  UMDt )  e(b)i ,t

(3)

Note that the construction methodology for the pseudo return for endowment i for year t consists
of predicted return with a zero alpha plus a randomly bootstrapped error term. Thus by
construction the pseudo-time series of returns has a true alpha of zero. There is, however, the
additional error term that adds randomization, since the residuals may be sampled more than
once and the residuals have been scrambled across time.
Once the pseudo time series of zero alpha returns (with a randomly sampled residual
added) has been constructed for every endowment-year, we re-estimate the four-factor model
using these bootstrapped pseudo endowment returns similar to equation (1). Even though the
true alpha is zero, the estimate for alpha from this regressions may be positive (or negative) if
that bootstrap had drawn an abnormally high number of positive (or negative) residuals. Thus
we are now able to generate a cross-section of bootstrapped alphas for all 17,028 funds. We save
the cross-section average of the alphas. This process is repeated for 5,000 bootstrap iterations, (b
= 1, …. , 5,000). This repetition yields a distribution of 5,000 average (cross-sectional) alphas.
Comparing the observed average alpha of -0.0110 in the top left cell of Table 4 to this
distribution allows us to make statistical inference. We find that the probability of average alpha
14

being -0.0110 is less than 1% if the true alpha was zero. In other words, in our 5,000 bootstraps
we obtained an average alpha of that magnitude in less than 1% of the cases. Thus, we can reject
the null hypothesis that average alpha is zero below the 1% significance level.
In addition to illustrating our main result, that endowment funds have mean risk-adjusted
returns 1.10% below their benchmarks, Table 4 also shows the fraction of alpha estimates that
are negative (61%) in our subsample of 17,028 endowments, and it shows the cross-sectional
average estimates for the four risk factors without testing their statistical significance. The
estimate of 0.5011 for the market risk factor implies that endowments invest conservatively, with
about half of their endowment excess return exposed to the equity markets.
We continue the analysis by examining separately each of the four size cohorts
introduced in Table 3 above. The table shows that even though all cohorts earn average alphas
that are negative, performance is better for smaller endowments compared to larger ones.
Second, systematic risk decreases with endowment size, as shown by the estimates for the
market return factor which decline across the size cohorts. This is consistent with a wealth effect
that leads to decreasing absolute risk aversion as the value of an endowment grows (Merton,
1993). Note that the larger endowments, which have the worst performance, account for a minor
number of observations by number, but an overwhelming fraction of the invested capital in the
non-profit sector. For instance, the “large” cohort of endowments, those worth more than $100
million, account for 4.1% of the observations and 78.2% of the assets. In contrast, the very
smallest endowments, those with asset values below $1 million which we label as “tiny,”
comprise 39.6% of the observations in the sample but account for only 0.4% of the assets
invested.

15

The inverse relation we find between endowment size and performance echoes the
pattern found for mutual funds in several studies. This pattern is regarded as something of a
puzzle, since larger funds should enjoy advantages in trading costs and access to research and
other information. Chen et al (2004) proposes a range of explanations for the pattern, including
the costs of investing in illiquid securities, which are more commonly held by larger funds, and
the administrative costs of team management that is often used by larger funds. Pollet and
Wilson (2008) discuss the costs of diversification and fund family membership as possible
explanations, but neither of these issues would seem relevant for endowments, which are
typically the only funds overseen by their parent organizations. The liquidity explanation is
possibly the most sensible, as some non-profit endowments are known to be over-weighted in
individual securities donated by university alumni or other benefactors who found their own
companies and contribute a slice of the equity to their favorite charities.10 The costs of hedging
and eventually unwinding these block ownership positions may create a drag on the overall
returns for the fund.
As noted in Section II above, our calculation of annual percentage investment returns for
each fund is based on an assumption that inflows of gifts and bequests occur halfway through the
fiscal year, while distributions occur at the end of the year, so we calculate the return by dividing
net investment gains by the sum of beginning-of-year assets plus half of new contributions. A
more aggressive estimate would assume that all distributions occur at the beginning of the year
while gifts are received at year-end, in which case the denominator would equal start-of-year
assets minus distributions. The most conservative estimate would make the opposite
assumptions, that gifts occur at the beginning of the year and that distributions are made at year-

10

There are numerous examples, but perhaps the best known is the connection between Emory University and the
founders of The Coca Cola Co.

16

end, which would change the denominator to start-of-year assets plus 100% of contributions.
We test whether our results change materially under either of these extreme assumptions. In the
first case, the median portfolio return of 4.78% in the bottom row of Table 3 would increase to
5.11%, while in the second case it would drop to 4.52%, implying a range of about +/- 30 basis
points depending upon the assumption chosen, a magnitude far below the levels of
underperformance documented in the right column of Table 3. The impact on the alpha
estimates in Table 4 is only minor. The alpha of -110 basis points shown in the first column of
Table 4 changes to -106 basis points under the former, aggressive measure and -117 basis points
under the latter, conservative measure. Other results shown in Tables 3 and 4 exhibit only
similarly tiny differences under either alternative assumption.

C. Returns and proximity to financial centers
We study the access to investment advice in analysis presented in Table 5. Based on a
hypothesis that firms obtain better investment advice if they are located geographically close to
financial experts, we use STATA’s geodist function to calculate the distance between the office
address of each non-profit organization and Wall Street, for which we use the address of
Goldman Sachs headquarters in New York. We save the alphas estimated for each endowment
fund in Table 4 above, and we regress these alphas against an intercept and a variable measuring
this mileage. Results of these estimations, which are partitioned according to the same size
cohorts used above, appear in Panel A of Table 5. In Panel B, a more refined analysis replaces
the distance from Wall Street variable with the minimum distance of each organization from one
of four financial centers where many asset management firms are located: New York, Boston,

17

Chicago, or San Francisco. For the latter three, we use the headquarters addresses of Fidelity
Investments, Northern Trust, and Charles Schwab, respectively.
For the largest funds in our sample, comprising the vast majority of investment assets, we
find that investment performance deteriorates if the fund is located closer to Wall Street. We
find a similar estimate, but no longer statistically significant, for the variable measuring the
distance to closest of the four major financial centers. The pattern is somewhat reversed for
smaller endowments, which tend to perform better when they are located closer to expert
financial advice, as shown by the estimate for small endowment funds in the second part of
Table 5.
We are not aware of any result in the investments literature consistent with the idea that
access to professional investment advice leads to superior performance; indeed, much of the
research on the underperformance of professional managers and the virtues of passive indexed
investing suggests quite the opposite, which is our finding for larger endowment funds.11 Our
weakly positive results for smaller endowments may be consistent with a number of potential
explanations other than access to professional investment advice. For instance, smaller nonprofits near financial centers are probably much more likely to have better-informed board
members, and they may establish superior investment policies for these organizations’
endowments. Larger funds may already have qualified board members but may be susceptible to
professional money managers’ sales pitches that lead to over-investment in exotic products with
high fee structures.

11

Many papers have been published in recent years on loosely related topics such as the importance of geography in
investment research (Coval and Moskowitz, 2001) and the tendency of individuals to invest in local stocks
Seasholes and Zhu, 2010).

18

D. Hedging of parent organizations’ asset values
In his discussion of the optimal investment policy for a non-profit endowment, Merton
(1993) leans heavily on portfolio theory. He argues that endowments should be invested in
assets whose value will have inverse relations with the other assets of the organization. In a
university, these assets might include local real estate and intellectual property; in a symphony
orchestra, they would include the instruments, fixtures, and access to the subscriber list. By their
very nature, many of these assets can be difficult to value and hedge, so Merton’s advice may
seem mostly theoretical for most organizations. Yermack (2017) tests this hypothesis for his
sample of 120 prominent art museums, using the Mei-Moses fine art index as the industry
benchmark. That study finds no significant relation.
The healthcare industry offers an opportunity to test this hypothesis closely, however,
since the U.S. economy includes numerous for-profit and non-profit companies in this sector. A
non-profit hospital or medical clinic should avoid investing in shares of stock issued by
pharmaceutical companies or for-profit hospital chains, for instance. We analyze the returns of
626 hospital sector endowments in regression models to test this hypothesis. We regress the
hospital endowment returns against the standard four risk factors plus an additional factor, the
return on the healthcare industry portfolio as calculated and made available for download on the
website of Prof. French. Alternatively, we use the index of returns on pharmaceutical stocks and
also for medical equipment stocks as additional risk factors.
In all three cases, including the health industry risk factors leads to little or no change in
the size and significance of the alpha estimates. Moreover, the healthcare, pharmaceutical, and
medical equipment risk factors have beta estimates quite close to zero. We conclude that little

19

evidence supports the proposition that endowment managers hedge their investment strategies by
over- or under-weighting healthcare stocks in their portfolios.

E. College and university endowments
Because colleges and universities represent such an important subgroup of the universe of
non-profit endowments, we analyze their returns separately and display the results in Table 6.
The estimates are striking: higher education institutions, whose endowments account for more
than half of all assets in the sample despite representing just 6% of the observations, significantly
underperform market benchmarks, with abnormal investment returns of minus 148 basis points
per year. All other (non-higher education) endowment funds also earn negative alphas, with a
statistically significant estimate of minus 107 basis points per year. The difference in these two
estimates is itself significant below the 1% level. We confirm that this result is not size-driven
by looking separately at the four size-based subsamples from above; we find that colleges and
universities underperform other sectors in two out of four size cohorts, with the greatest
difference occurring within the “tiny” group of endowments with assets below $1 million.
Prior research such as Lerner, Schoar and Wang (2008) has found that the self-reported
returns for universities in the NACUBO sample tend to track the academic quality of the
institutions, with more selective schools earning higher investment income. We find some
evidence consistent with this in the right column of Table 6, which looks at the abnormal returns
earned by endowments of the top 20 national universities (the Ivy League schools and others
such as MIT, Stanford, and Georgetown) as ranked in 2017 by U.S. News and World Report.
Due to inconsistent data in the filings of Cornell University, we drop it from the analysis and
instead use Emory University in its place. These highly ranked schools earn almost close to

20

zero abnormal return (minus 19 basis points per year), a result that gives no indication of
superior performance but is nevertheless much better than other colleges and universities as a
whole. While these results are not in line with earlier studies and copious media coverage about
the out-performance of elite schools, they suggest that the most selective schools do better than
others within their sector and basically earn returns that are no worse than average. However,
they also support the conclusion that the investment wisdom of top universities is largely a myth,
as one could expect to earn these types of returns simply by chance. Frequent mentions in the
media of the out-performance of top schools seems likely due to the outsized success of just one
university, Yale.

IV. Distribution policy
Endowments exist to distribute funds to their parent organizations. In principle, these
distributions could fund part of an organization’s operating budget, or be used for non-recurring
capital expenditures, or could occur as needed to close deficits when an organization cannot
otherwise balance its budget. Little is known about the distribution policies for non-profit
endowments other than two recent small-sample studies by Brown et. al (2014) and Yermack
(2017) which appear to reach opposite conclusions. Brown et. al study approximately 200 large
research universities and find a surprisingly pro-cyclical distribution pattern, in which
universities experiencing negative financial shocks reduce their endowment payouts. Yermack
(2017) studies 120 large art museums and finds that endowment withdrawals increase when the
museums’ operating surpluses decline.
Numerous papers beginning with Tobin (1974) have proposed spending rules for
endowments, and Brown et. al (2014) provide an excellent review of this literature. Many of

21

these rules resemble the consumption-smoothing prediction of Tobin’s permanent income
hypothesis or the dividend-smoothing payout rules followed by corporations as first documented
by Lintner (1956). The tenor of these policies implies that non-profits aim for a stable
distribution rate from their endowments, with the rate equal to the long-run expected return of
the fund. However, other papers have taken issue with this type of distribution policy, such as
Hansmann (1990) and Merton (1993). Hansmann focuses on issues of intergenerational equity
and concludes that an overly conservative distribution policy may give undue benefit to more
affluent future generations. Merton notes that an endowment fund can be invested, and can
follow distribution policies, that hedge an organization’s cash flows from other assets, such as a
university’s streams of tuition revenue and donations.
Table 7 shows descriptive statistics about the distribution policies for the endowment
funds in our sample. We calculate the distribution rate based on information in Part V, Schedule
D of Form 990. The distribution rate equals the ratio of distributions for grants and scholarships
(Line 1d) plus distributions for facilities and programs (Line 1e) over the sum of beginning-ofyear assets (Line 1a) plus 50% of new contributions and transfers during the year (Line 1b). It
should be thought of as similar to the dividend policy for a company deciding what fraction of its
equity to pay out to shareholders each year. We present data for the sample overall in the left
column of Table 7 and for each of the four size cohorts in the next four columns. The data
indicate that endowments have a mean distribution rate of 4.89% and a median rate of 2.45%,
with more than one-third of funds not making any distribution at all. However, these statistics
obscure a clear connection between endowment size and payout policies. In the second column
of Table 7, data indicate that most large endowment funds have very stable distribution policies,
with mean and median distribution ratios of 4.91% and 4.39%, respectively, and more than 95%

22

of all funds making a distribution in a given year.12 In the right column of Table 7, the data
indicate that the majority of tiny endowment funds make no distribution at all. The other two
size cohorts see the data trend monotonically between these two extremes.
The data suggest that smaller endowments follow an accumulation strategy, with a
predisposition to make no distributions at all to their parent organizations, and they instead
attempt to grow to a critical mass. Once endowments have grown large, they follow very
different distribution strategies. The mean and median distribution rates for large endowments
are very close, in the neighborhood of 4.5%. Extraordinary distributions from larger
endowments seem to be rare, since the mean and median withdrawal rates are almost equal, and
virtually all large funds make at least some distribution. In contrast, the mean distribution for
tiny endowments is 4.47%, even though more than half make no distribution at all. This implies
that smaller funds are accessed from time to time for large extraordinary distributions.
The 4.5% distribution rate appears to be a focal point that is commonly used by many
large, established funds. This figure may approximate the real return that one might expect from
a fund invested 60% in equities and 40% in risk-free debt, but if inflation is greater than zero, the
4.5% nominal distribution rate is likely to be less than the return of a typical fund, meaning that
endowments will tend to grow over time.13 This conservative distribution policy has been the
focus of much of the external criticism that has focused especially on the growth of elite
universities’ endowments and contributed to Congress’s decision to enact a 1.4% tax on large
university endowment profits beginning in 2018. By comparison, private foundations are
generally required to distribute at least 5.0% of their assets in order to maintain their non-profit
12

For comparison, Brown et. al’s (2014) survey of about 200 large universities drawn from the NACUBO sample
between 1986-2009 shows mean and median payout rates of 5.2%, calculated with slightly different methodology
than ours. Yermack’s (2017) study of 120 art museums between 2008-2013 shows mean and median spending rates
of 5.8% and 4.7%, respectively.

23

status, and that number also has drawn criticism for being below the likely investment returns for
funds held in these entities.
Table 8 presents a regression analysis of annual endowment distributions as a function of
six potential sources of cash for the organization: operating income, cash on the balance sheet at
the start of the year, new donations, new government grants, an increase in debt, and investment
earnings on the endowment itself. Standard errors are clustered at the organization level, and we
show estimates for the overall sample and for each of the four size cohorts. We exclude from
this analysis observations for lagged investment performance that are reported on Schedule D,
Part V of Form 990, since we lack annual operating data for these observations. We also exclude
organizations that identify themselves as “Supporting Public Charities” (coded as S for the
NTEE classification variable “Level 2”). These are typically organizations affiliated with other
non-profits, and they typically hold or manage the other organization’s endowment funds but
have few if any operating expenses of their own.
In the left column of Table 8, estimates indicate that the dollar value of endowment
distributions exhibits positive associations with three variables: cash available at the start of the
year, operating deficits, and endowment earnings. Results for the four size-based subsamples
shows that the operating surplus and cash effects can be attributed to the payout behavior of very
large endowments. However, a positive association exists in all four subsamples between
endowment earnings and distributions to the parent organizations.
The point estimates in the second column of Table 8 show that when large endowments
run operating deficits, about 22 percent of the deficit is covered by increased distributions from
the endowment, a result similar to Yermack’s (2017) estimate of 13 percent for a much smaller
13

Hansmann (1990, pp 9-10) writes, “nearly all discussions of spending rules simply take it for granted that the rate
of spending out of endowment should not, over time, exceed the real rate of return on the investments constituting
the endowment.”

24

sample of prominent art museums. This result seems to contradict Brown et. al’s finding that
endowment payouts are reduced when an organization experiences negative financial shocks.
However, that paper takes a different empirical approach, defining a “shock” not in terms of
operating losses, but instead as a deterioration in the ratio of endowment assets over total
expenses.
The other strong result in the first column of Table 8 shows that when an endowment’s
earnings rise or fall, the annual payout from the endowment to its parent can be expected to rise
or fall by about 25% of the change in endowment earnings. This surprisingly high partial
correlation may be an artifact of some institutions following a primitive distribution policy of
simply paying out most or all of the annual realized income of the fund to the parent (Hansmann,
1990); this conjecture is strongly supported by the very large estimate of 0.65 for the tiny
endowment funds in the right column of the table.

V. Endowment performance and its impact on fundraising
Given the high public interest in the investment performance of endowment funds, a
natural hypothesis to examine is whether donors respond to successful years in which funds earn
strong investment returns. We test this hypothesis in regressions analysis shown in Table 9. The
dependent variable in this table is based on total donations during the fiscal year. We calculate
this from Part VIII of Form 990 as the sum of federated campaigns (Line 1a) plus fundraising
events (Line 1c) plus all other contributions, gifts, and grants (Line 1f). We do not include
membership dues (Line 1b), income from related organizations (Line 1d) or government grants
(Line 1e). Our dependent variable in Table 9 is then ln(donationst / donationst-1), and we regress
this against the endowment investment return for the prior year with results shown in the left

25

column. In the center column, we repeat this regression after subtracting the equity market index
from the endowment return, so that the explanatory variable becomes the net-of-market return.
In the right column, we subtract the 60% - 40% mix of the equity and Treasury bond indexes
introduced as a benchmark in Table 3 above. We lack a sufficient number of annual
observations for each fund to fit a more elaborate model of expected returns.
Results in Table 9 indicate a positive and significant intercept around 0.02, implying a
secular growth rate in donations of close to 2% per year, and estimates of 0.2152, 0.1792, and
0.1270 for the lagged raw returns, net-of-market returns, and net of 60-40 benchmark returns
respectively, all significant at the 1% level based on standard errors clustered by endowment.
These coefficient estimates indicate a modest but significant elasticity between investment
performance and the willingness of donors to contribute in future periods. If a fund out-performs
the equity market benchmark by 10%, for instance, donations would grow by about 1.8% in the
following year, all else equal. These results parallel those found in other “flow-to-performance”
studies in the asset management industry that document increased inflows of management fee
income after years in which a money manager outperforms market benchmarks. Lewellen and
Lewellen (2018) provide a recent contribution in this area and a review of the lengthy literature.

VI. Discussion and conclusions
We study the investment returns and distribution policies of non-profit endowment funds,
which have grown into a $0.7 trillion institutional investor class in the U.S. economy. Up to
now, nearly all research on endowments has focused on a small, self-selected sample of major
research universities, using self-reported survey data from these organizations. Although higher
education endowments represent somewhat more than half of the total asset class, our results

26

suggest that the research focus on them may be somewhat misleading, as they have inferior
investment performance on an absolute basis and also when compared to endowments with
parent organizations in other sectors.
In a sample of more than 29,000 endowment funds drawn from U.S. Internal Revenue
Service filings, our regression analysis indicates that on average, endowment funds
underperform their market benchmarks significantly. This pattern is influenced by an
endowment’s size, as larger endowments tend to underperform the most. Endowments’ returns
also appear to be connected to the quality of investment advice they receive, since smaller
organizations close to cities that are major financial centers earn significantly higher investment
returns, while the opposite is true for the larger endowments.
Most endowments appear to follow distribution policies that are quite conservative, with
a median payout ratio below 2.5% of their assets. Again, size plays a big role, as most tiny
endowments make no distributions at all, and larger endowments tend to cluster around a
distribution rate of about 4.5% of fair market value. This number would appear to resemble the
expected long-run real return on a fund that is invested 60% in equities and 40% in debt.
Finally, we find an interesting connection between the endowment’s investment
performance and the willingness of donors to change their contributions in future years. We
estimate an elasticity between investment returns and the growth of donations of approximately
0.21. This implies that the constituent donors of a non-profit, such as the alumni of a university,
are aware of how well the organization performs as an investor and adjust their donations in a
pattern that rewards stock market profits with the supply of new capital, much as one sees the
inflows to a mutual fund increase when the fund outperforms the market.

27

Appendix
Table A1 provides month-by-month performance data for the endowment funds in our
sample alongside the relevant equity and debt market benchmarks, in a format identical to Table
3. Each row of the table shows the sample size and summary statistics for endowment returns
for those funds whose 12-month fiscal year reporting periods end in that month. Specifically, for
each calendar month we identify all endowments with their fiscal years ending in that month.
We calculate the median and inter-quartile returns for these subsets of endowments and report
these statistics in columns two through four. We next calculate the returns for the CRSP value
weighted index and the CRSP 10-Year U.S. Treasury Bond index over the same 12-month
periods that match the fiscal years of the endowments. As shown in the table, a significant
number of endowments have fiscal years ending in either June or December, with a smaller
number ending in September and the rest scattered among the remaining nine months of each
year. In addition, our sample size gradually increases over time, as more non-profit firms
comply with electronic filing requirements phased in during our sample period by the IRS. We
find that in 98 out of the 108 monthly subsamples, the median annual return for the set of
endowments is below the return generated by a simple 60-40 mix of the stock index and U.S.
government long bond index, as shown in the last column. In 50 of those 108 months, the
median return falls below the 10-year Treasury benchmark.

28

Bibliography
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common
stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773-806.
Barber, Bard M., and Guojun Wang, 2013, Do (some) university endowments earn alpha?
Financial Analysts Journal 69, 26-44.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Steven G. Dimmock, Jun-Koo Kang, and Scott J. Weisbenner, 2014, How
university endowments respond to financial market shocks: Evidence and implications,
American Economic Review 104, 931-962.
Brown, Keith C., Lorenzo Garlappi, and Cristian Tiu, 2007, The troves of academe: Asset
allocation, risk budgeting and the investment performance of university endowments funds,
unpublished working paper, available at ssrn.com/abstract=981436.
Brown, Stephen, William N. Goetzmann, and Roger G. Ibbotson, 1999, Offshore hedge funds:
Survival and performance, Journal of Business 72, 91-117.
Carhart, Mark, 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57-82.
Cejnek, Georg, Richard Franz, Otto Randl, and Neal Stoughton, 2014, A survey of university
endowment management research, Journal of Investment Management, third quarter 2014.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Jeffrey D. Kubik, 2004, Does fund size erode
mutual fund performance? The role of liquidity and organization, American Economic Review
94, 1276-1302.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: Informed
trading and asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 109, 811-841.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R, French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33. 3-56.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R, French, 2010, Luck versus skill in the cross-section of mutual
fund returns, Journal of Finance 65, 1915-1947.
Franzoni, Francesco, Eric Nowak, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2012, Private equity performance and
liquidity risk, Journal of Finance 67, 2341-2373.
Hansmann, Henry, 1990, Why do universities have endowments? Journal of Legal Studies 19, 342.
Kosowski, Robert, Allan Timmerman, Russ Wermers, and Hal White, 2006, Can mutual fund
“stars” really pick stocks? New evidence from a bootstrap analysis, Journal of Finance 61, 25512595.

29

Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, and Jialan Wang, 2008, Secrets of the academy: The drivers of
university endowment success, Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, 207-222.
Lewellen, Jonathan, and Katharina Lewellen, 2018, Institutional investors and corporate
governance: The incentive to be engaged, unpublished manuscript, Dartmouth Tuck School of
Business, available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=3265761.
Lintner, John, 1956, Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained earnings,
and taxes, American Economic Review 46, 97-113.
Merton, Robert, 1993, Optimal investment strategies for university endowment funds in Charles
T. Clotfelter and Michael Rothschild eds., Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education
(University of Chicago Press), 211-242.
Pollet, Joshua M., and Mungo Wilson, 2008, How does size affect mutual fund behavior?
Journal of Finance 63, 2941-2969.
Seasholes, Mark S., and Ning Zhu, 2010 Individual investors and local bias, Journal of Finance
65, 1987-2010.
Tobin, James, 1974, What is permanent endowment income? American Economic Review 64,
427-432.
Yermack, David, 2017, Donor governance and financial management in prominent U.S. art
museums, Journal of Cultural Economics 41, 215-235.

30

Table 1
Sample of Form 990 filings
The table shows the sample of Internal Revenue Service Form 990 filings that we retrieve from Amazon Web Services. We retain all
observations that have non-missing, positive values for endowment assets at the start and end of the year as well non-missing values
for investment income and exhibit no contradictions or inconsistencies in Table V, Schedule D, where the endowment data is reported.
Observations are classified according to each organization’s National Taxonomy of Exempt Entities (NTEE) code.
Panel A: Number of unique Form 990 filers by year and NTEE code
Arts,
culture, and
Higher Education
education
humanities
(other) Hospitals Environment
Year
1,594
1,067
2,342
715
633
2009
2010
2,350
1,150
3,306
842
888
2011
2,658
1,152
3,867
851
981
2012
2,878
1,169
4,195
852
1,079
2013
3,003
1,182
4,354
864
1,137
2014
3,064
1,178
4,405
848
1,157
2015
3,052
1,178
4,401
833
1,192
2016
3,052
1,161
4,378
798
1,206
2017
2,706
1,128
4,089
545
1,025
Total
24,357
10,365
35,337
7,148
9,298

Health
(other)
1,746
2,363
2,542
2,667
2,733
2,719
2,726
2,675
2,154
22,325

31

Human
services International
3,467
179
4,734
243
5,123
275
5,549
300
5,802
315
5,872
316
5,896
320
5,938
319
5,079
267
47,460
2,534

Mutual
benefit
215
303
334
363
375
368
397
423
307
3,085

Public and
societal
benefit Religion
1,566
292
2,152
425
2,436
464
2,648
508
2,712
529
2,753
536
2,753
537
2,784
537
2,288
424
22,092
4,252

Unknown
or
missing
304
376
312
224
137
95
50
44
47
1,589

Total
14,120
19,132
20,995
22,432
23,143
23,311
23,335
23,315
20,059
189,842

Panel B: Beginning-of-year endowment assets ($millions) by year and NTEE code
Arts,
Higher Education
Health
culture, and
humanities
(other) Hospitals Environment
Year
education
(other)
28,316
297,444
64,483
28,132
5,637
15,896
2009
2010
26,860
230,607
67,449
30,324
6,097
16,798
2011
32,229
248,994
74,938
34,302
6,599
19,773
2012
36,049
292,610
89,826
36,051
7,444
22,112
2013
37,093
294,443
93,151
38,842
7,776
23,003
2014
42,272
322,536
104,395
42,370
8,759
25,656
2015
44,864
367,012
107,596
45,167
9,245
27,670
2016
41,816
379,705
109,245
43,550
8,891
27,272
2017
36,125
365,251
109,401
33,292
7,479
21,397
Total
325,624 2,798,601
820,483
332,031
67,928 199,578

32

Human
services International
15,321
2,825
17,309
4,022
18,877
4,633
21,233
5,164
22,559
5,681
25,018
7,357
26,679
8,281
26,134
5,238
21,713
4,354
194,845
47,556

Mutual
benefit
2,073
2,334
2,518
2,720
2,794
2,496
3,041
2,835
2,422
23,233

Public and
societal
benefit Religion
22,613
1,245
27,664
1,934
30,322
2,304
39,619
2,642
43,574
3,137
51,692
3,540
56,019
3,866
59,462
2,397
45,460
2,013
376,425
23,076

Unknown
or
missing
1,987
1,937
1,907
1,547
945
804
535
595
679
10,937

Total
485,972
433,336
477,397
557,015
572,998
636,896
699,976
707,141
649,586
5,220,316

Table 2
Descriptive statistics
The table shows descriptive statistics for a sample of 29,762 U.S. non-profit organizations between 2009-17. Data are obtained from
Internal Revenue Service Form 990 filings. Total revenue is reported in Part I of Form 990 (Line 12). Total assets and liabilities are
reported as of the start of the fiscal year in Part X of Form 990 (Lines 16 and 26). Endowment assets at the start of year are reported
in Part V of Schedule D of Form 990 (Line 1a). Contributions to endowments are reported on the same schedule (Line 1b), and the
endowment distribution rate is calculated as the sum of grants and scholarships (Line 1d) and other expenditures for facilities and
programs (Line 1e) divided by start-of-year endowment assets plus 0.5 times endowment contributions. Net investment return equals
net endowment investment gains/losses (Line 1c) net of any administrative expenses (Line 1f), divided by start of year endowment
assets plus 0.5 times endowment contributions. Fundraising is sum of federated campaigns (Part VIII, Line 1a), fundraising events
(Part VIII, Line 1c) and other gifts (Part VIII, Line 1f). All dollar values are in $ millions. The number of observations for
endowment data exceeds the observations for revenue, assets, and liabilities due to the availability of up to four years of historical
endowment data on Schedule D of Form 990.

Total revenue
Total assets BoY
Total liabilities BoY
Endowment assets BoY
Endowment additions
Endowment distribution rate
Net investment return
Donations

count
145,651
145,651
145,651
189,842
189,842
189,842
189,842
189,842

mean
41.58
90.40
30.09
27.50
1.07
0.0489
0.0562
3.93

p50
2.79
7.39
0.53
1.21
0.00
0.0245
0.0478
0.28

33

sd
261.85
761.64
280.88
381.37
12.94
0.1096
0.0889
30.79

min
-32.96
-11.75
-31.06
0.00
-25.83
-3.1359
-0.4801
-1.18

max
12,712.23
75,287.52
35,024.44
36,428.53
1,415.68
1.9992
0.9153
2,654.35

Table 3
Endowment returns
The table shows summary statistics of net investment returns on endowment funds for a sample of 29,762 U.S. non-profit
organizations between 2009-2017. Endowment data are obtained from Part V of Schedule D of Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form
990 filings. The annual net investment return for each endowment fund is estimated as endowment investment gains/losses (Line 1c)
net of any administrative expenses (Line 1f), divided by start-of-year endowment assets (Line 1a) plus 0.5 times endowment
contributions (Line 1b). For comparison purposes, the table also shows mean benchmark returns based on the trailing 12-month
returns on the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) value-weighted index, the CRSP 10-Year U.S. Treasury Bond Index,
and a “balanced portfolio” comprised of 60% of the CRSP equity index and 40% of the Treasury bond index. Data in the table
represent means and medians for 12-month reporting periods and should not be interpreted as compound annual returns for the 20092017 period. Observations are not uniformly distributed through time. Many endowments’ 12-month reporting periods end in June or
December, and the number of observations generally increases over time to reflect increasing compliance with IRS electronic filing
requirements especially by smaller organizations. Each endowment is assigned to one of four size cohorts based on its average startof-year assets across all observations.
Distribution of endowment returns

Large:
assets > $100 mm
Medium:
$100 mm > assets > $10 mm
Small:
$10 mm > assets > $1 mm
Tiny:
$1 mm > assets
Full Sample

Trailing 12-month benchmark returns
Balanced
portfolio

Endowment
median minus
Balanced

Observations

25th %ile

Median

75th %ile

Equity

10-year
Treasuries

6,467

-0.0038

0.0813

0.1322

0.1100

0.0450

0.0840

-0.0026

28,862

0.0005

0.0657

0.1229

0.1183

0.0429

0.0882

-0.0224

68,182

0.0044

0.0545

0.1129

0.1270

0.0410

0.0926

-0.0381

86,331

0.0014

0.0367

0.1028

0.1307

0.0397

0.0943

-0.0576

189,842

0.0019

0.0478

0.1116

0.1268

0.0408

0.0924

-0.0446

34

Table 4
Abnormal net investment returns (four-factor model)
The table shows regression estimates of investment alphas for a sample of 29,762 U.S. non-profit organizations between 2009-2017
using the standard four-factor model:

ln(1  Ri ,t )  ln(1+R f ,t )   i  i , RMRF ln(1  RMRFt )  i , SMB ln(1  SMBt )  i , HML  ln(1  HMLt )  i ,UMD ln(1  UMDt )   i ,t
The analysis is limited to 17,028 endowment funds that report at least seven years of performance data in U.S. Internal Revenue
Service Form 990 filings. We fit a separate time series regression for each endowment fund, and the first row of the table reports the
cross-sectional average of these alpha estimates. The second row reports the bootstrapped p-values of the four-factor alphas,
calculated according to a method described more fully in the text. For the last four columns each endowment is assigned to one of the
four size cohorts based on its average start-of-year assets.
Entire
Sample

Four-factor alpha (cross-sectional average)
Cross-sectionally bootstrapped p-value*
Fraction of endowments with estimated alpha < 0
Observations
Fraction of observations
Fraction of endowment assets
βRMRF (cross-sectional average)
βSMB (cross-sectional average)
βHML (cross-sectional average)
βUMD (cross-sectional average)
R2 (cross-sectional average)

Large:
Assets
> $100 mm

-0.0110 ***
<0.01
0.61

-0.0165 ***
<0.01
0.73

Medium:
$10 mm
< Assets <
$100 mm
-0.0152 ***
<0.01
0.68

17,028
1.000
1.000
0.5011
0.0179
-0.0468
-0.0614
0.8507

700
0.041
0.782
0.6323
0.1586
-0.0121
-0.0093
0.9412

3,048
0.179
0.171
0.5832
0.0756
-0.0252
-0.0413
0.9088

Significant at 1% (***), 5% (**) and 10% (*) levels.

35

Small:
$1 mm
< Assets <
$10 mm
-0.0111 ***
<0.01
0.61
6,529
0.383
0.043
0.5158
-0.0033
-0.0556
-0.0649
0.8583

Tiny:
Assets
< $1 mm
-0.0084 ***
<0.01
0.56
6,751
0.396
0.004
0.4363
-0.0022
-0.0517
-0.0724
0.8078

Table 5
Endowment alphas and proximity to financial centers
The table shows regression estimates of investment alphas as a function of the locations of endowment funds, for a sample of 29,762
U.S. non-profit organizations between 2009-2017. We save the alphas estimated for each endowment fund from the regressions in
Table 4. We then regress these alphas against an intercept and location variables, based on the headquarters address of each
endowment’s parent organization, using standard ordinary least squares estimation. The analysis is limited to 16,844 endowment
funds with complete headquarters addresses that report at least seven years of performance data in U.S. Internal Revenue Service
Form 990 filings. For the regressions tabulated in Panel A, the location variable equals the distance in miles from Wall Street, based
on STATA’s ZIP code calculator and using the New York headquarters ZIP code of Goldman Sachs as the origin. Panel B changes
the location variable to equal the distance from each endowment to the nearest of four financial centers: New York, Boston, Chicago,
or San Francisco, measured in a similar way. Standard errors appear in parentheses. For the last four columns each endowment is
assigned to one of the four size cohorts based on its average start-of-year assets.

36

Panel A: Distance from Wall Street
Entire
sample

Large:
assets >
$100 mm

Intercept
Mileage from Wall Street x 10-3

Observations
R2

Medium:
$100 mm >
assets >
$10 mm

Small:
$10 mm >
assets >
$1 mm

Tiny:
$1 mm >
assets

-0.0107***
(0.0006)

-0.0144***
(0.0017)

-0.0137***
(0.0011)

-0.0109***
(0.0009)

-0.0083***
(0.0010)

-0.0003
(0.0005)

-0.0030*
(0.0016)

-0.0019**
(0.0009)

-0.0003
(0.0008)

0.0000
(0.0008)

16,844
0.0000

688
0.0051

3,025
0.0013

6,469
0.0000

6,662
0.0000

Panel B: Distance from nearest financial center
Entire
sample

Large:
assets >
$100 mm

Intercept
Mileage from nearest financial center x 10-3

Observations
R2

Medium:
$100 mm >
assets >
$10 mm

Small:
$10 mm >
assets >
$1 mm

Tiny:
$1 mm >
assets

-0.0114***
(0.0006)

-0.0156***
(0.0019)

-0.0137***
(0.0011)

-0.0123***
(0.0009)

-0.0088***
(0.0010)

0.0013
(0.0012)

-0.0038
(0.0044)

-0.0044
(0.0024)

0.0033*
(0.0019)

0.0012
(0.0020)

16,884
0.0001

688
0.0012

3,025
0.0011

6,469
0.0004

6,662
0.0001

Significant at 1% (***), 5% (**) and 10% (*) levels.

37

Table 6
Abnormal net investment returns for higher education endowments
The table shows alpha estimates for annual net investment returns for a sample of 29,762 U.S. non-profit endowment funds between
2009-2017 using the standard four-factor model:

ln(1  Ri ,t )  ln(1+R f ,t )   i  i , RMRF ln(1  RMRFt )  i , SMB ln(1  SMBt )  i , HML  ln(1  HMLt )  i ,UMD ln(1  UMDt )   i ,t
The analysis is limited to 17,028 endowment funds that report at least seven years of performance data in U.S. Internal Revenue
Service Form 990 filings. We fit a separate time series regression for each endowment fund, and the first row of the table reports the
cross-sectional average of these alpha estimates. The second row reports the bootstrapped p-values of the four-factor alphas,
calculated according to a method described more fully in the text. The subsample of the Top 20 Universities is based on 2017
rankings from U.S. News and World Report, except that Cornell University, which has data inconsistencies in its endowment
performance data, was replaced in the sample by Emory University.

Four-factor alpha (cross-sectional average)
Cross-sectionally bootstrapped p-value*
Fraction of endowments with estimated alpha < 0

Entire
sample
-0.0110
<0.01
0.61

Observations
R2 (cross-sectional average)

17,028
0.8507

Significant at 1% (***), 5% (**) and 10% (*) levels.

38

Colleges and
All other
universities organizations
-0.0148
-0.0107
<0.01
<0.01
0.69
0.60
1,111
0.9221

15,917
0.8458

Top 20
universities
-0.0019
<0.50
0.50
20
0.9725

Table 7
Distribution rates for endowments of different sizes
The table shows descriptive statistics about the annual distribution rates for endowment funds,
for a sample of 29,762 U.S. non-profit organizations between 2009-2017. Data are obtained
from Internal Revenue Service Form 990 filings on Schedule D, Part V. The distribution rate is
calculated as the ratio of distributions for grants and scholarships (Line 1d) plus distributions for
facilities and programs (Line 1e) over the sum of beginning-of-year assets (Line 1a) plus 50% of
new contributions and transfers during the year (Line 1b).

Observations
Fraction of with zero distribution
Median distribution rate
Mean distribution rate

Entire
Sample

Large:
Assets
> $100
mm

Medium:
$10 mm
< Assets <
$100 mm

Small:
$1 mm
< Assets <
$10 mm

Tiny:
Assets
< $1 mm

189,842
0.3411
2.45%
4.89%

6,467
0.0424
4.39%
4.91%

28,862
0.1040
3.98%
5.16%

68,182
0.2480
3.21%
5.32%

86,331
0.5162
0.00%
4.47%

39

Table 8
Distributions by endowments as a function of other sources of cash
The table shows least square regression estimates of the amounts of cash distributed from nonprofit endowment funds, as a function of six potential sources of cash for the parent organization.
The cash distributed is estimated as the sum of grants or scholarships (Line 1d) and other
expenditures for facilities and programs (Line 1e) as reported in part V of Schedule D of Internal
Revenue Service Form 990. Cash donations equal the sum of federated campaigns (Part VIII,
Line 1a), fund raising events (Part VIII, Line 1c), and all other contributions, gifts, and grants
(Part VIII, Line 1f). The operating surplus equals program service revenue (Part VII, Line 2g)
minus program service expenses (Part IX, Line 25). Endowment earnings is from part V of
Schedule D (Line 1b). New debt issued equals the difference in bonds, loans, and notes
outstanding at the end of year from the beginning of the year (the sum of Lines 20, 23, and 24 in
Part X). Government grants received equal cash from newly awarded grants (Part VIII, Line 1e)
minus changes in grants and pledges receivable (Part X, Line 3). Cash on the balance sheet is
the sum of reported cash (Part X, Line 1) and savings (Part X, Line2). All filings by Supporting
Public Charities are excluded. Standard errors clustered at the organization level appear in
parentheses.
Entire
Sample

Large:
Assets
> $100 mm

Medium:
$10 mm
< Assets <
$100 mm

Small:
$1 mm
< Assets <
$10 mm

Tiny:
Assets
< $1 mm

Cash donations

-0.0107
(0.0347)

0.0272
(0.0805)

0.0006
(0.0018)

0.0015***
(0.0006)

-0.0000
(0.0001)

Operating surplus

-0.1095**
(0.0482)

-0.2245***
(0.0851)

0.0005
(0.0014)

0.0012**
(0.0006)

0.0000
(0.0001)

Endowment earnings

0.2527***
(0.0224)

0.1942***
(0.0369)

0.1349***
(0.0221)

0.1913***
(0.0139)

0.6528*
(0.3738)

Net change in long term debt

0.0348
(0.0220)

0.0580*
(0.0326)

0.0019
(0.0027)

-0.0004
(0.0004)

-0.0000
(0.0001)

Government grants received

0.0011
(0.0412)

-0.1598*
(0.0849)

0.0041
(0.0025)

0.0010
(0.0008)

0.0001
(0.0001)

Cash on balance sheet

0.0799***
(0.0173)

0.1074***
(0.0263)

0.0032
(0.0022)

0.0002
(0.0005)

-0.0000
(0.0000)

Intercept

2.8253**
(1.2824)

90.6808***
(29.4955)

14.2417***
(1.6030)

1.7136***
(0.0554)

0.0865
(0.0690)

Observations
R2

113,452
0.6069

4,147
0.6374

16,562
0.0075

38,692
0.0149

54,051
0.0272

Significant at 1% (***), 5% (**) and 10% (*) levels.

40

Table 9
Investment returns and subsequent donations to parent organization
The table shows regression estimates for a model of the growth in donations to the parent organizations of endowment funds, for a
sample of 29,762 U.S. non-profit organizations between 2009-2017. The dependent variable is the log of the ratio of current year
donations over prior year donations. Donations are estimated based on data reported in Part VIII of the Form 990 filing. Total
donations are defined as sum of Line 1a (federated campaigns), Line 1c (fund raising events), and Line 1f (all other contributions) of
Part VIII of the Form 990 filing. The main explanatory variables are the lagged endowment return, defined as ln(1+Annual
Endowment Return), the net endowment return adjusted for return on the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) value
weighted index, defined as [ln(1+Annual Endowment Return) –ln(1+Annual VWRETD)], and the net endowment return adjusted for
a 60% - 40% combination of the CRSP value weighted index and the CRSP 10-Year U.S. Treasury Bond Index. Data are obtained
from Internal Revenue Service Form 990 filings for the period 2009-2017. Standard errors, clustered for each endowment, appear in
parentheses.
Estimate

Estimate

Estimate

Intercept

0.0175***
(0.0025)

0.0199***
(0.0023)

0.0332***
(0.0025)

Lagged endowment return, unadjusted

0.2152***
(0.0347)
0.1792***
(0.0337)

Lagged endowment return, net of equity market
index

0.1270***
(0.0473)

Lagged endowment return, net of 60%-40% equitydebt balanced portfolio
Observations
R2

103,426
0.0003

Significant at 1% (***), 5% (**) and 10% (*) levels.

41

103,426
0.0003

103,426
0.0001

Table A1
Endowment returns
The table shows summary statistics of net investment returns on endowment funds for a sample of 29,762 U.S. non-profit
organizations between 2009-2017. Each line of the table shows the distribution of annual endowment returns and the comparable
trailing 12-month benchmark returns for observations whose 12-month fiscal year reporting periods end in that month. Endowment
data are obtained from Part V of Schedule D of Internal Revenue Service Form 990 filings. The annual net investment return for each
endowment fund is estimated as endowment investment gains/losses (Line 1c) net of any administrative expenses (Line 1f), divided
by start-of-year endowment assets (Line 1a) plus 0.5 times endowment contributions (Line 1b). Benchmark returns are based on the
Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) value-weighted index, the CRSP 10-Year U.S. Treasury Bond Index, and a “balanced
portfolio” comprised of 60% of the CRSP equity index and 40% of the Treasury bond index.
Observations

Distribution of Endowment returns

Tax Year
Ending
Month
2009m1
2009m2
2009m3
2009m4
2009m5
2009m6
2009m7
2009m8
2009m9
2009m10
2009m11
2009m12
2010m1
2010m2
2010m3
2010m4
2010m5

19
30
220
102
404
5,462
172
509
1,068
92
14
6,028
29
45
354
158
533

25th%tile
-0.2214
-0.3004
-0.2719
-0.2578
-0.2342
-0.1925
-0.1446
-0.1211
-0.0160
0.0238
-0.0068
0.0420
0.0110
0.0472
0.0767
0.0636
0.0602

Median
-0.1743
-0.1981
-0.2185
-0.2100
-0.1888
-0.1473
-0.0857
-0.0754
0.0080
0.0887
0.0378
0.1494
0.1640
0.2056
0.2406
0.1824
0.1173

75th %ile
0.0195
0.0183
-0.0825
-0.1016
-0.0992
-0.0584
0.0075
-0.0078
0.0317
0.1345
0.1525
0.2117
0.2083
0.3237
0.3330
0.2671
0.1474
42

Trailing 12-month benchmark returns
Endowment
Median
minus
10-Year
Balanced
Equity
Treasuries
portfolio
Balanced
-0.3922
0.0828
-0.2022
0.0279
-0.4410
0.0708
-0.2363
0.0381
-0.3861
0.0938
-0.1942
-0.0243
-0.3521
0.0722
-0.1823
-0.0276
-0.3242
0.0748
-0.1646
-0.0242
-0.2690
0.0664
-0.1349
-0.0124
-0.1986
0.0697
-0.0913
0.0055
-0.1820
0.0642
-0.0835
0.0081
-0.0521
0.0743
-0.0016
0.0096
0.1300
0.1019
0.1188
-0.0300
0.3050
0.0345
0.1968
-0.1590
0.3130
-0.0583
0.1645
-0.0151
0.3702
0.0060
0.2245
-0.0605
0.5759
0.0100
0.3495
-0.1439
0.5424
-0.0359
0.3111
-0.0705
0.4182
0.0164
0.2575
-0.0751
0.2231
0.0595
0.1576
-0.0403

2010m6
2010m7
2010m8
2010m9
2010m10
2010m11
2010m12
2011m1
2011m2
2011m3
2011m4
2011m5
2011m6
2011m7
2011m8
2011m9
2011m10
2011m11
2011m12
2012m1
2012m2
2012m3
2012m4
2012m5
2012m6
2012m7
2012m8
2012m9
2012m10
2012m11
2012m12
2013m1
2013m2

7,590
254
703
1,436
127
30
7,873
34
58
417
200
622
8,672
291
780
1,566
138
35
8,182
36
62
456
216
658
9,320
337
840
1,679
154
42
8,632
40
56

0.0417
0.0341
0.0187
0.0287
0.0412
0.0298
0.0346
0.0272
0.0316
0.0512
0.0385
0.0748
0.0731
0.0330
0.0382
-0.0206
0.0032
0.0005
-0.0259
-0.0017
0.0034
0.0031
-0.0082
-0.0485
-0.0180
-0.0028
0.0185
0.0512
0.0330
0.0410
0.0397
0.0182
0.0160

0.0925
0.0846
0.0482
0.0702
0.0903
0.0645
0.0873
0.0963
0.1277
0.0920
0.1036
0.1530
0.1595
0.1017
0.0877
-0.0015
0.0203
0.0253
-0.0023
0.0072
0.0160
0.0208
0.0038
-0.0253
0.0003
0.0144
0.0539
0.1272
0.0687
0.0667
0.0878
0.0687
0.0542

0.1228
0.1133
0.0723
0.0951
0.1259
0.0970
0.1163
0.1216
0.1590
0.1189
0.1388
0.1891
0.1999
0.1363
0.1176
0.0132
0.0379
0.0392
0.0142
0.0352
0.0406
0.0401
0.0273
0.0039
0.0170
0.0353
0.0804
0.1648
0.0944
0.1051
0.1149
0.0949
0.0728
43

0.1646
0.1523
0.0693
0.1167
0.1930
0.1344
0.1771
0.2459
0.2500
0.1791
0.1891
0.2721
0.3154
0.2013
0.1829
-0.0082
0.0639
0.0519
-0.0107
0.0232
0.0262
0.0474
0.0112
-0.0408
0.0145
0.0486
0.1418
0.2808
0.1335
0.1476
0.1577
0.1578
0.1212

0.0923
0.0919
0.1194
0.1057
0.1039
0.0755
0.0745
0.0523
0.0500
0.0644
0.0624
0.0620
0.0211
0.0446
0.0567
0.0899
0.0824
0.0997
0.1660
0.1766
0.1643
0.1422
0.1578
0.1652
0.1644
0.1471
0.0924
0.0544
0.0642
0.0649
0.0359
0.0115
0.0342

0.1357
0.1281
0.0893
0.1123
0.1574
0.1108
0.1361
0.1685
0.1700
0.1332
0.1384
0.1880
0.1977
0.1386
0.1324
0.0310
0.0713
0.0710
0.0600
0.0846
0.0815
0.0853
0.0699
0.0416
0.0745
0.0880
0.1220
0.1902
0.1058
0.1145
0.1090
0.0992
0.0864

-0.0432
-0.0435
-0.0411
-0.0421
-0.0671
-0.0464
-0.0488
-0.0722
-0.0423
-0.0412
-0.0347
-0.0350
-0.0382
-0.0369
-0.0447
-0.0325
-0.0510
-0.0457
-0.0622
-0.0773
-0.0655
-0.0645
-0.0661
-0.0669
-0.0741
-0.0736
-0.0681
-0.0630
-0.0370
-0.0478
-0.0211
-0.0305
-0.0322

2013m3
2013m4
2013m5
2013m6
2013m7
2013m8
2013m9
2013m10
2013m11
2013m12
2014m1
2014m2
2014m3
2014m4
2014m5
2014m6
2014m7
2014m8
2014m9
2014m10
2014m11
2014m12
2015m1
2015m2
2015m3
2015m4
2015m5
2015m6
2015m7
2015m8
2015m9
2015m10
2015m11

469
233
649
9,666
350
856
1,714
168
42
8,900
36
56
465
224
638
9,828
353
841
1,699
173
45
8,953
36
55
482
227
641
9,854
354
825
1,686
165
40

0.0371
0.0281
0.0818
0.0497
0.0377
0.0315
0.0384
0.0450
0.0519
0.0497
0.0020
0.0129
0.0457
0.0397
0.0695
0.0848
0.0416
0.0678
0.0361
0.0395
0.0440
0.0163
0.0115
0.0337
0.0224
0.0206
0.0215
-0.0004
0.0042
-0.0419
-0.0444
-0.0108
-0.0083

0.0719
0.0858
0.1379
0.0917
0.0993
0.0722
0.0813
0.1011
0.0910
0.1166
0.0501
0.1045
0.0931
0.0796
0.1015
0.1330
0.0846
0.1270
0.0691
0.0630
0.0653
0.0375
0.0266
0.0560
0.0442
0.0470
0.0381
0.0118
0.0242
-0.0189
-0.0213
0.0044
0.0023

0.0922
0.1124
0.1636
0.1176
0.1414
0.1011
0.1171
0.1431
0.1543
0.1571
0.0916
0.1385
0.1196
0.1087
0.1225
0.1579
0.1080
0.1532
0.0933
0.0828
0.0828
0.0571
0.0488
0.0743
0.0645
0.0677
0.0572
0.0284
0.0471
0.0011
0.0000
0.0194
0.0150
44

0.1335
0.1584
0.2633
0.1985
0.2489
0.1856
0.1982
0.2638
0.2874
0.3047
0.2006
0.2456
0.2086
0.1928
0.1941
0.2463
0.1595
0.2380
0.1633
0.1424
0.1381
0.1051
0.1083
0.1187
0.1021
0.1098
0.0991
0.0486
0.0835
-0.0209
-0.0296
0.0206
0.0019

0.0587
0.0475
-0.0161
-0.0392
-0.0584
-0.0682
-0.0455
-0.0360
-0.0567
-0.0690
-0.0212
-0.0282
-0.0357
-0.0443
0.0053
0.0338
0.0383
0.0716
0.0416
0.0480
0.0760
0.1015
0.1087
0.0762
0.0892
0.0716
0.0475
0.0307
0.0465
0.0260
0.0555
0.0340
0.0159

0.1036
0.1140
0.1515
0.1035
0.1260
0.0841
0.1007
0.1439
0.1498
0.1552
0.1119
0.1361
0.1109
0.0979
0.1186
0.1613
0.1110
0.1714
0.1146
0.1046
0.1133
0.1037
0.1085
0.1017
0.0969
0.0945
0.0784
0.0414
0.0687
-0.0021
0.0044
0.0260
0.0075

-0.0317
-0.0282
-0.0136
-0.0118
-0.0267
-0.0118
-0.0194
-0.0428
-0.0588
-0.0386
-0.0617
-0.0316
-0.0177
-0.0184
-0.0171
-0.0282
-0.0264
-0.0444
-0.0455
-0.0417
-0.0480
-0.0661
-0.0819
-0.0457
-0.0527
-0.0475
-0.0403
-0.0296
-0.0445
-0.0167
-0.0257
-0.0216
-0.0052

2015m12
2016m1
2016m2
2016m3
2016m4
2016m5
2016m6
2016m7
2016m8
2016m9
2016m10
2016m11
2016m12
2017m1
2017m2
2017m3
2017m4
2017m5
2017m6
2017m7
2017m8
2017m9
2017m10
2017m11
2017m12
Full
Sample

8,970
37
56
460
215
650
9,839
358
826
1,677
162
37
8,998
37
56
436
214
615
9,783
335
809
1,652
163
36
5,923

-0.0299
-0.0513
-0.0869
-0.0394
-0.0401
-0.0378
-0.0274
-0.0024
0.0193
0.0399
0.0090
0.0252
0.0291
0.0251
0.0480
0.0475
0.0419
0.0742
0.0668
0.0420
0.0513
0.0594
0.0608
0.0774
0.0829

-0.0126
-0.0305
-0.0402
-0.0222
-0.0180
-0.0212
-0.0073
0.0113
0.0474
0.0710
0.0294
0.0445
0.0548
0.0736
0.0975
0.0906
0.0822
0.1034
0.1014
0.0852
0.0862
0.0969
0.1217
0.1322
0.1266

0.0013
0.0003
0.0005
0.0007
0.0047
0.0009
0.0084
0.0286
0.0671
0.0917
0.0401
0.0596
0.0739
0.1136
0.1376
0.1127
0.1074
0.1187
0.1233
0.1084
0.1093
0.1201
0.1493
0.1550
0.1500

-0.0168
-0.0471
-0.0970
-0.0231
-0.0201
-0.0162
0.0062
0.0327
0.1017
0.1437
0.0419
0.0814
0.1268
0.2216
0.2606
0.1801
0.1775
0.1717
0.1791
0.1582
0.1568
0.1807
0.2300
0.2145
0.2066

0.0107
-0.0016
0.0412
0.0312
0.0349
0.0401
0.0949
0.0821
0.0748
0.0546
0.0460
0.0068
0.0070
-0.0199
-0.0289
-0.0251
-0.0099
-0.0034
-0.0368
-0.0399
-0.0157
-0.0313
-0.0171
0.0221
0.0280

-0.0058
-0.0289
-0.0417
-0.0014
0.0019
0.0063
0.0417
0.0525
0.0910
0.1080
0.0435
0.0516
0.0789
0.1250
0.1448
0.0980
0.1025
0.1017
0.0928
0.0789
0.0878
0.0959
0.1312
0.1375
0.1352

-0.0067
-0.0016
0.0016
-0.0208
-0.0199
-0.0275
-0.0490
-0.0412
-0.0435
-0.0370
-0.0141
-0.0071
-0.0241
-0.0514
-0.0473
-0.0074
-0.0203
0.0017
0.0086
0.0062
-0.0016
0.0010
-0.0095
-0.0053
-0.0086

189,842

0.0019

0.0478

0.1116

0.1268

0.0408

0.0924

-0.0446

45

