NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHACKLING THE IDENTIFICATION POLICE?
Christopher J. Ruhm
Working Paper 25320
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25320

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018

This paper was presented on November 19, 2018 as the Presidential address at the 88th Annual
Meeting of the Southern Economic Association, in Washington DC. I thank the University of
Virginia Bankard Fund for providing financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Shackling the Identification Police?
Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 25320
November 2018
JEL No. A11,B4,C50,H0,I0,J0,O0
ABSTRACT
This paper examines potential tradeoffs between research methods in answering important
questions versus providing more cleanly identified estimates on problems that are potentially of
lesser interest. The strengths and limitations of experimental and quasi-experimental methods are
discussed and it is postulated that confidence in the results obtained may sometimes be
overvalued compared to the importance of the topics addressed. The consequences of this are
modeled and several suggestions are provided regarding possible steps to encourage greater focus
on questions of fundamental importance.

Christopher J. Ruhm
Frank Batten School of
Leadership and Public Policy
University of Virginia
235 McCormick Rd.
P.O. Box 400893
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4893
and NBER
ruhm@virginia.edu

Introduction
This paper provides some “big picture” thoughts on tradeoffs in the types of empirical
research conducted in the broad area of applied microeconomics, by which I include fields
such as labor, health, public, education and environmental economics. Nothing here is
necessarily original but, hopefully, it will be thought-provoking.
When I was in graduate school and in my first years thereafter, applied microeconomics
was dominated by increasingly sophisticated econometric methods that, to my view, often
yielded little confidence in the results because their plausibility rested upon often opaque
and possibly incorrect statistical assumptions. Others, with far more expertise than I, have
previously expressed similar reservations. For instance, Edward Leamer’s famous (1983)
article, “Let’s Take the Con Out of Econometrics”, emphasized the fragility of many
empirical estimates to even small changes in model specifications.
Therefore, it was a revelation to me to read David Card’s (1990) paper using the Mariel
Boatlift as a plausibly exogenous event for studying immigration effects on the wages of
low-skilled workers. This approach struck me as clean, transparent and relativelyassumption free. I was not the only alone in feeling this way. This and other studies
emphasizing natural experiments led to what Angrist and Pishke (2010) reasonably
described as a “credibility revolution” in empirical economics. One result is that all welltrained applied micro-economists now think about identification strategies and have
considerable familiarity with “quasi-experimental” methods such as instrumental variable
(IV), regression discontinuity (RD), differences-in-differences (DD) and panel data
techniques. Taking one step further, “experimental” designs with randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) are increasingly viewed (by some) to be the “gold standard” of applied
economic research.
Evidence of the rapid growth in these methods can be obtained from Kleven’s (2018) textual
analysis of more than 4500 National Bureau of Economic Research working papers in the
area of public economics published since 1975. He shows that over the five year periods
ending in 1980 and 2017 the fraction of papers using the term identification rose from 1%
to 46%. Over the same period, the share using quasi-experimental methods, laboratory
experiments and RCTs grew from 0% in all three cases to 21%, 7% and 9%. By the fiveyear period concluding in 2017, DD, RD and event study methods were employed in 22%,
12% and 9% of the papers. Nor are these patterns limited to public economics. Cameron et
al.’s (2016) comprehensive review indicates that the vast majority of impact evaluations in

Page 1

international development now use experimental or quasi-experimental methods. 1 They
found that there were an average of seven such evaluations were published annually from
1981-1999. But the numbers rose rapidly thereafter reaching 82 in 2004, 173 in 2008, 296 in
2010, and 377 in 2012 (the last year studied). Similarly, Panhans and Singleton (2017),
demonstrate rapid increases in mentions of experimental and quasi-experimental methods
(differences-in-differences, regression discontinuity, natural experiment and randomized
controlled trials) and instrumental variables since the early 1990s for the top four general
economics journals and eleven top field journals.2
The increased use of experimental and quasi-experimental methods has facilitated major
contributions to empirical research across a wide variety of fields. However, I am concerned
that the “identification police” are becoming a too powerful force in our profession. I use
the term identification police as a short-hand to indicate an almost exclusive focus on
research designs (generally experimental and quasi-experimental) that provide clean
identification. My worry is that excessive reliance on such methods may move us away from
examining issues that are of fundamental significance but for which unambiguous causal
inference is more difficult to obtain. There are often likely to be tradeoffs, both direct and
indirect, between the confidence in and importance of the results obtained from empirical
research.3 Disproportionate attention to the former may lead to us to focus on inquiries
that, while clearly identified, may sometimes be of secondary value, whereas other critical
issues may be neglected.

Limitations of Experimental and Quasi-experimental Approaches
The limitations of experimental and quasi-experimental approaches have been discussed
previously in considerable detail (e.g. Heckman and Smith 1995; Keane 2010; Deaton and
Cartwright 2018). One concern is that the average treatment effects (ATE) in small RTC’s
may be imprecisely estimated, even if they are unbiased. Another is that the estimated
treatment effects may poorly indicate the ATE of interest. For instance, the local average
1

Over the period examined (1990-2012), 66% of the evaluations were based on RCTs while 17%, 8% and 2%
employed DD, IV and RD methods.
2
They also indicate differences in the use of these strategies across fields. For example, they highlight the
frequency of DD methods in health economics, RD estimates in public economics and RCTs in development
economics.
3
I am not claiming that this framing is novel. For instance, after drafting this paper, I became aware of lessons for graduate students by Amy Finkelstein in 2006 where she described an article production possibility
frontier with the two arguments being “interest/importance of question” and “how convincingly can you answer this question” (see
econ.lse.ac.uk/staff/spischke/phds/Amy%20Finkelstein%20IAP%20talk%202006.ppt).

Page 2

treatment effect (LATE) obtained from IV models, may differ markedly from the
population-wide ATE. This relates to the more general issue that clean identification may
yield estimates that are internally but not externally valid. Also, these methods may reveal
what the treatment effect is without telling us why, which limits the usefulness of the findings
without the addition of theory or structure.4 Finally, the reliability of estimated treatment
effects may be jeopardized if there are post-randomization differences in RTC’s (e.g. because
of differential attrition and placebo or Hawthorne effects) or because of the poor quality of
many “natural experiments”, whereby the treatment and control groups are actually
dissimilar.5
My emphasis here, however, is less about potential shortcomings of experimental and quasiexperimental techniques per se – all methods have limitations – than to the possibility that
excessive reliance on them leads to an overemphasis on confidence in the results obtained
at the cost of failing to investigate important questions ill-suited to the use of these
techniques. To some extent, this may reflect the aforementioned distinction between
internal and external validity. For instance, successful IV analyses may provide an unbiased
and hopefully precise measure of a local average treatment effect but only limited
information on overall policy effects of broader interest. Consider Angrist and Krueger’s
(1991) use of birthdates as a source of exogenous variation in the ages at which compulsory
schooling ends, in their IV analysis of the effects of education on earnings. The resulting
LATE indicates the returns to completing approximately the 10th or 11th grade of schooling,
versus not doing so, but provides little information on the gains from higher levels of
education that are probably of greater current interest.6
But to reiterate, my concern is more wide-ranging than this. It is that the methods most
well suited to answer important economic issues are likely to vary with the specific question
examined and that an overemphasis on causal inference will sometime be counterproductive.
Research problems are generally best addressed using heterogeneous set of research
approaches, often supplementing or substituting for experimental and quasi-experimental

4

This point is sometimes made to justify the “superiority” of structural modeling but the real issue is that
“black-box” analyses that do not indicate mechanisms have limited applicability. Many different methods –
including carefully designed but purely descriptive investigations – can sometimes help to get inside the
“black-box”.
5
A related issue receiving recent attention are the potential limitations in common tests of the “parallel
trends” assumption needed when estimating DD models (Jaeger, Joyce, and Robert 2018; Kahn-Lang and
Lang 2018).
6
Concerns have also been raised that the estimated LATE in this application might be biased because of a
weak instruments problem (Bound, Jaeger, and Baker 1995) and since the composition of births may not
randomly distributed over the calendar year (Buckles and Hungerman 2013).

Page 3

techniques with non-experimental approaches. This will be true as research on given topic
accumulates over time but also, in some cases, applies to individual projects. These
alternative approaches may be quite varied, sometimes including highly technical methods
(e.g. estimation of dynamic discrete choice structural models) but with useful information
also often frequently provided using “simple” descriptive, correlational and reduced-form
regression analyses of observational data.7
Research Questions Without Clean Identification
A charter member of the identification police will likely rank empirical methods from
extremely useful to worthless (or even harmful) in the following order: randomized
controlled trials, instrumental variable and regression discontinuity applications,
differences-in-differences and panel data methods, propensity score and other matching
estimators, regression, unconditional means and descriptive analyses.
Such a ranking has merit in some situations but is entirely misleading in others. For
instance, RCT’s are often viewed as the “gold-standard” but contain fundamental
limitations for many questions. They poorly indicate the treatment effects of interest when
general equilibrium impacts of large-scale changes differ sharply from the partial equilibrium
effects of small scale interventions. They provide limited information on the long-run effects
of sustained interventions because it is usually financially prohibitive to run RCTs for
lengthy periods of time. And randomization is simply not possible for many critical
questions. Quasi-experimental methods can at times address some of these problems. For
instance, observational or administrative data will often be available for lengthy periods
and at relatively low cost.8 However, these approaches often contain other limitations, as
already discussed.
To get other perspectives on these issues, I sent out the following query on social media
(Facebook and Twitter) and email: “I would like to get your best examples of IMPORTANT
microeconomic questions (in labor/health/public/environmental/education etc.) where
clean identification is difficult or impossible to obtain.” Responses included the following.9

7

I put “simple” in quotes because I believe that the expertise and experience required to implement these
methods well is often drastically underestimated and receives too little attention in the profession.
8
Distinguishing between partial and general equilibrium effects may still be difficult but can sometimes be
accomplished with ingenious quasi-experimental designs. For example, see Finkelstein’s (2007) analysis of the
effects of the introduction of Medicare on hospital spending.
9
Some responses have been edited for clarity or brevity. I thank Charles Courtemanche, Arindrajit Dube,
Donald Fullerton, James Harrigan, Garth Heutel, Stephen Holland, Matthew Kraft, Thomas McGuire, Maya
Rossin-Slater and Diane Schanzenbach for supplying these examples.

Page 4

•! Effects of trade liberalization on the distribution of real wages.
•! Contributions of location, preferences, local policy decisions and luck to geographic
differences in morbidity and mortality rates.
•! Effects of the school climate and work environment on teacher and student
outcomes.
•! Importance of norms on firms’ wage setting.
•! Extent to which economic factors explain the rise in obesity.
•! Impact of family structure on child outcomes.
•! Effects of inequality, child abuse and domestic violence on later life outcomes.
•! Social cost of a ton of SO2 emissions.
•! Effect of race on healthcare use.
•! Effect of climate change on agricultural productivity.
I concur that none of subjects these can be fully addressed using experimental approaches
although, in some cases, quasi-experimental methods might provide useful information..
This suggests that the identification police have become so influential that the term “clean
identification” may be synonymous with RCT’s for at least some segments of our profession.
For a more concrete indication of the value and limitations of experimental and quasiexperimental approaches, consider the case of the fatal drug epidemic, which is possibly the
most serious public health problem in the United States today. To provide brief background,
the number of US drug deaths increased from 16,849 in 1999 to 63,632 in 2016 (Hedegaard,
Warner, and Miniño 2017) and have been the leading cause of injury deaths since 2009
(Paulozzi 2012). The rise in overdose mortality is believed to have been initially fueled by
enormous increases in the availability of prescription opioids, with more recent growth
dominated by heroin and fentanyl.10 However, some researchers argue that the underlying
causes are economic and social decline (rather than supply-factors) that have particularly
affected disadvantaged Americans (Case and Deaton 2017).
What role can different methodological approaches play in increasing our understanding of
this issue? RCTs could be designed to test certain short-term interventions – such as
comparing the efficacy of specific medication-assisted treatment options for drug addicts –
but probably have limited broader applicability since randomization will not be practical
for most potential policies and longer-term effects will be difficult to evaluate. Quasiexperimental methods have provided useful information on specific interventions such as

10

This is partially the result of a shift to illegal drugs following the release of an abuse-resistant formulation
of OxyContin (Jones, Mack, and Paulozzi 2013; Hedegaard, Warner, and Miniño 2017; Alpert, Powell, and
Pacula 2018; Evans, Lieber, and Power 2018).

Page 5

the effects of prescription drug monitoring programs (Dowell et al. 2016; Buchmueller and
Carey 2018) and on the effects of other policies, like the legalization of medical marijuana
(Chu 2015; Powell, Pacula, and Jacobson 2018; Bradford et al. 2018). However, the
challenges of using these strategies should not be understated since the results often depend
on precise characteristics of the policies and the timing of implementation, which may be
difficult to ascertain in practice.11 Moreover, while the estimated policy impacts are often
reasonably large, they are dwarfed by the overall increase in fatal drug overdoses. Efforts
to understand the root causes of the drug epidemic are therefore likely to be resistant to
clean identification and instead require an “all of the above” approach using experimental
and quasi-experimental methods where possible, but also the accumulation evidence from a
variety of data sources and techniques, including descriptive and regression analyses that
in isolation may fail to meet desired standards of causal inference but, hopefully, can be
combined with other investigations to provide a compelling preponderance of evidence.
The relationship between smoking and lung cancer provides a striking example of in
important question that was “answered” using strategies that would be viewed as
unacceptable today by the identification police. The understanding of tobacco use as a
major causal factor was not based upon RCTs involving humans but rather resulted the
accretion of evidence from a wide variety of sources including: bench science, animal
experiments and epidemiological evidence from non-randomized prospective and
retrospective studies (Proctor 2012). Quasi-experimental evidence was eventually provided
(e.g. from analyses of changes in tobacco taxes) but long after the question had been largely
resolved.
To summarize, clean identification strategies will frequently be extremely useful for
examining the partial equilibrium effects of specific policies or outcomes – such as the effects
of reducing class sizes from 30 to 20 students or the consequences of extreme deprivation
in-utero – but will often be less successful at examining the big “what if” questions related
to root causes or effects of major changes in institutions or policies. This is not to say that
such topics are never amenable to experimental or quasi-experimental approaches. One
reason Card’s (1990) Mariel boatlift paper has been so influential is because it addresses a
broad policy question – the labor market effects of immigration. Another example is
Manning et al.’s (1987) analysis of the RAND health insurance experiment which, among
other aspects, provided important evidence on the price elasticity of demand for medical

11

Horowitz et al. (2018) provide an excellent example and analysis of these problems in the context of estimating the effects of prescription drug monitoring programs.

Page 6

care.12 However, these examples may be the exception rather than the rule. In many cases,
cleanly identified research strategies answer relatively narrow questions.

Model
Consider a simple model showing possible tradeoffs between the importance of research
questions and the confidence in the findings obtained from studies examining them. Assume
that a research project yields social benefit (𝑆) according to:
𝑆(𝐼, 𝐴)
where 𝐼 indicates importance of the question and 𝐴 is accuracy of the result. With
subscripts indicating partial derivatives, 𝑆𝐼 , 𝑆 𝐴 ≥ 0 and 𝑆(0, 𝐴) = 𝑆(𝐼, 0) = 0 . Thus,
social benefit increases with both importance and accuracy, while research that is
unimportant or completely inaccurate supplies no social benefit. In the pathological case
where 𝐴 < 0, the research has a negative social benefit.
Accuracy is generally unknown ex ante, but individuals have priors on it.13 The expected
social benefit of the project (𝐸) is therefore determined by:
𝐸(𝐼, 𝐶)
where 𝐶 ∈ [0,1], denotes the confidence in the results. If 𝐶 = 0 the research adds no new
knowledge and if 𝐶 = 1, the research findings are correct with certainty.14
The optimization problem for an individual maximizing the expected social benefit of a
research project, subject to a time constraint, is:
𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝐸(𝐼, 𝐶)
𝐼,𝐶

𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 𝑡𝑜

12

𝑡𝐼 𝐼 + 𝑡𝐶 𝐶 = 𝑇 ,

(1)

Interestingly, the findings of both studies have recently been challenged. Borjas (2017) argues that Card’s
results are overturned when focusing on the wages of high school dropouts, who he views as the most relevant
comparison group; but this conclusion has been disputed by other researchers (Peri and Yasenov 2018;
Clemens and Hunt 2017). Aron-Dine et al. (2013) highlight potential nonrandom assignment to insurance
plans and differential participation and reporting rates across them in creating biased results in Manning et
al.’s analysis RAND health insurance experiment; they also caution against attempting to derive a single
estimated demand elasticity from the complicated nonlinear health insurance contracts contained in the
experiment.
13
Importance is also not fully known ex ante but this source of uncertainty is not focused upon here.
14
If 𝐶 < 0, the research reduces understanding (e.g. deliberately distortionary research). This possibility is
ruled out here.

Page 7

where 𝑡𝐼 and 𝑡𝐶 , respectively, are the time prices of research investments in importance and
confidence and with T being the total time available. First-order conditions (FOC) imply
investing time such that
𝐸𝐼 𝐸 𝐶
=
,
𝑡𝐶
𝑡𝐼

(2)

which requires choosing 𝐼 ∗ and 𝐶 ∗ such that the marginal expected social benefits of time
spent on importance and confidence are equalized. One implication is that if the time price
of confidence falls (e.g. because technology makes it faster to conduct RCT’s or get
information on policy changes with discontinuous effects), optimal expected social benefit
and confidence (𝐸 ∗ and 𝐶 ∗ ) increase, with uncertainty about whether 𝐼 ∗ rises or falls. This
may provide one reason why the popularity of “credible” research designs has grown in
recent years. Also, if the number of research projects is endogenous, reductions time prices
will increase the optimal quantity of investigations, as well as the expected social benefit of
each project.15
The model to this point emphasizes the tradeoff between confidence and importance of the
research results because time spent on one detracts from that available for the other.
However, the could also be more direct tradeoffs. Assume that confidence varies
systematically with the method of analysis. Define research methods using a continuous
variable 𝑀 ∈ [0,1], where 𝑀 = 0 refers to strategies yielding no confidence and 𝑀 = 1 for
those providing complete confidence in the accuracy of the result. Further assume that
confidence is higher for methods with cleaner identification: thus 𝑀 might be highest for
well-designed RCT’s, somewhat lower for quasi-experimental designs and lower still for nonexperimental analyses of observational data. However, there may be a direct tradeoff if,
ceteris paribus, methods providing more confidence refer to questions of lesser importance
(e.g. because the well-estimated LATE from an IV model is of less general interest than the
ATE from a less well identified regression analysis covering a broader range of the treatment
variable).
We can incorporate this into the expected social benefit function as:

For instance, an individual will choose to conduct 𝑁 ∗ projects of identical scope (i.e. the same [𝐼, 𝐶] levels)
by solving the optimization problem:
max 𝑁 × 𝐸(𝐼, 𝐶) 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 𝑡𝑜 𝑁 × (𝑡𝐼 𝐼 + 𝑡𝐶 𝐶) = 𝑇 ̃ ,
15

𝑁,𝐼,𝐶

where 𝑇 ̃ is now a global time constraint. FOC for choosing 𝐼 ∗ and 𝐶 ∗ for each individual project are still as
shown in equation (2). In addition, a reduction in time prices relaxes the overall budget constraint allowing
for higher levels of the reduced price input and in the expected social benefit of each research project, as well
as an increase in the number of projects conducted.

Page 8

𝐸(𝐼(𝑀 ), 𝐶(𝑀 )),
where 𝐶𝑀 ≥ 0 but 𝐼𝑀 < 0. The optimization problem then becomes:
𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝐸(𝐼(𝑀 ), 𝐶(𝑀))

𝐼,𝐶,𝑀

𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 𝑡𝑜

𝑡𝐼 𝐼 + 𝑡𝐶 𝐶 = 𝑇 .

(3)

In addition to the FOC already described, the researcher optimally chooses 𝑀 ∗ to achieve:
−

𝐶𝑀
𝐸
= 𝐼.
𝐼𝑀
𝐸𝐶

(4)

This implies that 𝑀 ∗ rises when: 1) the confidence gains from using robust methods of
causal inference increase; 2) the loss of importance from employing these techniques declines;
and 3) the marginal social benefits of confidence are, ceteris paribus, high relative to those
for importance.16
Next consider the case where decision-makers (e.g. journal editors) overweight confidence
according to:
𝐽 (𝐼 , 𝐶) = 𝐸(𝛼𝐼, 𝐶),
where 0 < 𝛼 < 1. A researcher attempting to maximize professional success then faces the
optimization problem:
𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝐸(𝛼𝐼, 𝐶)
𝐼,𝐶

𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 𝑡𝑜

𝑡𝐼 𝐼 + 𝑡𝐶 𝐶 = 𝑇 .

(5)

First-order conditions imply choosing 𝐶 ∗ and 𝐼 ∗ such that
𝛼

𝐸𝐼 𝐸 𝐶
=
.
𝑡𝐼
𝑡𝐶

(6)

(6) implies that confidence and importance will, respectively, exceed and fall short of social
optimum. When incorporating methods directly into the optimization problem (as in
equation 3), the additional FOC is:
−

𝐶𝑀
𝐸
= 𝛼 𝐼.
𝐼𝑀
𝐸𝐶

16

(7)

The last result occurs because diminishing returns imply that higher investments in confidence will be
needed to reduce 𝐸𝐶 to a specified level.
Page 9

which implies that methods will be overly weighted towards those that provide clean
identification.

Where Do We Go From Here?
My concern is that overemphasis on the use of clean identification strategies, that provide
a high level of confidence in the results, may sometimes come at the cost of examining less
important questions. A potential downside is that the study of critical issues may be left to
other disciplines whose practitioners are typically less well-trained than economists to think
in terms of causal inference.
Have the identification police become too powerful? The answer to this question is
subjective and open to debate. However, I believe that it is becoming increasingly difficult
to publish research on significant questions that lack sufficiently clean identification and,
conversely, that research using quasi-experimental and (particularly) experimental
strategies yielding high confidence but on questions of limited importance are more often
being published. In talking with PhD students, I hear about training that emphasizes the
search for discontinuities and policy variations, rather than on seeking to answer questions
of fundamental importance.
At professional presentations, experienced economists
sometimes mention “correlational” or “reduced-form” approaches with disdain, suggesting
that such research has nothing to add to the cannon of applied economics.
I do not claim that these concerns are universal. For instance, the top general journals
certainly emphasize the need for important contributions and some outlets focus on
overarching questions addressed using a multiplicity of approaches that are heavy in data
description and breadth of analysis, but often using weaker causal designs. However, the
individuals publishing these pieces often are well-established and, I suspect, would have
been ill-advised do so earlier in their careers. Given the current incentives, I would certainly
caution current graduate students or newly minted Ph.D.’s against conducting such
research, since it would place at risk their own career advancement. However, it seems
worth considering whether it is desirable for the next generation of scholars to be
discouraged from attempting to answer these crucial but less well-identified questions.
If there is agreement that we are currently sacrificing importance by worshipping at the
altar of confidence, what should be done? I have no solutions but conclude by suggesting
some possibilities.
The first is to explicitly emphasize the centrality of the questions we attempt to answer,
rather than the tools used to do so. Causal inference is extremely useful but does not define

Page 10

applied microeconomic analysis. Obviously, there will be heterogeneity in the weights placed
on importance versus confidence as arguments in the research social welfare function and it
would be useful to have discussion and debate on these issues in academic journals and
through panels at professional meetings or in other venues.17
A second step is to increase the incentives for research that addresses substantively
significant topics. For instance, journal editors could further emphasize that importance of
the contribution, rather than confidence in the findings alone, will be a key component of
acceptance decisions. Again, there will be variation in the importance-confidence tradeoff
across academic outlets and editors could clearly state the social welfare function used by
their journal. Many journals already ask referees discuss the contribution made by the
manuscript but these rankings could be made more comprehensive and explicit. Similarly,
paper submitters could be strongly encouraged to emphasize the significance of the research
question and findings. One potentially useful change would be to urge researchers to shorten
or eliminate the “literature review” at the beginning of the paper but (as is routine in some
other disciplines) to provide a much more detailed conclusion section that, rather than
simply repeating the results, places them in the context of prior findings and clearly
indicates the importance of the new knowledge obtained.
Third, the central role of questions, rather than tools, could receive increased emphasis in
economics graduate programs, although this will be difficult to achieve without
corresponding changes in professional research incentives. One suggestion would be to
include at least one or two outstanding papers using purely descriptive methods (not even
regressions!) as required readings in graduate field courses.
Should we shackle the identification police? Absolutely not! But nor should we ignore our
profession’s primary responsibility to address substantively important questions, even
when clean identification is elusive.

17

These discussions are already occurring although, to my view, they have often been somewhat sterile
addressing, for example, the superiority of structural versus reduced-form methods.

Page 11

References
Alpert, Abby, David Powell, and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula. 2018. “Supply-Side Drug
Policy in the Presence of Substitutes: Evidence from the Introduction of AbuseDeterrent Opioids.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10 (4): 1–35.
doi:10.3386/w23031.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger. 1991. “Does Compulsory School Attendance
Affect Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (4): 979–1014.
Angrist, Joshua D, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2010. “The Credibility Revolution in
Empirical Economics: How Better Research Design Is Taking the Con out of
Econometrics.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 (2): 3–30.
doi:10.1257/jep.24.2.3.
Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein. 2013. “The RAND Health
Insurance Experiment, Three Decades Later.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 27
(1): 197–222. doi:10.1257/jep.27.1.197.
Borjas, George J. 2017. “The Wage Impact of the Marielitos: A Reappraisal.” ILR
Review 70 (5): 1077–1110. doi:10.1177/0019793917692945.
Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina M. Baker. 1995. “Problems with
Instrumental Variables Estimation When the Correlation between the Instruments
and the Endogenous Explanatory Variable Is Weak.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 90 (430): 443–50. doi:10.1080/01621459.1995.10476536.
Bradford, Ashley C., W. David Bradford, Amanda Abraham, and Grace Bagwell
Adams. 2018. “Association Between US State Medical Cannabis Laws and Opioid
Prescribing in the Medicare Part D Population.” JAMA Internal Medicine 178 (5):
667–72. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.0266.
Buchmueller, Thomas C, and Colleen Carey. 2018. “The Effect of Prescription Drug
Monitoring Programs on Opioid Utilization in Medicare.” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy. doi:10.3386/w23148.
Buckles, Kasey S., and Daniel M. Hungerman. 2013. “Season of Birth and Later
Outcomes: Old Questions, New Answers.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95
(3): 711–24. doi:10.1162/REST_a_00314.
Cameron, Drew B., Anjini Mishra, and Annette N. Brown. 2016. “The Growth of
Impact Evaluation for International Development: How Much Have We Learned?”
Journal of Development Effectiveness 8 (1): 1–21.
doi:10.1080/19439342.2015.1034156.
Card, David. 1990. “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.”

Page 12

Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43 (2): 245. doi:10.2307/2523702.
Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 2017. “Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Chu, Yu-Wei Luke. 2015. “Do Medical Marijuana Laws Increase Hard-Drug Use?”
Journal of Law and Economics 58 (2): 481–517. doi:10.1086/684043.
Clemens, Michael A., and Jennifer Hunt. 2017. “The Labor Market Effects of Refugee
Waves: Reconciling Conflicting Results.” 23433. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 23433.
Deaton, Angus, and Nancy Cartwright. 2018. “Understanding and Misunderstanding
Randomized Controlled Trials.” Social Science and Medicine.
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.12.005.
Dowell, Deborah, Kun Zhang, Rita K. Noonan, and Jason M. Hockenberry. 2016.
“Mandatory Provider Review and Pain Clinic Laws Reduce the Amounts of
Opioids Prescribed and Overdose Death Rates.” Health Affairs 35 (10): 1876–83.
doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0448.
Evans, William N, Ethan Lieber, and Patrick Power. 2018. “How the Reformulation of
OxyContin Ignited the Heroin Epidemic.” Review of Economics and Statistics, no.
Forthcoming.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2007. “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the
Introduction of Medicare.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1): 1–37.
doi:10.1162/qjec.122.1.1.
Heckman, James J, and Jeffrey A Smith. 1995. “Assessing the Case for Social
Experiments.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (2): 85–110.
doi:10.1257/jep.9.2.85.
Hedegaard, Holly, Margaret Warner, and Arialdi M Miniño. 2017. “Drug Overdose
Deaths in the United States, 1999-2016.” NCHS Data Brief, no. 294.
Horowitz, Jill, Corey S. Davis, Lynn S. McClellan, Rebecca S. Fordon, and Ellen Meara.
2018. “The Problem of Data Quality in Analyses of Opioid Regulation: The Case of
Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 24947.
Jaeger, David A., Theodore Joyce, and Kaestner Robert. 2018. “Does Reality TV
Induce Real Effects? On the Questionable Association Between 16 and Pregnant
and Teenage Childbearing.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics forthcoming.
Jones, Christopher M, Karin A Mack, and Leonard J Paulozzi. 2013. “Pharmaceutical
Overdose Deaths, United States, 2010.” JAMA 309 (7): 657–59.
Page 13

doi:10.1001/jama.2013.272.
Kahn-Lang, Ariella, and Kevin Lang. 2018. “The Promise and Pitfalls of Differences-InDifferences: Reflections on ‘16 and Pregnant’ and Other Applications.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 24857.
Keane, Michael P. 2010. “Structural vs. Atheoretic Approaches to Econometrics.”
Journal of Econometrics 156 (1): 3–20. doi:10.1016/j.jeconom.2009.09.003.
Kleven, Henrik J. 2018. “Language Trends in Public Economics.” Princeton, NJ.
Leamer, Edward E. 1983. “Let’s Take the Con out of Econometrics.” American
Economic Review 73 (1): 31–43. doi:10.2307/1803924.
Manning, W G, J P Newhouse, N Duan, E B Keeler, a Leibowitz, and M S Marquis.
1987. “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a
Randomized Experiment.” The American Economic Review 77 (3): 251–77.
doi:http://www.aeaweb.org/aer/.
Panhans, Matthew T, and John D Singleton. 2017. “The Empirical Economist’s Toolkit:
From Models to Methods.” History of Political Economy 49 (Supplement). Duke
University Press: 127–57.
Paulozzi, Leonard J. 2012. “Prescription Drug Overdoses: A Review.” Journal of Safety
Research. doi:10.1016/j.jsr.2012.08.009.
Peri, Giovanni, and Vasil Yasenov. 2018. “The Labor Market Effects of a Refugee
Wave: Synthetic Control Method Meets the Mariel Boatlift.” Journal of Human
Resources, 0217_8561R1. doi:10.3368/jhr.54.2.0217.8561R1.
Powell, David, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, and Mireille Jacobson. 2018. “Do Medical
Marijuana Laws Reduce Addictions and Deaths Related to Pain Killers?” Journal
of Health Economics 58: 29–42. doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2017.12.007.
Proctor, Robert N. 2012. “The History of the Discovery of the Cigaretteelung Cancer
Link: Evidentiary Traditions, Corporate Denial, Global Toll.” Tobacco Control 21
(2): 87–91. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2011-050338.

Page 14

