NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM LEVERAGE AND REGIONAL BUSINESS CYCLES
Xavier Giroud
Holger M. Mueller
Working Paper 25325
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25325

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

We thank Eduardo Dávila, Itamar Drechsler, Shan Ge, Mark Gertler, Adam Guren, Theresa
Kuchler, Simone Lenzu, Andres Liberman, Max Maksimovic, Thomas Philippon, Alexi Savov,
Moritz Schularick, Jeremy Stein, Johannes Stroebel, Amir Sufi, Emil Verner, and seminar
participants at NYU, Columbia, Penn, and Maryland for helpful comments. Any opinions and
conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Firm Leverage and Regional Business Cycles
Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 25325
December 2018
JEL No. E24,E32,G32
ABSTRACT
This paper shows that buildups in firm leverage predict subsequent declines in aggregate regional
employment. Using confidential establishment-level data from the U.S. Census Bureau, we
exploit regional heterogeneity in leverage buildups by large U.S. publicly listed firms, which are
widely spread across U.S. regions. For a given region, our results show that increases in firms’
borrowing are associated with “boom-bust” cycles: employment grows in the short run but
declines in the medium run. Across regions, our results imply that regions with larger buildups in
firm leverage exhibit stronger short-run growth, but also stronger medium-run declines, in
aggregate regional employment. We obtain similar results if we condition on national recessions–
regions with larger buildups in firm leverage prior to a recession experience larger employment
losses during the recession. When comparing regional firm and household leverage growth, we
find qualitatively similar patterns for both. Finally, we find that regions whose firm leverage
growth comoves more strongly also exhibit stronger comovement in their regional business
cycles.

Xavier Giroud
Columbia Business School
Finance Division
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 806
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
xavier.giroud@gsb.columbia.edu
Holger M. Mueller
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu

1

Introduction

Large U.S. firms are widely spread across regions. During the 1976—2011 period, the
average U.S. publicly listed firm owned establishments in 32.3 counties, 19.9 MSAs, and
8.1 states. When these large firms increase their borrowing, regions are diﬀerentially
impacted. As this paper shows, regions with larger buildups in leverage by U.S. publicly
listed firms exhibit stronger aggregate regional employment growth in the short run.
However, this employment growth is only temporary. In the medium run, regions with
larger buildups in leverage by U.S. publicly listed firms experience stronger declines in
aggregate regional employment. For a given region, this implies that increases in firms’
borrowing are associated with “boom-bust” cycles: employment grows in the short run
but declines in the medium run. Across regions, our results imply that regions with
larger buildups in firm leverage experience stronger short-run growth, but also stronger
medium-run declines, in aggregate regional employment.
Our study informs the debate about the role of credit growth. A key finding in that
literature is that leverage buildups predict subsequent downturns in economic activity.1
For instance, Schularick and Taylor (2012), in a seminal paper, find that credit growth
is a powerful predictor of financial crises; Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2013) find that
more credit-intensive booms are followed by deeper (financial and normal) recessions; and
Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2016) find that both mortgage and non-mortgage credit
booms predict financial crises–but mortgage credit booms lead to deeper recessions and
slower recoveries. Gourinchas and Obstfeldt (2012) find that increases in the ratio of
credit to GDP predict future banking crises, while Baron and Xiong (2017) find that
increases in the credit-to-GDP ratio predict bank equity crashes. Finally, Mian, Sufi,
and Verner (2017) find that increases in the ratio of household debt to GDP generate
“boom-bust” cycles: GDP grows in the short run but declines in the medium run. By
contrast, increases in the ratio of firm debt to GDP do not generate “boom-bust” cycles,
and they have only weak predictive power for GDP growth in the medium run.

1

Other empirical studies use credit spreads–as opposed to credit growth–to predict future economic
activity (e.g., Gilchrist and Zakrajšek 2012; López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek 2017).

2

Why do increases in household credit predict future GDP declines but increases in
firm credit do not? One possibility is that firms and households both respond to credit
booms, which may eventually “go bust.” However, in the case of firms, credit growth may
additionally also respond to other factors, some of which may be positively associated
with future output growth. As a result, the overall relation between firm credit growth
and future output growth may be ambiguous. For example, firms may also respond to
future growth opportunities–by borrowing and making investments–implying a positive
association between firm credit growth and future output growth. Naturally, this raises
the question as to why households do not (also) borrow in response to future growth
opportunities. We can think of at least two possibilities. One is that households are
simply not as good at forecasting future growth opportunities. The other is that firms and
households are both good at forecasting, but households face tighter collateral constraints,
preventing them from borrowing against future growth opportunities.2
In this paper, we explore a U.S. regional setting in which regional variation in firm
leverage growth is plausibly uncorrelated with regional growth opportunities. As we will
see, when regional growth opportunities are accounted for, we obtain the same pattern
for firm leverage growth that prior (country-level) studies have obtained for household
leverage growth: buildups in firm leverage are associated with short-run increases but
medium-run declines in aggregate regional employment. Thus, buildups in firm leverage
generate “boom-bust” cycles. Indeed, we obtain the same qualitative pattern for both
firm leverage growth and household leverage growth, suggesting that the predictability of
downturns after leverage buildups is a fairly broad phenomenon.
To isolate regional variation in firm leverage growth that is plausibly uncorrelated
with regional growth opportunities, we exploit variation in regional exposure to leverage
buildups by large U.S. publicly listed firms, which are widely spread across U.S. regions.
We measure regional exposure to leverage buildups by U.S. publicly listed firms by computing the weighted average leverage ratio of U.S. publicly listed firms operating in a
given region (“regional firm leverage”). Weights are based on firms’ shares of regional
2

For example, households may only be able to borrow against realized home value appreciations but
not against (expected) future home value appreciations.

3

employment. We construct regional employment shares for all U.S. publicly listed firms
using confidential data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD), which provides information on employment, payroll, location, industry, and firm
aﬃliation at the individual establishment level. Our main regional analysis is at the
county level. The sample period is from 1976 to 2011.
Our identifying assumption is that non-listed firms are sensitive to regional shocks.
We believe this is a sensible assumption. The typical non-listed firm in the LBD is a
small local firm operating in a single county. As prior research shows, these firms are
highly sensitive to local shocks (e.g., Giroud and Mueller 2017). Accordingly, if variation
in regional firm leverage growth–based on heterogeneity in regional exposure to leverage
buildups by U.S. publicly listed firms–was driven by regional growth opportunities, or
regional shocks more generally, non-listed firms in the same region should also “respond.”
However, changes in regional firm leverage are uncorrelated with both employment and
wage changes at non-listed firms in the same region. We may therefore conclude that
variation in regional firm leverage growth in our setting is not driven by regional shocks.3
For the same reason, we also find that changes in regional firm leverage are uncorrelated
with changes in regional household leverage ( = 0015). While the former capture the
eﬀects of leverage buildups by large U.S. publicly listed firms–which are widely spread
across U.S. regions–the latter reflect changes in leverage by regional households, which
are likely driven by regional factors (e.g., regional house prices).
We find that a one standard deviation increase in regional firm leverage over a threeyear period is associated with a 3.8 percent increase in regional employment by U.S.
publicly listed firms as well as a 0.5 percent increase in aggregate regional employment
(by listed and non-listed firms). In the medium run, however, an increase in regional firm
leverage predicts a decline in regional employment. Precisely, a one standard deviation
increase in regional firm leverage from  − 3 to  predicts a 3.0 percent decline in regional
employment by U.S. publicly listed firms and a 0.4 percent decline in aggregate regional
3

The “non-listed firm placebo” resembles the “pass-through entity placebo” in empirical studies of
corporate tax changes (e.g., Yagan 2015; Giroud and Rauh 2018). In those studies, pass-through entities
(S-corporations, sole proprietorships, partnerships) do not “respond” to corporate (income or dividend)
tax changes, suggesting that variation in these tax changes is not driven by regional shocks.

4

employment, both from  + 1 to  + 4 A comparison of these magnitudes shows that
employment changes at U.S. publicly listed firms are passed through to the aggregate
regional level at a ratio of approximately 12.8 percent, corresponding to the average
regional employment share of U.S. publicly listed firms (note: 38 × 0128 = 05 and
30 × 0128 = 04) This is precisely what one would expect given that changes in regional
firm leverage are uncorrelated with employment changes at non-listed firms.4

While our main regional analysis is at the county level, we obtain similar results if
we use broader regions based on MSAs or states. Likewise, our results are similar if
we conduct separate analyses for tradable, non-tradable, and other industries. In all
of those industries, increases in leverage by large U.S. publicly listed firms operating in
a given region predict subsequent declines in aggregate regional (sectoral) employment.
Lastly, our results do not hinge on how we aggregate up at the regional level. Indeed,
they come directly from the establishments underlying the aggregation. To illustrate,
we consider employment growth at the individual establishment level while saturating
our model with highly granular county × industry × year fixed eﬀects. Accordingly, we
compare establishments in the same county, industry, and year–which are exposed to
the same regional shocks–belonging to U.S. publicly listed firms with diﬀerent changes
in firm leverage from  − 3 to . We again find that increases in firm leverage predict
subsequent declines in employment.
A large body of theory literature links increases in leverage to downturns in economic
activity. In these models, buildups in leverage bring about fragility and vulnerability
to shocks operating either through balance-sheet constraints (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler
1989, Kiyotaki and Moore 1997, Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist 1999, Brunnermeier and
Sannikov 2014) or reversals in beliefs (e.g., Minsky 1977, Kindleberger 1978, Fostel and
Geanakoplos 2008, Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny 2015, Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer
4

We note that this (near perfect) pass-through from changes in regional employment at U.S. publicly
listed firms to changes in aggregate regional employment is not at odds with the agglomeration literature,
which documents significant regional spillover eﬀects (e.g., Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti 2010;
Bernstein et al. 2018; Huber 2018). In that literature, regional spillovers arise from plant openings, firm
bankruptcies, or other large shocks to individual firms. In contrast, in our study, changes in regional
employment at U.S. publicly listed firms are based on a weighted average across a large number of firms,
smoothing out much variation at the individual firm level.

5

2018). Alternatively, firms may be facing temporary demand or productivity shocks
generating mean-reversion in employment growth. We present three separate pieces of
evidence that are inconsistent with this alternative story.
Firstly, while we find that increases in regional firm leverage predict subsequent
declines in aggregate regional employment, we do not find that decreases in regional
firm leverage predict subsequent growth in aggregate regional employment. Accordingly,
the story is very much one of buildups in regional firm leverage predicting downturns in
regional economic activity. Second, in the case of a temporary employment shock, the
subsequent drop in employment is a reversal of, and thus explained by, the initial growth
in employment. However, our results are only slightly weaker–and all coeﬃcients remain
similar–when we control for the initial employment growth. Thus, buildups in regional
firm leverage have separate predictive power for medium-run drops in aggregate regional
employment over and above their short-run eﬀects. Lastly, we show that the predictive
power of leverage buildups depends on the initial level of leverage–increases in regional
firm leverage are more negatively associated with subsequent drops in aggregate regional
employment when the initial level of regional firm leverage is high. While this result is
diﬃcult to reconcile with an employment mean-reversion story, it is consistent with the
hypothesis that leverage creates fragility and vulnerability to shocks.
All our results are unconditional, in the sense that they do not condition on economic
downturns. However, our results also hold if we condition on national recessions during
our sample period (1980—82, 1990—91, 2001, 2007—09). In each of these recessions, we
find that regions with larger buildups in firm leverage before the recession experience
larger employment losses during the recession. Interestingly, the magnitude of this eﬀect
varies significantly across recessions. For example, a one standard deviation increase
in regional firm leverage before the recession is associated with 0.4 percent decline in
aggregate regional employment during the 1980—82 recession but a 1.5 percent decline in
aggregate regional employment during the 2007—09 (“Great”) recession.
We furthermore examine if comovement in regional firm leverage growth generates
comovement in regional business cycles. We find that it does. A one standard deviation
increase in the pairwise correlation of regional firm leverage growth is associated with a 1.6
6

percentage point increase in the pairwise correlation of medium-run regional employment
growth. Accordingly, regions whose firm leverage growth comoves more strongly also
exhibit stronger comovement in their regional business cycles.
Lastly, we address potential concerns that our results could be picking up the eﬀects
of household leverage growth. As mentioned earlier, changes in regional firm leverage and
changes in regional household leverage are uncorrelated in our setting. Not surprisingly,
therefore, our estimates remain similar if we control for changes in regional household
leverage. More importantly, we obtain the same qualitative pattern for firm leverage
growth and household leverage growth, suggesting that the predictability of downturns
after buildups in leverage is a relatively broad phenomenon.
Our paper is part of a broader literature using regional analysis in macroeconomics.
As Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) point out, using regional analysis entails two main
advantages. First, the number of observations is multiplied by an order of magnitude
or more. Our U.S. regional setting is based on nearly 100,000 county-year observations.
Thus, all coeﬃcients are precisely estimated. Second, identification is cross-sectional,
based on heterogeneity in regional exposure to a given shock. For example, Autor, Dorn,
and Hanson (2013) exploit variation in regional exposure to import competition from
China, Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) exploit regional diﬀerences in the sensitivity to
national military buildups, and Beraja et al. (2018) exploit regional heterogeneity in home
equity refinancing and spending responses to interest rate changes. Our paper exploits
variation in regional exposure to leverage buildups by large U.S. publicly listed firms.
Importantly, this source of variation is uncorrelated with regional growth opportunities,
or regional shocks more generally.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data, variables,
empirical methodology, and summary statistics. Section 3 studies the relation between
regional firm leverage growth and regional employment growth. Section 4 contains various
extensions and robustness checks. Section 5 considers mean-reversion in employment
growth. Section 6 examines firm leverage buildups prior to national recessions. Section
7 studies regional business cycle comovement. Section 8 compares firm leverage growth
and household leverage growth. Section 9 concludes.
7

2

Data, Methodology, and Summary Statistics

2.1

Data and Variables

Our main data source is the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) provided by the
U.S. Census Bureau. The LBD contains information on employment, payroll, location,
industry, and firm aﬃliation for all business establishments in the U.S. with at least
one paid employee. An establishment is a “single physical location where business is
conducted” (Jarmin and Miranda 2002; p. 5), e.g., a restaurant, department store, or
manufacturing plant. Our sample period is from 1976 to 2011.5
We match individual establishments in the LBD to firms in Compustat using the
Compustat-SSEL bridge maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau. Given that this bridge
ends in 2005, we extend the match to 2011 using employer name and ID number (EIN)
by applying the methodology described in McCue (2003). Following standard practice in
the literature, we exclude regulated industries (utilities, financials) as well as firms with
missing financial data.
Our main regional analysis is at the county level, though we also conduct analyses
at the MSA and state level in robustness checks. We compute county-level employment
separately for publicly listed and non-listed firms in a county by adding up employment
across individual establishments. To obtain a measure of firm leverage at the county and
year level (“regional firm leverage”), we compute the weighted average leverage ratio in a
given year across all publicly listed firms with establishments in the given county. Weights
are based on the firms’ county-level employment shares. Our main variable, ∆ Lev(−3 0),
is the change in regional firm leverage from  − 3 to  Firm leverage is the ratio of the sum
of debt in current liabilities (Compustat item DLC) and long-term debt (item DLTT) to
assets (item AT) and is winsorized between zero and one.6 We proceed analogously when
computing firm leverage at the MSA and state level.
5

1976 is the first available year in the LBD. 2011 is the last available year in our Census data project.

6

The definition of firm (book) leverage is standard in the empirical corporate finance literature. See
Frank and Goyal (2009) for an empirical assessment of the determinants of firms’ capital structure choices.
Graham and Harvey (2002) present related evidence from CFO surveys. Graham and Leary (2011) review
the empirical corporate finance literature on capital structure research.

8

We also use data on household debt at the county level from the Consumer Credit
Panel provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Household debt is mortgage,
credit card, and auto loan debt normalized by adjusted gross income (from IRS data).

2.2

Empirical Methodology

We study the dynamic relation between changes in regional firm leverage–the weighted
average leverage ratio across all U.S. publicly listed firms with establishments in a given
region–and regional employment growth. We estimate the following equation:
∆ log(Emp) ( +    +  + 3) =  +  +  ∆ Lev ( − 3 ) +  

(1)

where  = −3   2; ∆ log(Emp) ( +    +  + 3) is employment growth in county
 from  +  to  +  + 3; ∆ Lev ( − 3 ) is the change in firm leverage in county 
from  − 3 to ; and  and  are county and year fixed eﬀects. We estimate equation
(1) for all  = −3  2 resulting in six regressions. For example, when  = −3 the
coeﬃcient  captures the short-run eﬀects of changes in regional firm leverage from  − 3
to  on regional employment growth from  − 3 to . As  increases, we move towards
medium-run eﬀects. For example, when  = 1 the coeﬃcient  captures the eﬀects of
changes in regional firm leverage from  − 3 to  on regional employment growth from  + 1
to  + 4. For simplicity, we write ∆ log(Emp)(−3 0) in lieu of ∆ log(Emp) ( − 3 ),
etc., in our tables and figures. Observations are weighted by county-level employment.
Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level.
In one instance, we examine the dynamic relation between changes in firm leverage
and employment growth at the individual establishment level. We estimate the following
establishment-level analogue of equation (1):
∆ log(Emp) ( +    +  + 3) =  ×  ×  +  ∆ Lev ( − 3 ) +  

(2)

where ∆ log(Emp) ( +    +  + 3) is the growth in employment of establishment 
of firm  in county  and industry  from  +  to  +  + 3 ∆ Lev ( − 3 ) is the change
9

in leverage of firm  from  − 3 to  and  ×  ×  are county × industry × year fixed
eﬀects. Accordingly, equation (2) compares the employment growth of establishments in
the same county, industry, and year that belong to firms with diﬀerent leverage changes
from  − 3 to . Industries are measured at the 4-digit NAICS code level. Observations
are weighted by establishment-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered at
the county and year level.
Our main identifying assumption is that non-listed firms are sensitive to regional
shocks. We believe this is a plausible assumption. The typical non-listed firm in the
LBD is a small local firm operating in a single region (see Table 2). As prior research
shows, these firms are highly sensitive to local shocks–in fact, they are more sensitive
than establishments of publicly listed firms (Giroud and Mueller 2017). By implication, if
variation in regional firm leverage growth was driven by regional shocks, non-listed firms
in the same region should also “respond.” To see whether non-listed firms “respond” to
changes in regional firm leverage, we estimate equation (1) using employment growth of
non-listed firms as the dependent variable. The results are provided in Table 1. As is
shown in Panel (A), changes in regional firm leverage are uncorrelated with employment
changes at non-listed firms in the same region, both in the short run and medium run.
Further, as is shown in Panel (B), changes in regional firm leverage are also uncorrelated
with wage changes at non-listed firms in the same region, again both in the short run and
medium run. We may thus conclude that variation in regional firm leverage growth–
based on leverage buildups by large U.S. publicly listed firms–is not driven by regional
growth opportunities, or regional shocks more generally.

2.3

Summary Statistics

Table 2 provides summary statistics. Panel (A) provides firm-level summary statistics
for all firms, publicly listed firms, and non-listed firms. As one would expect, publicly
listed firms are much larger than non-listed firms–they have more employees and more
establishments. Indeed, the typical non-listed firm is a small local firm with (little more
than) a single establishment operating in a single ZIP code. In contrast, the typical

10

publicly listed firm owns 85.5 establishments in 63.6 ZIP codes, 32.3 counties, 19.9 MSAs,
and 8.1 states. The average leverage ratio of publicly listed firms is 0.261. And while
there are many ups and downs in firm leverage during the sample period, the average
three-year change in firm leverage is close to zero.
Panel (B) provides summary statistics at the county level. The average three-year
employment growth at the county level is 5.4 percent for all firms, 4.1 percent for publicly
listed firms, and 6.2 percent for non-listed firms. Publicly listed firms account for 12.8
percent of total county-level employment. That said, the county-level employment share
of publicly listed firms varies considerably across industry sectors. It is 13.2 percent in the
non-tradable sector, 26.9 percent in the tradable sector, and 7.1 percent in the “other”
sector (industries that are neither non-tradable nor tradable). In robustness tests, we
perform separate analyses for each industry sector. The average firm leverage ratio at
the county level is 0.288, which diﬀers slightly from the corresponding ratio at the firm
level due to the uneven geographical distribution of publicly listed firms. The average
three-year change in firm leverage at the county level (“regional firm leverage”) is again
close to zero, and its standard deviation is 0.08.

3
3.1

Firm Leverage and Regional Employment Growth
Bin Scatterplots

Figure 1 provides bin scatterplots depicting the relation between changes in regional
firm leverage and regional employment growth. Panel (A) shows the growth in regional
employment by all U.S. publicly listed firms with operations in a given region. Panel (B)
shows the growth in aggregate regional employment by all (listed and non-listed) firms
in a given region. In both panels, the left plots show the short-run eﬀects of changes
in regional firm leverage–the relation between ∆ Lev(−3 0) and ∆ log(Emp)(−3 0)–
based on 99,300 county-year observations, while the right plots show the medium-run
eﬀects of changes in regional firm leverage–the relation between ∆ Lev(−3 0) and ∆
log(Emp)(1 4)–based on 86,500 county-year observations. For each percentile bin, the
11

plots provide the mean values of ∆ Lev(−3 0) and either ∆ log(Emp)(−3 0) (left plots)
or ∆ log(Emp)(1 4) (right plots).7
As the left plot in Panel (A) shows, there is a positive short-run association between
changes in regional firm leverage and regional employment growth at U.S. publicly listed
firms. The magnitude of this eﬀect is quite large: a one standard deviation increase in
regional firm leverage (0.08) is associated with a 3.5 percent short-run increase in regional
employment at U.S. publicly listed firms (note: 008 × 0440 = 0035). In the medium
run, however, this positive association turns negative. As the right plot in Panel (A)
shows, a one standard deviation increase in regional firm leverage predicts a 4.3 percent
medium-run decline in regional employment at U.S. publicly listed firms.
The two plots in Panel (B)–which are based on aggregate regional employment by
all (listed and non-listed) firms in a given region–look similar to those in Panel (A),
except that the magnitudes are much smaller. In the left plot, a one standard deviation
increase in regional firm leverage is associated with a 0.8 percent short-run increase in
aggregate regional employment, while in the right plot, it is associated with a 0.5 percent
medium-run decline in aggregate regional employment. In Section 3.2, we will see that
the pass-through from changes in regional employment at U.S. publicly listed firms to
changes in aggregate regional employment is roughly proportional to the average regional
employment share of U.S. publicly listed firms.
Table A.1 in the Online Appendix presents the regressions that correspond to the
bin scatterplots in Figure 1. While these regressions do not include county or year fixed
eﬀects–in accord with Figure 1–they are based on the full sample of 99,300 or 86,500
observations in lieu of percentile bins. As is shown, the regression coeﬃcients associated
with ∆ Lev(−3 0) are remarkably similar to the slope coeﬃcients in Figure 1: 0481
versus 0440, −0526 versus −0541, 0097 versus 0096, and −0069 versus -0064. Three
of the four regression coeﬃcients are significant at the one percent level; one is significant
at the five percent level. Thus, the bin scatterplots in Figure 1 provide an adequate
representation of the raw data.

7

All sample sizes are rounded to the nearest hundred following Census Bureau disclosure guidelines.

12

3.2

Main Results

Table 3 presents our main results based on estimating equation (1) for  = −3  2
This yields six regressions with dependent variables ranging from short-run ( − 3 to
) to medium-run ( to  + 3   + 2 to  + 5) regional employment growth. Panel
(A) examines the relationship between changes in regional firm leverage and regional
employment growth at U.S. publicly listed firms. Inspection of all six columns shows
that the eﬀects are positive in the short run but negative in the medium run. The sign
switches around ( − 2 to  + 1), which is why the coeﬃcient in column (2) is small and
insignificant. All other coeﬃcients are significant. In particular, the short-run coeﬃcient
in column (1) and the medium-run coeﬃcient in column (5) are both significant at the
one percent level. Like in the bin scatterplots in Figure 1, the magnitudes of the eﬀects
are quite large. In column (1), for example, a one standard deviation increase in regional
firm leverage is associated with a 3.8 percent short-run increase in regional employment
at U.S. publicly listed firms, whereas in column (5), it predicts a 3.0 percent medium-run
decline in regional employment at U.S. publicly listed firms.
Employment losses at U.S. publicly listed firms may trigger a drop in regional wages
and oﬀsetting hiring by non-listed firms in the same region, with the implication that
aggregate regional employment remains unchanged. That being said, we have seen in
Table 1 that changes in regional firm leverage are uncorrelated with both employment
and wage changes at non-listed firms in the same region. Consequently, we would expect
that employment changes at U.S. publicly listed firms are passed through to the aggregate
regional level without any significant oﬀsetting eﬀects.
Panel (B) examines the relationship between changes in regional firm leverage and
aggregate regional employment growth–the growth in total employment by all (listed
and non-listed) firms in a given region. As can be seen, the results are qualitatively
similar to those in Panel (A). The short-run eﬀects are again positive, the sign switches
again around ( − 2 to  + 1), and the medium-run eﬀects are again negative. Also,
the short-run coeﬃcient in column (1) and the medium-run coeﬃcient in column (5) are
again significant at the one percent level. However, the magnitudes are much smaller

13

than those in Panel (A). In column (1), for example, a one standard deviation increase
in regional firm leverage is associated with a 0.5 percent short-run increase in aggregate
regional employment, while in column (5), it predicts a 0.4 percent medium-run decline
in aggregate regional employment. A comparison of the magnitudes with those in Panel
(A) indicates that, in both cases, employment changes at U.S. publicly listed firms are
passed through to the aggregate regional level at a ratio of approximately 12.8 percent,
corresponding to the average regional employment share of U.S. publicly listed firms (note:
38 × 0128 = 05 and 30 × 0128 = 04) This is precisely what one would expect given
that changes in regional firm leverage are uncorrelated with changes in employment at
non-listed firms in the same region.

4

Extensions and Robustness

4.1

Industry Sectors

Table 4 breaks down our main results by industry sector. Panel (A) considers tradable
industries. Panel (B) considers non-tradable industries. Panel (C) considers all other
industries.8 All variables are industry-specific. For example, in Panel (A), regional firm
leverage is the weighted average leverage ratio across publicly listed firms with tradable
establishments in a given county, and the employment weights are based on firms’ shares
of tradable county-level employment. Likewise, employment growth is the growth rate
of tradable employment in a given county. In this and all remaining tables, we shall
focus on the predictability of aggregate regional employment growth in the medium run
(corresponding to columns (4) to (6) in Panel (B) of Table 3).
Inspection of all three panels shows that the results are qualitatively similar across
industry sectors. To interpret the coeﬃcients, note that the standard deviation associated
with ∆ Lev(−3 0) is 0.108 for tradable industries, 0.086 for non-tradable industries, and
0.091 for other industries. In column (2), for example, where the dependent variable is
8

Our classification of tradable and non-tradable industries follows Mian and Sufi (2014). Tradable
industries are essentially manufacturing industries. Non-tradable industries are restaurant and retail
industries. “Other” industries are those that are neither tradable nor non-tradable.

14

∆ log(Emp)(1 4), a one standard deviation increase in regional firm leverage predicts a
subsequent decline in aggregate regional employment of 0.4 percent both in the tradable
and non-tradable sector and 0.6 percent in the “other” sector. We may thus conclude
that the medium-run eﬀects of changes in regional firm leverage on aggregate regional
(sectoral) employment are fairly similar across industry sectors.

4.2

MSAs and States

Using counties as our unit of analysis entails two main advantages. First, our sample
consists of nearly 100,000 county-year observations, allowing us to precisely estimate all
coeﬃcients. Second, with over 3,000 counties, there is ample regional variation in both
regional firm leverage and aggregate regional employment growth.
In Table 5, we estimate equation (1) using broader definitions of regions. Panel (A)
considers MSAs, while Panel (B) considers states. As can be seen, the results are similar
to our county-level results. To interpret the coeﬃcients, note that the standard deviation
associated with ∆ Lev(−3 0) is 0.043 at the MSA level and 0.044 at the state level.
In column (2), for example, where the dependent variable is ∆ log(Emp)(1 4), a one
standard deviation increase in regional firm leverage predicts a subsequent decline in
aggregate regional employment of 0.4 percent at the MSA level and 0.8 percent at the
state level, which is of the same order of magnitude as the corresponding drop at the
county level. Hence, our results are robust to using broader regions.

4.3

Firms with Distant Headquarters

Regional shocks may disproportionately aﬀect firms which are headquartered in a given
region.9 In Table A.2 of the Online Appendix, we exclusively focus on firms with distant
headquarters. Specifically, when computing our measure of regional firm leverage based
on U.S. publicly listed firms, we drop firms which are either headquartered in the given
region or nearby. In Panel (A), we require that firms’ headquarters be located at least
9

Gao, Ng, and Wang (2011) find that firm leverage is correlated with headquarter-MSA fixed eﬀects
after controlling for time-varying firm-level characteristics as well as year and industry fixed eﬀects.

15

1,000 miles away from the given region. In Panel (B), we require that firms’ headquarters
be located in a diﬀerent state. As can be seen, all our results remain similar.

4.4

Computing ∆ Lev(−3 0)

As described in Section 2.1, we compute changes in regional firm leverage, ∆ Lev(−3 0),
in two steps. We first obtain a measure of regional firm leverage at the county and
year level by computing the weighted average leverage ratio in a given year across all
publicly listed firms with establishments in the given county. Weights are based on the
firms’ county-level employment shares. In a second step, we compute the change in this
measure over a three-year period from  − 3 to 
Alternatively, we may compute changes in regional firm leverage over a three-year
period directly from changes in firms’ leverage ratios. Precisely, for all publicly listed
firms with establishments in a given county, we compute the change in firm leverage from
 − 3 to  In a second step, we obtain ∆ Lev(−3 0) by computing the weighted average of
these firm-level changes using firms’ county-level employment shares in  − 3 as weights.
As is shown in Table A.3 of the Online Appendix, it makes ultimately little diﬀerence
how we compute ∆ Lev(−3 0): all coeﬃcients are very close to the original coeﬃcients
in columns (4) to (6) of Table 3 (−0038 versus −0035, −0057 versus −0053, −0044
versus −0046) and their standard errors are identical.

4.5

Establishment-Level Evidence

Our results do not hinge on how we aggregate up at the regional level. Indeed, they come
directly from the individual establishments underlying the aggregation. To illustrate, we
consider employment growth at the individual establishment level. A benefit of using
establishments as our unit of analysis is that we can saturate our model with highly
granular fixed eﬀects. Precisely, we estimate equation (2), which is similar to equation
(1), except that it includes county × industry × year fixed eﬀects, while employment
and firm leverage growth are measured at the establishment and firm level, respectively.
Industries are measured at the 4-digit NAICS code level. Thus, we compare establishments
16

in the same county, industry, and year–which are likely exposed to the same regional
shocks–that belong to U.S. publicly listed firms with diﬀerent changes in leverage from
 − 3 to . The results are shown in Table 6. As can be seen, buildups in firm leverage
again predict subsequent declines in employment, consistent with what we have found at
the aggregate regional level.

5

Mean-Reverting Employment Growth

A large body of theory literature associates leverage buildups with subsequent downturns
in economic activity. In models based on financial frictions, increases in leverage bring
about fragility and vulnerability to shocks operating through balance-sheet constraints
(e.g., Bernanke and Gertler 1989, Kiyotaki and Moore 1997, Bernanke, Gertler, and
Gilchrist 1999, Brunnermeier and Sannikov 2014). In behavioral models, optimism leads
to credit expansions, financial fragility, and belief reversals, resulting in slowdowns in
economic growth (e.g., Minsky 1977, Kindleberger 1978, Fostel and Geanakoplos 2008,
Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny 2015, Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer 2018).
An alternative story is that firms may be facing temporary demand or productivity
shocks generating mean-reversion in employment growth. For example, firms facing an
increase in demand may hire more workers. When the demand subsides, the workers
are laid oﬀ. If the initial expansion is financed with debt, we may see an increase and
subsequent drop in employment, where the increase in employment is accompanied by an
increase in leverage. And yet, the subsequent drop in employment is fully explained by
the initial increase–the increase in leverage is just a “side show.” In Table 7, we provide
three pieces of evidence that are inconsistent with this alternative story.
Firstly, the employment mean-reversion story is inherently symmetric: temporary
demand or productivity shocks can be positive or negative. Our main results, however,
are not symmetric. In Panel (A), we interact changes in regional firm leverage with a
dummy indicating whether the changes are positive or negative.10 As is shown, increases
10

About 53 percent of the 99,300 county-year observations associated with ∆ Lev(−3 0) are positive.
Conditional on being positive (negative), the mean value of ∆ Lev(−3 0) is 0.055 (-0.057).

17

in regional firm leverage predict subsequent declines in aggregate regional employment,
but decreases in regional firm leverage do not predict subsequent growth in aggregate
regional employment. Thus, the story is very much one of buildups in regional firm
leverage predicting subsequent downturns in regional economic activity.
Second, in the case of a temporary shock, the subsequent drop in employment is a
reversal of, and thus explained by, the initial growth in employment. However, Panel
(B) shows that our main results become only slightly weaker if we control for the initial
employment growth. Indeed, the coeﬃcients in columns (1) to (3) are very close to the
original coeﬃcients in Table 3 (−0030 versus −0035, −0049 versus −0053, −0042
versus −0046), and their significance is only slightly reduced (−values of 0076 versus
0049, 0003 versus 0002, 0013 versus 0007). Accordingly, buildups in regional firm
leverage have separate predictive power for medium-run declines in aggregate regional
employment over and above their possible short-run eﬀects.
Third, under the employment mean-reversion story, buildups in leverage are just a
“side show.” Consequently, their ability to predict subsequent employment drops should
not vary with measures of fragility, such as the level of leverage. In contrast, under the
fragility story, we would expect that a given increase in leverage has a stronger eﬀect
on future employment growth when the initial level of leverage is high. In Panel (C),
we interact ∆ Lev(−3 0) with dummies indicating whether the initial level of regional
firm leverage in  − 3 lies in the first, second, or third tercile of its sample distribution
(based on all county-year observations). As is shown, the eﬀect of leverage buildups on
future employment growth is highly non-linear. When the initial level of leverage is low,
increases in regional firm leverage have no significant eﬀect. At intermediate levels, there
is a significant eﬀect in column (2) but not in columns (1) or (3). Finally, at high levels
of leverage, increases in regional firm leverage have a strongly negative eﬀect on future
employment growth in all three columns. Thus, buildups in regional firm leverage matter
precisely when the regional economy is fragile to begin with. While these results are
diﬃcult to reconcile with an employment mean-reversion story, they are consistent with
the notion that leverage creates fragility and vulnerability to shocks.

18

6

National Recessions

All our results so far have been unconditional, in the sense that they do not condition
on economic downturns. Rather, they predict downturns in regional economic activity
following increases in regional firm leverage. Note that increases in regional firm leverage
are not simply a by-product of national expansions. During our sample period from 1976
to 2011, the NBER records five recessions: January 1980 to July 1980, July 1981 to
November 1982, July 1990 to March 1991, March 2001 to November 2001, and December
2007 to June 2009. Altogether, these five recessions comprise 56 contraction months,
leaving us with 35 × 12 − 56 = 364 expansion months.11 Hence, there are about 6.5 times
more expansion months than contraction months. In contrast, increases and decreases in
regional firm leverage are fairly balanced during our sample period–about 53 percent of
observations are increases and 47 percent are decreases.12
That being said, national recessions provide an ideal setting to examine whether
buildups in leverage bring about fragility and vulnerability to shocks–after all, national
recessions constitute significant aggregate shocks. Accordingly, we would expect regions
that exhibit larger buildups in firm leverage before a national recession to experience
larger declines in employment during the recession. Due to the short recovery period
between 1980 and 1981, we treat the twin recessions of 1980 and 1981—1982 as a single
recession lasting from 1980 to 1982. The results are shown in Table 8. Year “0” is the
year immediately before a national recession. For example, in Panel (A), ∆ Lev(−3 0)
is the change in regional firm leverage from 1976 to 1979, while ∆ log(Emp)(1 2), ∆
log(Emp)(1 3), and ∆ log(Emp)(1 4) represent the growth in regional employment from
1980 to 1981, 1980 to 1982, and 1980 to 1983, respectively.
Inspection of Panels (A) to (D) reveals that regions with stronger buildups in firm
leverage prior to a national recession also experience larger employment losses during
11

See http://www.nber.org/cycles.html. Dupraz, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2017) measure expansion
and contraction months using the unemployment rate. Based on this alternative measure, there are 265
expansion months and 155 contraction months during the 1976—2011 sample period.
12

By the same token, our results are not driven by firms increasing or decreasing their leverage during
national recessions (cf., Erel et al. 2012). When we interact ∆ Lev(−3 0) with a recession dummy, we
find that the interaction term is insignificant.

19

the recession. This is true for all recessions during our sample period. To interpret the
coeﬃcients, note that the standard deviation associated with ∆ Lev(−3 0) is 0.060 in
Panel (A), 0.076 in Panel (B), 0.075 in Panel (C), and 0.105 in Panel (D). Consider, for
instance, column (2). In the 1980—1982 and 2001 recessions, the eﬀect of a buildup in
firm leverage is similar to the average sample eﬀect in Table 3. In both recessions, a one
standard deviation increase in regional firm leverage prior to the recession is associated
with a 0.4 percent decline in aggregate regional employment during the recession. In the
1990—1991 recession, the eﬀect of a buildup in firm leverage is much stronger. In that
recession, a one standard deviation increase in regional firm leverage before the recession
is associated with a subsequent drop in aggregate regional employment of 1.1 percent.
Finally, the eﬀect of a buildup in firm leverage is strongest in the 2007—2009 (“Great”)
recession, where a one standard deviation increase in regional firm leverage prior to the
recession is associated with a 1.5 percent reduction in aggregate regional employment
during the recession.13 Accordingly, the magnitude of the eﬀect of firm leverage buildups
prior to a national recession varies considerably from recession to recession.

7

Business Cycle Comovement

Do regions whose firm leverage growth comoves more strongly also exhibit stronger comovement in their regional business cycles? To address this question, we compute for
all (approximately five million) region-pairs the pairwise correlation of both regional firm
leverage growth, [∆ Lev(−3 0)] and regional employment growth, [∆ log(Emp)(1 4)].
We then regress the pairwise correlation of regional employment growth on the pairwise
correlation of regional firm leverage growth while including county fixed eﬀects. Although
this is a cross-sectional regression, each region appears  − 1 times in the sample–the
number of pairwise correlations it shares with other regions. Thus, we are able to absorb
region-specific variation by including county fixed eﬀects.
13

The Great Recession witnessed a significant drop in consumer demand due to falling house prices.
Consistent with buildups in firm leverage creating fragility and vulnerability to shocks, Giroud and
Mueller (2017) find that establishments of firms with higher leverage in 2006, at the onset of the Great
Recession, were more sensitive to drops in consumer demand during the Great Recession.

20

Table 9 shows the results. As can be seen, the relation between [∆ Lev(−3 0)]
and [∆ log(Emp)(1 4)] is positive and statistically significant at the one percent level.
Hence, if region ’s firm leverage growth comoves more strongly with region ’s firm
leverage growth than with region ’s, then region ’s employment growth also comoves
more strongly with region ’s employment growth than with region ’s. To interpret the
magnitude of this eﬀect, note that the standard deviation associated with [∆ Lev(−3 0)]
is 0.323. Accordingly, a one standard deviation increase in the pairwise correlation of
regional firm leverage growth is associated with a 1.6 percentage point increase in the
pairwise correlation of medium-run regional employment growth.

8

Firm versus Household Leverage

We finally address possible concerns that our results could be picking up the eﬀects of
changes in regional household leverage. A priori, this seems unlikely. While changes
in (our measure of) regional firm leverage capture the eﬀects of leverage buildups by
large U.S. publicly listed firms–which are widely spread across U.S. regions–changes in
regional household leverage reflect choices made by regional households, which are likely
driven by regional factors (e.g., house prices). Indeed, the correlation between changes in
regional firm and household leverage is close to zero ( = 0015).
In Table 10, we include changes in regional household leverage, ∆ HH Lev(−3 0), in
our regression. Panel (A) considers our main panel specification, except that the sample
period is from 1999 to 2011.14 As can be seen, we obtain the same qualitative pattern
for regional firm and household leverage. In either case, a buildup in leverage predicts
a subsequent downturn in economic activity. To interpret the coeﬃcients, note that the
standard deviations associated with ∆ Lev(−3 0) and ∆ HH Lev(−3 0) are 0.069 and
0.421, respectively. In column (2), for example, a one standard deviation increase in
regional firm leverage predicts a subsequent decline in aggregate regional employment of
0.5 percent, which is almost identical to our estimate in Table 3. Also, a one standard
14

Household leverage is the ratio of household debt (mortgage, credit card, and auto loan debt) to
income at the county level. 1999 is the first available year for which we have data on household debt.

21

deviation increase in regional household leverage predicts a subsequent drop in aggregate
regional employment of 1.6 percent, which is of similar magnitude as the 2.1 percent
drop in GDP growth in Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2017), despite diﬀerences in samples and
variable definitions. Altogether, these results suggest that the predictability of downturns
after buildups in leverage is a relatively broad phenomenon.
Panel (B) considers the cross-sectional specification from Panel (D) of Table 8 which
focuses on the Great Recession. As can be seen, we again obtain the same pattern for
regional firm and household leverage. To interpret the magnitudes of the eﬀects, note that
the standard deviations associated with ∆ Lev(−3 0) and ∆ HH Lev(−3 0) are 0.105
and 0.572, respectively. In column (2), for example, a one standard deviation increase in
regional firm leverage prior to the Great Recession is associated with a 1.3 percent decline
in aggregate regional employment during the Great Recession. The economic magnitude
of an increase in regional household leverage is, in fact, exactly identical. Hence, regions
with larger buildups in either firm or household leverage prior to the Great Recession
exhibit larger declines in aggregate regional employment during the Great Recession.

9

Conclusion

Our paper contributes to a growing literature showing that buildups in leverage predict
downturns in economic activity (e.g., Schularick and Taylor 2012; Jordà, Schularick, and
Taylor 2013; Mian, Sufi, and Verner 2017). Our empirical approach diﬀers from prior
studies in that we exploit regional variation in leverage buildups by large U.S. publicly
listed firms, allowing us to separate the eﬀects of leverage buildups from regional growth
opportunities, or regional shocks more generally. We find that a one standard deviation
increase in regional firm leverage–the weighted average leverage ratio of U.S. publicly
listed firms operating in a given region–predicts a subsequent drop in aggregate regional
employment of 0.4 percent. For a given region, our results show that increases in firms’
borrowing are associated with “boom-bust” cycles: employment grows in the short run
but declines in the medium run. Across diﬀerent regions, our results imply that regions
with larger buildups in firm leverage exhibit stronger short-run growth, but also stronger
22

medium-run declines, in aggregate regional employment. Altogether, our results suggest
that the geography of U.S. publicly listed firms’ operations plays an important role for
regional employment growth cycles.
Our results have policy implications. Prior studies have shown that fiscal or monetary
policy shocks diﬀerentially impact U.S. regions–because regions are diﬀerentially exposed
to military buildups (Nakamura and Steinsson 2014) or home-equity based borrowing
(Beraja et al. 2018). Our study suggests that fiscal or monetary policy shocks aﬀecting
the borrowing decisions of large U.S. publicly listed firms may diﬀerentially impact U.S.
regions–because regions are diﬀerentially exposed to those firms.

10

References

Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson, 2013, The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Eﬀects of Import Competition in the United States, American Economic
Review 103, 2121—2168.
Baron, Matthew, and Wei Xiong, 2017, Credit Expansion and Neglected Crash Risk,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 713—764.
Beraja, Martin, Andreas Fuster, Erik Hurst, and Joseph Vavra, 2018, Regional Heterogeneity and the Refinancing Channel of Monetary Policy, forthcoming, Quarterly
Journal of Economics.
Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler, 1989, Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations, American Economic Review 79, 14—31.
Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, 1999, The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework, in: Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume
1, John Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds.), Chapter 21, 1341—1393. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Bernstein, Shai, Emanuele Colonnelli, Xavier Giroud, and Benjamin Iverson, 2018, Bankruptcy Spillovers, forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
23

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, 2018, Diagnostic Expectations
and Credit Cycles, Journal of Finance 73, 199—227.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector, American Economic Review 104, 379—421.
Dupraz, Stéphane, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson, 2017, A Plucking Model of Business Cycles, mimeo, Columbia University.
Erel, Isil, Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, and Michael Weisbach, 2012, Macroeconomic
Conditions and Capital Raising, Review of Financial Studies 25, 341—376.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos, 2008, Leverage Cycles and the Anxious Economy,
American Economic Review 98, 1211—1244.
Frank, Murray, and Vidhan Goyal, 2009, Capital Structure Decisions: Which Factors
Are Reliably Important? Financial Management 38, 1—37.
Gao, Wenlian, Lilian Ng, and Qinghai Wang, 2011, Does Corporate Headquarters Location Matter for Firm Capital Structure? Financial Management 40, 113—138.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2015, Neglected Risks: The Psychology of Financial Crises, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings
105, 310—314.
Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajšek, 2012, Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations, American Economic Review 102, 1692—1720.
Giroud, Xavier, and Holger Mueller, 2017, Firm Leverage, Consumer Demand, and
Employment Losses during the Great Recession, Quarterly Journal of Economics
132, 271—316.
Giroud, Xavier, and Joshua Rauh, 2018, State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity: Evidence from Establishment-Level Data, forthcoming, Journal of
Political Economy.
24

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Maurice Obstfeld, 2012, Stories of the Twentieth Century for the Twenty-First, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4, 226—
265.
Graham, John, and Campbell Harvey, 2002, How Do CFOs Make Capital Budgeting
and Capital Structure Decisions? Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 15, 8—23.
Graham, John, and Mark Leary, 2011, A Review of Empirical Capital Structure Research
and Directions for the Future, Annual Review of Financial Economics 3, 309—345.
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti, 2010, Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings,
Journal of Political Economy 118, 536—598.
Huber, Kilian, 2018, Disentangling the Eﬀects of a Banking Crisis: Evidence from German Firms and Counties, American Economic Review 108, 868—898.
Jarmin, Ron, and Javier Miranda, 2002, The Longitudinal Business Database, CES
Working Paper 02—17.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor, 2013, When Credit Bites Back, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 45, 3—28.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor, 2016, The Great Mortgaging: Housing
Finance, Crises and Business Cycles, Economic Policy 31, 107—152.
Kindleberger, Charles, 1978, Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises.
New York: Basic Books.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit Cycles, Journal of Political Economy
105, 211—248.
López-Salido, David, Jeremy Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek, 2017, Credit-Market Sentiment
and the Business Cycle, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1373—1426.

25

McCue, Kristin, 2003, Matching Compustat Data to the SSEL, mimeo, Center for Economic Studies.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2014, What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?
Econometrica 82, 2197—2223.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner, 2017, Household Debt and Business Cycles
Worldwide, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1755—1817.
Minsky, Hyman, 1977, The Financial Instability Hypothesis: An Interpretation of Keynes
and an Alternative to “Standard” Theory, Challenge 20, 20—27.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson, 2014, Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from US Regions, American Economic Review 104, 753—792.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson, 2018, Identification in Macroeconomics, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 32, 59—86.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan Taylor, 2012, Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy,
Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870—2008, American Economic Review 102,
1029—1061.
Yagan, Danny, 2015, Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The Eﬀects of the
2003 Dividend Tax Cut, American Economic Review 105, 3531—3563.

26

Figure 1
Bin Scatterplots
This figure shows bin scatterplots depicting the relation between changes in regional firm leverage and either
regional employment growth at U.S. publicly listed firms (Panel (A)) or aggregate regional employment growth
(Panel (B)). In both panels, the left scatterplots depict the (short-run) relation between Δ Lev(-3,0) and
Δ log(Emp)(-3,0) based on 99,300 county-year observations, while the right scatterplots depict the (medium-run)
relation between Δ Lev(-3,0) and Δ log(Emp)(1,4) based on 86,500 county-year observations. For each percentile
bin, the scatterplots provide the mean values of Δ Lev(-3,0) and either Δ log(Emp)(-3,0) (left scatterplots) or
Δ log(Emp)(1,4) (right scatterplots).

Panel (A): Regional employment growth at publicly listed firms

Panel (B): Aggregate regional employment growth

Table 1
“Non-Listed Firm Placebo”
In Panel (A), the dependent variable is employment growth by non-listed firms at the county level. In Panel (B), the
dependent variable is wage growth by non-listed firms at the county level. Growth rates are measured over three
years from t + τ to t + τ + 3, where τ ranges from τ = –3 in column (1) to τ = 2 in column (6). Δ Lev(–3,0) is the
change in regional firm leverage from t – 3 to t as described in Section 2.1. Observations are weighted by countylevel employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample period is from 1976
to 2011. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Regional employment growth at non-listed firms

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(-3,0)

Δ log(Emp)
(-2,1)

Δ log(Emp)
(-1,2)

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.006
(0.027)

0.010
(0.022)

-0.003
(0.019)

-0.007
(0.023)

-0.009
(0.025)

-0.003
(0.019)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.46
99,300

0.47
96,100

0.47
92,900

0.48
89,700

0.49
86,500

0.50
83,300

Panel (B): Regional wage growth at non-listed firms

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Wages)
(-3,0)

Δ log(Wages)
(-2,1)

Δ log(Wages)
(-1,2)

Δ log(Wages)
(0,3)

Δ log(Wages)
(1,4)

Δ log(Wages)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.008
(0.023)

-0.001
(0.022)

-0.011
(0.030)

-0.011
(0.020)

-0.016
(0.015)

-0.002
(0.015)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.60
99,300

0.66
96,100

0.57
92,900

0.63
89,700

0.54
86,500

0.62
83,300

Table 2
Summary Statistics
Panel (A) provides firm-level summary statistics for all firms (column (1)), publicly listed firms (column (2)), and
non-listed firms (column (3)). # ZIP codes is the number of ZIP codes in which the firm has establishments.
# Counties, # MSAs, and # States are defined analogously. Leverage at the firm level is the ratio of the sum of debt
in current liabilities (Compustat item DLC) and long-term debt (item DLTT) to total assets (item AT). Δ Lev is the
change in firm leverage from t – 3 to t. Panel (B) provides county-level summary statistics for all firms (column (1)),
publicly listed firms (column (2)), and non-listed firms (column (3)). Δ log(Emp) is the growth in county-level
employment from t – 3 to t. Employment share is the total county-level employment share of either publicly listed
firms (column (2)) or non-listed firms (column (3)). Employment share (non-tradable), employment share (tradable),
and employment share (other) are defined analogously for specific industry sectors based on the industry
classification in Mian and Sufi (2014). Leverage is regional firm leverage at the county and year level as described
in Section 2.1. Δ Lev is the change in regional firm leverage from t – 3 to t. All figures are sample means. Standard
deviations are in parentheses. The sample period is from 1976 to 2011.

Panel (A): Firm-level summary statistics

Employees
Establishments
# ZIP codes
# Counties
# MSAs
# States

All

Publicly Listed

Non-Listed

(1)

(2)

(3)

21
(729)
1.24
(15.81)
1.19
(10.31)
1.10
(4.05)
1.07
(2.04)
1.03
(0.64)

4,282
(19,616)
85.46
(417.62)
63.63
(264.83)
32.32
(97.21)
19.94
(45.06)
8.06
(11.62)
0.261
(0.243)
-0.002
(0.082)

17
(457)
1.18
(10.24)
1.14
(6.86)
1.08
(2.84)
1.05
(1.50)
1.02
(0.51)

181,732,500

145,600

181,587,000

Leverage
Δ Lev

Observations

Table 2
(continued)
Panel (B): County-level summary statistics

Δ log(Emp)

All

Publicly Listed

Non-Listed

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.054
(0.190)

0.041
(0.266)
0.128
(0.107)
0.132
(0.106)
0.269
(0.278)
0.071
(0.077)
0.288
(0.073)
-0.002
(0.080)

0.062
(0.244)
0.872
(0.107)
0.868
(0.106)
0.731
(0.278)
0.929
(0.077)

99,300

99,300

99,300

Employment share
Employment share (non-tradable)
Employment share (tradable)
Employment share (other)
Leverage
Δ Lev

Observations

Table 3
Main Results
This table presents variants of the regressions in Panel (A) of Table 1 in which the dependent variable is either
employment growth by publicly listed firms (Panel (A)) or all (listed and non-listed) firms (Panel (B)) at the county
level. Observations are weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county
and year level. The sample period is from 1976 to 2011. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

Panel (A): Regional employment growth at publicly listed firms

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(-3,0)

Δ log(Emp)
(-2,1)

Δ log(Emp)
(-1,2)

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.476***
(0.181)

0.099
(0.219)

-0.278*
(0.145)

-0.231**
(0.117)

-0.381***
(0.135)

-0.338**
(0.145)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.58
99,300

0.57
96,100

0.60
92,900

0.58
89,700

0.60
86,500

0.58
83,300

Panel (B): Aggregate regional employment growth

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(-3,0)

Δ log(Emp)
(-2,1)

Δ log(Emp)
(-1,2)

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.062***
(0.022)

0.019
(0.018)

-0.033*
(0.020)

-0.035**
(0.018)

-0.053***
(0.017)

-0.046***
(0.017)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.38
99,300

0.37
96,100

0.36
92,900

0.35
89,700

0.37
86,500

0.38
83,300

Table 4
Industry Sectors
This table presents variants of the regressions in columns (4) to (6) of Panel (B) of Table 3 in which the sample is
split by industry sector. Regional firm leverage and aggregate regional employment are sector-specific as described
in Section 4.1. The classification of industry sectors follows Mian and Sufi (2014). Observations are weighted by
county-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample period is
from 1976 to 2011. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Tradable industries

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.039*
(0.021)

-0.040**
(0.020)

-0.055**
(0.025)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.23
88,300

0.23
85,200

0.24
82,000

Panel (B): Non-tradable industries

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.034**
(0.015)

-0.044**
(0.017)

-0.038**
(0.017)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.35
89,700

0.36
86,500

0.36
83,300

Table 4
(continued)
Panel (C): Other industries

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.037*
(0.020)

-0.063***
(0.022)

-0.060***
(0.021)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.29
89,700

0.30
86,500

0.31
83,300

Table 5
MSAs and States
This table presents variants of the regressions in columns (4) to (6) of Panel (B) of Table 3 in which regions are
based on MSAs (Panel (A)) or states (Panel (B)) in lieu of counties. Observations are weighted by region-level
employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the region and year level. The sample period is from 1976 to
2011. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): MSAs

Δ Lev(-3,0)

MSA fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.071*
(0.042)

-0.110***
(0.036)

-0.097***
(0.035)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.46
11,300

0.46
11,000

0.49
10,600

Panel (B): States

Δ Lev(-3,0)

State fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.129*
(0.073)

-0.183***
(0.054)

-0.128**
(0.048)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.60
1,500

0.60
1,500

0.63
1,400

Table 6
Establishment-Level Evidence
This table presents variants of the regressions in columns (4) to (6) of Panel (B) of Table 3 in which employment is
measured at the individual establishment level and the county and year fixed effects are replaced with county ×
industry × year fixed effects. Industries are measured at the 4-digit NAICS code level. Observations are weighted by
establishment-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample
period is from 1976 to 2011. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County × industry × year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.173**
(0.082)

-0.177**
(0.080)

-0.148*
(0.090)

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.04
4,491,000

0.04
3,869,700

0.05
3,338,600

Table 7
Mean-Reverting Employment Growth
Panel (A) presents variants of the regressions in columns (4) to (6) of Panel (B) of Table 3 in which Δ Lev(–3,0) is
interacted with a dummy indicating whether the change in leverage is positive or negative. Panel (B) presents
variants of the regressions in columns (4) to (6) of Panel (B) of Table 3 in which Δ log(Emp)(–3,0) is included as a
control variable. Panel (C) presents variants of the regressions in columns (4) to (6) of Panel (B) of Table 3 in which
Δ Lev(–3,0) is interacted with dummies indicating whether the initial level of regional firm leverage in t – 3 lies in
the first, second, or third tercile of its sample distribution based on all county-year observations. Observations are
weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample
period is from 1976 to 2011. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Positive and negative changes in regional firm leverage

Δ Lev(-3,0)(positive)
Δ Lev(-3,0)(negative)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.046*
(0.026)
-0.026
(0.034)

-0.062**
(0.028)
-0.039
(0.042)

-0.058**
(0.027)
-0.029
(0.047)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.35
89,700

0.37
86,500

0.38
83,300

Table 7
(continued)
Panel (B): Controlling for initial employment growth

Δ Lev(-3,0)
Δ log(Emp)(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.030*
(0.018)
-0.082***
(0.013)

-0.049***
(0.017)
-0.052***
(0.010)

-0.042**
(0.017)
-0.056***
(0.010)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.38
89,700

0.37
86,500

0.39
83,300

Table 7
(continued)
Panel (C): Interaction with level of regional firm leverage
Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Δ Lev(-3,0) × Lev(-3)(1st tercile)

-0.012

-0.009

-0.035

Δ Lev(-3,0) × Lev(-3)(2nd tercile)

(0.035)
-0.036

(0.034)
-0.074**

(0.042)
-0.038

Δ Lev(-3,0) × Lev(-3)(3rd tercile)

(0.029)
-0.070***

(0.028)
-0.081***

(0.028)
-0.048**

(0.021)
-0.009
(0.013)
-0.013
(0.013)

(0.018)
0.002
(0.012)
0.006
(0.013)

(0.019)
0.005
(0.013)
0.007
(0.014)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.35
89,700

0.37
86,500

0.38
83,300

Lev(-3)(2nd tercile)
Lev(-3)(3rd tercile)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Table 8
National Recessions
This table presents cross-sectional variants of the regressions in columns (4) to (6) of Panel (B) of Table 3 in which
the dependent variable is either one-year (column (1)), two-year (column (2)), or three-year (column (3)) growth in
aggregate regional employment. Year “0” indicates the year immediately before a national recession. For example,
in Panel (A), Δ Lev(-3,0) is the change in regional firm leverage from 1976 to 1979, while Δ log(Emp)(1,2),
Δ log(Emp)(1,3), and Δ log(Emp)(1,4) represent the growth in aggregate regional employment from 1980 to 1981,
1980 to 1982, and 1980 to 1983, respectively. For brevity, the table only displays the coefficients and standard
errors associated with Δ Lev(–3,0). Observations are weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors are
robust standard errors. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ log(Emp)
(1,2)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel (A): 1980−82 recession
Δ Lev(-3,0)

-0.039***
(0.010)

-0.065***
(0.014)

-0.076***
(0.013)

Panel (B): 1990−91 recession
Δ Lev(-3,0)

-0.124***
(0.011)

-0.148***
(0.016)

-0.150***
(0.013)

Panel (C): 2001 recession
Δ Lev(-3,0)

-0.067***
(0.014)

-0.056***
(0.018)

-0.030
(0.020)

Panel (D): 2007−09 recession
Δ Lev(-3,0)

-0.133***
(0.032)

-0.139***
(0.038)

-0.147***
(0.035)

Table 9
Business Cycle Comovement
The dependent variable, ρ[Δ log(Emp)(1,4)], is the pairwise correlation of (medium-run) aggregate regional
employment growth between two counties. ρ[Δ Lev(-3,0)] is the pairwise correlation of regional firm leverage
growth between two counties. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. The sample period is from 1976 to
2011. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

ρ [Δ log(Emp)(1,4)]
(1)
ρ [Δ Lev(-3,0)]

County fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

0.049***
(0.013)
Yes
0.63
4,925,100

Table 10
Firm versus Household Leverage
This table presents variants of the regressions in columns (4) to (6) of Panel (B) of Table 3 (Panel (A)) and columns
(1) to (3) of Panel (D) of Table 8 (Panel (B)) in which the change in regional household leverage, Δ HH Lev(–3,0),
is included as a control variable. Regional household leverage is the ratio of household debt (mortgage, credit card,
and auto loan debt) to income at the county level. Observations are weighted by county-level employment. In Panel
(A), standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. In Panel (B), standard errors are robust
standard errors. In Panel (A), the sample period is from 1999 to 2011. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Panel specification (1999-2011)

Δ Lev(-3,0)
Δ HH Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.041*
(0.025)
-0.019*
(0.011)

-0.075**
(0.031)
-0.039**
(0.012)

-0.057*
(0.030)
-0.025**
(0.010)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.66
9,000

0.60
8,000

0.72
5,900

Table 10
(continued)
Panel (B): 2007-09 recession

Δ Lev(-3,0)
Δ HH Lev(-3,0)

R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(1,2)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.138***
(0.037)
-0.018***
(0.005)

-0.127***
(0.046)
-0.022***
(0.004)

-0.126***
(0.046)
-0.023***
(0.004)

0.01
2,000

0.01
2,000

0.01
2,000

Online Appendix

Table A.1
Bin Scatterplot Regressions
This table presents variants of the regressions in columns (1) and (5) of Table 1 without county or year fixed effects
in which the dependent variable is either employment growth at publicly listed firms (Panel (A)) or all (listed and
non-listed) firms (Panel (B)) at the county level. Observations are weighted by county-level employment. Standard
errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample period is from 1976 to 2011. *, **, and ***
denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Regional employment growth at publicly listed firms

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(-3,0)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

(1)

(2)

0.481**
(0.198)

-0.526***
(0.149)

No
No

No
No

0.01
99,300

0.01
86,500

Panel (B): Aggregate regional employment growth

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(-3,0)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

(1)

(2)

0.097***
(0.026)

-0.069***
(0.021)

No
No

No
No

0.03
99,300

0.01
86,500

Table A.2
Firms with Distant Headquarters
This table presents variants of the regressions in columns (4) to (6) of Panel (B) of Table 4 in which regional firm
leverage is based on firms whose headquarters are located at least 1,000 miles away from the given region (Panel
(A)) or in a different state (Panel (B)). Observations are weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors are
double clustered at the county and year level. The sample period is from 1976 to 2011. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Firms with headquarters located 1,000+ miles away

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.040***
(0.010)

-0.048***
(0.010)

-0.040***
(0.010)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.36
60,400

0.36
59,000

0.38
57,500

Panel (B): Firms with out-of-state headquarters

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.051**
(0.017)

-0.057**
(0.019)

-0.050**
(0.020)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.35
87,600

0.35
84,500

0.37
81,500

Table A.3
Computing Δ Lev(-3,0)
This table presents variants of the regressions in columns (4) to (6) of Panel (B) of Table 4 in which Δ Lev(-3,0) is
computed as the weighted average change in firm leverage from t – 3 to t across all publicly listed firms with
establishments in a given county using as weights the firms’ county-level employment shares in t – 3. Observations
are weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The
sample period is from 1976 to 2011. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Lev(-3,0)

County fixed effects
Year fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Δ log(Emp)
(0,3)

Δ log(Emp)
(1,4)

Δ log(Emp)
(2,5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.038**
(0.018)

-0.057***
(0.017)

-0.044**
(0.017)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.35
89,700

0.37
86,500

0.38
83,300

