NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY IN EDUCATION:
VARIATION IN GEOGRAPHY AND TIME
Jason Fletcher
Joel Han
Working Paper 25324
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25324

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jason Fletcher and Joel Han. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Intergenerational Mobility in Education: Variation in Geography and Time
Jason Fletcher and Joel Han
NBER Working Paper No. 25324
December 2018
JEL No. I2,I21,I24,J24,J48
ABSTRACT
Although the measurement of intergenerational income mobility has seen a rapid increase in
attention and policy discussions, similar examinations of educational mobility in the U.S. are
lacking. This paper begins to fill this gap by documenting differences in educational mobility
across time (1982-2004) and geography (U.S. states). The study complements recent estimates of
intergenerational income mobility because educational mobility both contributes to income
mobility and is a target for education policies. We both develop a method to compute
intergenerational correlation coefficients which respects the unique properties of education
attainment, as well as utilize standard measures in the literature. While naive intergenerational
regressions of years attained suggest a slight increase in mobility over the sample period, we find
that mobility fluctuated: decreasing over roughly the first decade and increasing in the second. In
addition, there is also substantial geographic variation in education mobility. We identify local
community and policy factors, such as the existence of high school exit exams, that are correlated
with educational mobility as well as a lack of increase in mobility in the South.

Jason Fletcher
University of Wisconsin-Madison
La Follette School of Public Affairs
1225 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
jfletcher@lafollette.wisc.edu
Joel Han
Loyola University Chicago
Quinlan School of Business
16 E Pearson St
Room 714
Chicago, IL 60611
jhan12@luc.edu

Intergenerational Mobility in Education: Variation in Geography
and Time
Jason Fletcher and Joel Han
December 8, 2018
Abstract
Although the measurement of intergenerational income mobility has seen a rapid increase in attention and policy
discussions, similar examinations of educational mobility in the U.S. are lacking. This paper begins to fill this gap
by documenting differences in educational mobility across time (1982-2004) and geography (U.S. states). The study
complements recent estimates of intergenerational income mobility because educational mobility both contributes to
income mobility and is a target for education policies. We both develop a method to compute intergenerational correlation coefficients which respects the unique properties of education attainment, as well as utilize standard measures
in the literature. While naive intergenerational regressions of years attained suggest a slight increase in mobility over
the sample period, we find that mobility fluctuated: decreasing over roughly the first decade and increasing in the
second. In addition, there is also substantial geographic variation in education mobility. We identify local community
and policy factors, such as the existence of high school exit exams, that are correlated with educational mobility as
well as a lack of increase in mobility in the South.

1

Introduction

The purpose of this paper is to document patterns in the intergenerational correlation of educational attainment. While
prominent recent work (Chetty et al. (2014a) and Chetty et al. (2014b)) has focused on intergenerational correlations
in income, less work has focused on education as the variable of interest. Building on previous work, we analyze
patterns in education mobility, across both time and geographical regions in the contemporary U.S. In addition to
standard approaches, we develop a simple method for estimating mobility in education that recognizes the possibility
of changing education standards over time.
While the topic of income mobility has been well studied, we believe the study of education mobility offers distinct
insights. Since education contributes significantly to lifetime income, one reason for studying educational mobility
is to assess the degree to which it explains variation in income mobility. In turn, the study of education mobility
could also yield information on the effectiveness of educational policies in addressing issues of income mobility. At
the same time, there may be differences between education and income mobility. Since education attains its terminal
value relatively early in the life cycle, and is more directly influenced by parents, it serves as a measure of early life
opportunities available to the child. In comparison, income depends on a wide variety of intervening factors that may
1

come into effect later in life (e.g. career choice or the Great Recession). Hence, measures of education mobility may be
of more interest when studying early life opportunities or the concept of ”equality of opportunity”. Finally, measuring
education mobility is easier than income mobility because terminal values of education attainment are relatively easy
to obtain in data. In contrast, measurement of income is often troubled by the issue of disentangling permanent income
from transitory income shocks. By focusing on education, the set of feasible data becomes significantly larger.
In this paper, we focus on producing estimates of intergenerational mobility in education that respect the way in which
educational attainment is measured. By nature, our variable of interest requires slightly different methods from those
used to study income. Measurements of educational attainment are typically discrete and sparse. While it is relatively
safe to assume that income is continuously distributed, the observed patterns in educational attainment do not support
this assumption. In response to the issue of discreteness, one solution is to use a natural parameterization of education:
the years of education attained. While this method gives results that are easily interpreted, it has a shortcoming:
changes in the marginal distribution of education may result in changes to the estimated mobility coefficients. For
example, comparing two cohorts of children, it is likely that children from the later cohort have a higher rate of college
graduation.1 In our view, this change in the fraction of children attending college should not necessarily have affect
the mobility coefficient: it is important to consider the education level of their parents as well. If the increased fraction
of children graduating college comes from the top of the parental education spectrum, we do not view this as a real
increase in mobility.
We proceed by assuming that measured educational attainment is a discrete, ordinal categorization of an underlying
continuous variable, which we refer to as human capital for the sake of discussion. We seek to estimate mobility in
this latent, continuous variable. When only discrete education is observed, the main difficulty lies in differentiating
changes in mobility from changes in the marginal distribution of education. It may be argued that education mobility
measures should depend on these marginal distribution changes. The resolution of this issue depends on the concept
of mobility that the researcher wants to capture. For comparability with recent studies of income mobility, we focus on
the concept of relative mobility: the dependence of a child’s position in the education distribution of his/her generation,
on the position of the parent.
Relative mobility is distinct from absolute mobility, which focuses on whether children are doing better than their
parents on a particular invariant scale (e.g. years of education completed). Both concepts of economic mobility are
relevant in addressing different policy concerns. For example, when assessing improvement in education outcomes
over time, absolute mobility is the appropriate measure. On the other hand, when studying the intergenerational
1 This hypothesis is supported by the data: we present supporting findings later in the paper. Additionally, the same trend holds true, albeit to a
lesser degree, for the parents of these children as well.

2

origins of social stratification or “equality of opportunity” among peers of the same cohort, relative mobility becomes
the relevant concept. It is important to develop separate measures for relative and absolute mobility because they
could exhibit very different patterns (Breen and Jonsson, 2005). At the national level, Winship (2014) finds substantial
differences between absolute and relative mobility, for a child cohort born in the 1970s.2 Our objective is to measure
relative mobility and examine its trends and geographic distribution fo a recent set of birth cohorts in the U.S.
We develop two specifications for estimating relative mobility in education. Similar to rank-rank regressions, each of
our methods imposes assumptions on the latent variable so that the distribution is known. In the first specification,
we impute the mean percentile of the latent variable for each education level.3 This specification assumes that the
intergenerational transmission of education percentiles is linear: we verify that this assumption is not contradicted by
the data. We also develop an alternative specification based on the assumption that this latent variable is normally
distributed.
We apply our method to three separate representative surveys of high schoolers in the United States. Conducted by the
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), these three surveys span a period of roughly 2 decades. Hence, they
provide three snapshots of national trends in education mobility. Furthermore, these surveys also sampled a wide range
of geographical areas, permitting some comparison across U.S. states and regions as well. Our results suggest that
education mobility has increased for recent cohorts in the U.S. We find some evidence that the measure of education
matters in documenting these recent trends due to changes in the distribution of educational attainment. Turning to
geographic variation, between states, a number of contextual and policy measures - including the presence of high
school exit examinations - are associated with lower education mobility. This finding is expected, and verifies that our
mobility findings lead to sensible patterns. Furthermore, we find some correlation between our measures of education
mobility and income mobility measures from Chetty et al. (2014b), as well as evidence of region variation, with the
South lacking recent increases in mobility.

1.1

Existing Literature

There is substantial interest in estimating intergenerational mobility for variables other than income. One body of
existing research effectiveness of educational policies in remediating issues of social mobility (Blanden and Machin,
2 He finds that relative mobility appears to be limited, while absolute mobility is high. The discrepancy arises from increasing living standards
across generations, such that children tend to fare better than their parents. However, the same child still has a low chance of escaping a situation of
relative disadvantage.
3 Our method is very similar to a study by Goldring et al. (2015). In that study, as in ours, education is taken to be a discrete categorization of an
underlying continuous variable (which they term SES). However, in contrast to our study, the dependent variable in that paper is mortality, which is
a binary variable. While we could replicate their approach by choosing a binary outcome (e.g. child’s high school graduation), we choose, in our
main analysis, to look at changes along the entire support of child/parental education.

3

2004; Heineck and Riphahn, 2009).4 In line with these prior studies, our study can provide descriptive evidence about
the associations between mobility and high school exit exam policies. Since we have variation in policies across
states and time, it is possible to group states by the presence of such policies, and determine if these policies affected
educational mobility.

Besides those mentioned above, there are a few existing studies that focus on intergenerational mobility in education.
Chevalier et al. (2003) and Hertz et al. (2007) both compare educational mobility across countries.5 The former study
focuses on the relationship between mobility and inequality across countries, while the latter estimates income and
education persistence separately. Both of these studies do not examine the U.S. at a sub-national level. In addition,
these prior studies use either years-on-years regressions or eigenvalue measures of mobility. We will argue that our
estimates are better suited to the measurement of relative mobility. In addition, Azam and Bhatt (2015) measures
intergenerational mobility in education in India: similar to this paper, they are concerned with measuring changes in
relative mobility. They achieve this through standardizing years attained within each cohort, which is an alternative
approach that we also explore.

With reference to the U.S., Hilger (2017) measures intergenerational mobility in education, from the 1940s onwards.
In comparison to his sample, ours does not reach as far back, historically; however, taking advantage of the sampling of
our data, we are able to estimate mobility figures for smaller geographic units - census MSAs - and do not need to make
assumptions about links between co-residence with parents and educational attainment.6 In addition, Nguyen et al.
(2005) examines educational mobility in a single cross section of U.S. children, but does not examine geographical
variation. Internationally, Blanden et al. (2005) study intergenerational correlations in both income and education for
two cohorts of children in the U.K. For their sample (1958 to 1970), they find that child education has become more
sensitive to parental income and education. They also find that the correlation between parental income and child
education forms a significant part of the estimated intergenerational correlations in income (about a third of the total
magnitude).

4 In comparison to other determinants of income (e.g. cognitive ability), one motivation for studying educational mobility in specific is the
prevalence of policies that directly influence educational mobility. The studies cited do not examine the U.S.: Blanden and Machin (2004) consider
the effect of expansion policies for higher education in the U.K., while Heineck and Riphahn (2009) studies a change in the German education
system. Chevalier et al. (2003) also cite policy relevance as a reason for studying educational mobility. In addition, they also cite the relative
difficulty of measuring lifetime income.
5 See Black and Devereux (2011) for a survey of current research literature on intergenerational mobility, which includes the two cited sources.
6 Since Hilger uses cross-sectional Decennial Census data, he is only able to examine intergenerational correlations between parents and children
if the children are residing with the parents during the data collection. The necessary assumption that Hilger provides evidence for is that children
who live with their parents after completing schooling have representative mobility profiles as children who do not.

4

2

An Empirical Model of Mobility in Education

In our model, parents transmit human capital to their children. Human capital is a summary measure of resources,
norms, and ability, which contributes to educational attainment. Indexing families by i and generations by g ∈ {0, 1},
we assume a linear transmission of human capital, as in (1).7 The important coefficient in this model is α1,r,t , which
can vary across geographic regions r and time periods t.

hi,1 = α0,r,t + α1,r,t hi,0 + i

(1)

Parental income has been deliberately omitted from the model: we wish to include parental income as a channel for
intergenerational transmission of educational attainment. In other words, if highly-educated parents are more able to
fund higher education for their children, we want to capture that effect in our estimate.
Education is assumed to be a discrete categorization of human capital. In other words, education and human capital are
almost equivalent, but educational attainment involves some information loss. Education is constant for all values of
human capital between certain thresholds (2). The numerical values v for these categories could describe, for example,
the years of education attained.

ei =





v1







v2










vM

hi ∈ [δ0,t = δmin , δ1,t ]
hi ∈ (δ1,t , δ2,t ]
..
.

(2)

hi ∈ (δM −1,t , δM,t = δmax ]

The thresholds δmt can be interpreted as education standards, determining the minimal human capital needed to receive
a , which may vary across time periods, due to changes in norms, incentives, and costs of education. For example,
compulsory education laws might eliminate the lowest category of ei . For this reason, in our empirical work we allow
these thresholds to vary freely across time periods as well.8
The discrete categorization of human capital as education affects both the dependent variable (child human capital)
and the key regressor (parent human capital). The discrete nature of the dependent variable can be addressed using
standard regression methods for ordinal data: for example, suppose that parental human capital were fully observed,
7 (1) can be viewed as the reduced form of a simple human capital investment model, similar to Solon (2004). See Section A for a detailed
description.
8 These thresholds could vary across geographical regions (states or cities) as well. In our analysis of national trends, we accommodate a limited
form of such variation, through the inclusion of state-year fixed effects. Section 2.3 contains a more detailed discussion.

5

but child human capital only up to the level of education. In this case, an ordered probit regression could be used to
estimate relative mobility. On the other hand, the discrete nature of parental human capital is more problematic. In
the model, even if the transmission of human capital is linear, the transmission of educational attainment is likely to
be nonlinear. For simplicity, consider the case in which child human capital is fully observed, but parental education
takes one of M education levels (3).
hi,1 =

M
X

βm 1 (ei,0 = vm ) + νi

(3)

m=1

Equation (3) describes the model-derived causal relationship between parental education and child human capital.
This equation cannot, in general, be meaningfully reduced to a linear regression in ei,0 . The exception would be the
0
unlikely case that (βm − βm0 )/(vm − vm
) were constant for all m, m0 .

In this paper, our empirical objective is to recover coefficient α1 in (1) (subscripts r and t have been suppressed), and
to compare this coefficient across geographic regions and time periods. We denote by ∆m the difference in expected
human capital between education level vm and the lowest level:

∆m ≡ E [hi,0 | hi,0 ∈ (δm−1,0 , δm,0 ]] − E [hi,0 | hi,0 ∈ (δmin , δ1,0 ]]

The coefficients on parental education from (3) are related to α1 as follows:
h i
h i
E β̂m − E β̂1 = α1 ∆m

(4)

As (4) shows, the coefficients on parental education are not straightforward indicators of relative mobility: they are also
affected by the process of discretization. That is, for a particular level of parental education, the estimated regression
coefficient is the product of the intergenerational correlation coefficient and the conditional expectation of human
capital for parents with that level of educational attainment. Furthermore, a linear regression in years of parental
education is only interpretable when all the ∆m ’s are identical. This assumption would impose that going from 10 to
11 years of schooling represents the same increase in human capital as going from 11 to 12 years.
One potential response to this issue is to discount the information contained in the values of education categories and
to simply estimate (3) with indicator variables for each ordinal level of education. The drawback to this approach is
the difficulty in assessing changes in mobility. Any comparison of mobility across two time periods or two locations
requires a comparison between two sets of M coefficients each. Because of this practical difficulty, we do not use this
approach in our primary analysis.
6

At the same time, (4) suggests a method of re-weighting in order to compare coefficients across geographical regions
(or, equivalently, time periods). Consider two regions, c and d. In order to compare the underlying mobility coefficient
α1,c and α1,d :


h
i
h
i
 h
i
h
i
E β̂m,c − E β̂1,c ∆−1
∆−1
m,c − E β̂m,d − E β̂1,d
m,d = α1,c − α1,d

(5)

Because the latent distribution of parent’s human capital is unobserved, it is not possible to estimate ∆m,c in general.
Hence, we next impose some distributional assumptions of unobserved human capital, so that ∆m,c can be recovered
from observed information.

2.1

9

Recovering Intergenerational Correlations Using Education Percentiles

As discussed previously, in order to recover the intergenerational correlation in unobserved human capital, some distributional assumptions must be made. In this paper, we explore two alternative assumptions. The first assumption
is that human capital percentiles are linearly transmitted: in other words, the position of the child in his/her marginal
distribution of human capital depends on the parent’s position in their respective marginal distribution. Since the percentiles of human capital must be uniformly distributed between 0 and 1, this assumption allows us to calculate the
expected percentile of human capital, conditional on the observed level of education. As shown in (6), the conditional
expectation ∆m can be recovered from probability measures corresponding to observed frequencies in the data. Essentially, for each parent, the education percentile or percentile mean is assigned as the fraction of parents with strictly
less education, plus one-half the fraction of parents with equal education.
By this assumption, the conditional expectation of education percentiles can be expressed in terms of the empirical
distribution function for educational attainment:

∆m = P r(ei,0 < vm ) +

2.2

P r(ei,0 = vm )
− P r(ei,0 = v1 )
2

(6)

Recovering Intergenerational Correlation under Normality Assumptions

As an alternative approach to education percentiles, we instead assume that latent human capital is normally distributed. Under this assumption, expected human capital, conditional on an observed education level, can be derived
from an alternative formula, based on the truncated normal distribution.10 For notational simplicity, let F (v) denote the
9 Appendix B illustrates the model using a simple numerical example. In Appendix C, we also compare our methods other alternative measures
of mobility: ordinal variable regressions and matrix-based measures of mobility.
10 We standardize latent human capital to be mean 0, standard deviation 1, which is trivial under the assumption that it is normally distributed.

7

empirical distribution function of parental education, i.e. the fraction of observed parents with education no greater
than v. Then, under these alternative assumptions, ∆m is given by (7), where Φ (resp. φ) denotes the distribution
function (resp. probability distribution function) for the standard normal distribution. As an alternative to education
percentiles, we also calculate human capital using this method, which we term truncated normal expectations.

∆m

2.3



φ Φ−1 (F (vm−1 )) − φ Φ−1 (F (vm ))
=
F (vm ) − F (vm−1 )

(7)

Comparing Intergenerational Correlations Across Time and Geography

By design, both methods of calculating human capital are invariant to changes in the marginal distribution of educational attainment. In an intergenerational regression of human capital measures, the coefficient on parent’s human
capital describes how the child’s position in his/her education distribution depends on the parent’s position. Our approach is similar to rank-rank regressions: which have been widely used in recent research to measure relative mobility
in income (Chetty et al. (2014a), Chetty et al. (2014b)). Our method simply adapts the concept of a rank-rank regression to suit discrete data. Similar to rank-rank regressions, the key assumption is that the human capital measure is
linearly transmitted from parent to child.
Using simulated data, we test both of our methods against commonly-used intergenerational regression methods.11
When applied to simulated human capital data, our chosen methods perform better: they stay relatively constant under
different mappings from latent human capital to observed education level.12
We describe trends in intergenerational education mobility over time using the regression specification given in (8).
This regression pools all observations in our sample. In this regression, ∆i0 (∆i1 ) represents the human capital of the
parent (child): calculated as education percentiles or alternatively truncated normal expectations. The parameters of
interest are αt , for each time period. The regression contains a limited set of controls (race/gender of child, as well as
a constant term), as well as state-year fixed effects ψst . The coefficients of interest are αt .

∆i1 = αt ∆i0 + Xi0 βt + ψst + εi

(8)

When we aggregate across all states in a year to calculate human capital, we implicitly assume that all states have
11 These are an intergenerational regression of years of education attained, and a version of that regression with years of education standardized
to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1.
12 Full details are found in Appendix D.

8

the same educational standards.13 In reality, different state-level education policies may lead to different mappings
between human capital and educational attainment: one state may have the top 20 percent of the human capital
distribution attaining a college degree, while in another state it may only be the top 15 percent. Recognizing this
limitation, our regression approach accommodates some flexibility in accommodating different educational standards
across states, within a given year. We highlight the presence of state-year fixed effects in our regression specification.
Hence, our results are not affected if one state has lower educational standards than the others, as long as these
differences are consistent across education levels. In contrast, the fixed effects will not address the problem if a state
has a relatively high bar for college attainment, but a low bar for high school attainment.14
When we compare education mobility across states, the possibility of differing education standards becomes more
salient. For this analysis, we estimate separate intergenerational correlations regressions by state-year, following
regression specification (9). The controls in Xi are identical to (8). In contrast to (8), child (∆i1st ) and parent (∆i0st )
human capital measures are calculated relative to the marginal distribution for state s and year t. Hence, any differences
in αst across states cannot be attributed to differences in state education standards.

∆i1st = αst ∆i0st + Xi0 βst + εi

3

(9)

Data

The data for this study comes from three longitudinal studies of high school students in the United States. In chronological order, these are the High School & Beyond study (HSB), the National Education Longitudinal Survey (NELS)
and the Education Longitudinal Study (ELS). These three studies were conducted by the National Center of Education
Statistics (NCES), hence, when referring to all three surveys as a collective, we use the term NCES surveys. The
HSB and the ELS studied 10th graders in years 1980 and 2002 respectively,15 In comparison, the NELS surveyed
8th graders in 1988. One implication of this discrepancy is that the NELS cohort includes students who dropped out
between 8th and 10th grades, while the other two surveys do not. As a result, we do not include any NELS children
who report a final education level less than 10th grade.16 Putting these three cohorts together, we observe the graduating high school classes in years 1982, 1992, and 2004. From follow-up surveys, we take the last observed value of
13 Using the notation of (2), the assumption is that δ
mt is identical for all states in period t, for every education level m This limitation is
analogous to not adjusting for cost of living when measuring income mobility using rank-rank regressions.
14 Likewise, education standards may differ across races and genders as well.
15 Both studies also include 12th grader cohorts, which we do not use to make the samples as comparable as possible with the NELS.
16 Even then, the samples may not be perfectly comparable: consider a student who drops out of high school in 9th grade, and later obtains a
GED and some post-secondary education. This student will be observed in the NELS sample but not in the other two. However, we believe that the
sample are basically comparable since the conditions outlined above only apply to very few children.

9

educational attainment to be the terminal value of education for that student. Hence, to be included in our sample, the
student must have been surveyed at a late follow-up survey, for observed education levels to reasonably approximate
terminal education.17

In addition, we drop from our sample any student who is not living with either parent at the initial survey wave. Since
students report the education level of their parents, we take this step to remove families where either parent is not
involved in the household. Admittedly, this step does not address students who changed families (e.g. were adopted)
just before the study, or whose parents separated after the initial study. Separately, we also estimate intergenerational
correlations for the subsample of children reporting both parents in the households. This subsample is significantly
smaller than our base sample. Sample sizes by survey year and child gender can be found in Table 1.

Within this sample, the marginal distribution of parent and child education shows some changes over time. As Figure
1 shows, the distribution of parent’s education has been shifting towards higher education levels, when comparing
parents of high schoolers in the 1980 versus the cohort from the 2000s. Here, as in subsequent analysis, we use the
maximum across both parents (where both parents are present in the household) as our measure of parental education.18
Similarly, Figure 5 shows a striking difference between child education distributions in the HSB, relative to subsequent
years.19 In the HSB, there is a much higher percentage of students with terminal high school degrees. One reason
for this is the changing marginal distribution of education: across time, it is progressively more common to acquire
post-secondary education. However, there is another reason for this discrepancy in post secondary education, which
has to do with differences in survey design. Unlike the other two studies, the HSB did not record post-secondary
education that did not result in certificate attainment (e.g. college dropouts). Hence, unique to the HSB, respondents
who attempted post-secondary education but left before completion are recorded as “HS Grad”, and not “some PSE”.
Given the differences in the way educational attainment is coded between surveys, the method of education percentiles
presents another advantage. In each survey year, we are able to use all available levels of educational attainment,
without harmonizing the number of categories across different surveys.20

17 The

construction of child education variables is discussed in detail in Appendix E.1.
distribution of parental education is mostly unchanged when using either mother’s or father’s education, as is the case for our main results.
19 We compare the marginal distributions of parent and child education against national data drawn from the decennial census (Appendix E.2).
Overall, we find that the data are a representative national sample.
20 The exact coding of parent and child education variables is shown in Table A1.
18 The

10

4

Results

4.1

Linearity of Intergenerational Transmission

Each of our selected methods imposes unverifiable assumptions on the intergenerational transmission process of latent
human capital. Before turning to the results, we test one of the more salient restrictions imposed by our model:
percentile means/truncated normal expectations should appear to be linearly transmitted in the education data. When
we test this assumption, our two empirical approaches do not appear to break the linearity restriction. Figure 2 plots
child educational attainment against parent educational attainment, using each of our two empirical specifications.
The top panel shows the intergenerational correlation of percentile means: each point displays the expected percentile
mean of the child, conditional on the percentile mean of the parent. By inspection, each point lies relatively close
to the linear approximation: with few exceptions, the associated confidence intervals for each point overlap with the
dotted line of best fit. More formally, we assess linearity of intergenerational transmission using the Ramsey RESET
test, (Ramsey, 1969): this test examines the statistical significance of coefficients on higher powers of the parental
education variable. In each of the three years of data, it is not possible to reject the hypothesis that child percentile
means are linearly dependent on parental percentile means. The intergenerational plots for our alternative approach
- truncated normal expectations - are presented in the bottom panel of Figure 2. Once again, based on the observed
patterns as well as the statistical test, it is not possible to reject the assumption of linear intergenerational transmission
in any of the sample years.
In contrast to our methods, when raw years of education is the specification of choice, the assumption of linear
transmission is difficult to maintain. The top panel of Figure 3 shows the intergenerational plot of years of education
attained. The deviations from the line of best fit appear to be more significant, and this is corroborated by the Ramsey
test: in two out of three years, the assumption of linearity is rejected at the 0.05 level. As the bottom panel of Figure 3
shows, even when years of education are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation of one, the assumption
of linearity is still rejected. Beyond theoretical reasons (capturing relative mobility in underlying human capital), our
choice of empirical approach is also motivated by practical concerns of fitting the data.

4.2

Variation across Time

We carry out intergenerational regressions of educational attainment, following regression specification (8), using
two measures of observed education - years of schooling, a standardized measure of years of schooling21 - and two
21 Within

each survey year, child years of schooling is adjusted to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. The same is done for parent’s education.

11

measures of human capital - education percentiles, and truncated normal expectations.
The main results of our estimation are provided in Table 3.22 In this table, the focus is on changes in education mobility
across time, treating the entire United States as a single geographic unit. Unsurprisingly, parent-child correlations in
education are significant in all years, and across the whole range of specifications. On the other hand, the time trends
in these coefficients depend on the specification of education variable: specifically, whether changes in the marginal
distribution of education have been accounted for. Consider first the results when parent and child education are
measured in years attained. As the first column of Table 3 shows, there is a slight decreasing trend in the coefficient
from 1982 to 2004. Because the coefficient captures the dependence of child’s education on parent’s education, the
decreasing trend in the coefficients indicates an increase in mobility. These results are the closest analogue to the
education mobility trends presented in Hilger (2017). Using an intergenerational regression of years of education
attained, Hilger finds that mobility since the 1980s has been declining slightly.23 While our findings are qualitatively
different, we stress that, from one survey year to the next, the changes in our coefficients are slight and not statistically
significant.
The second column uses a standardized measure of years: while there is no consistent downward trend, there is a
significant fall in the correlation coefficient when comparing the year 1982 with subsequent years. This time, the
decrease in correlation coefficient is statistically significant. Both of the naive approaches suggest that mobility in
education has increased over these two decades.
Moving to our preferred empirical approaches, the third and fourth columns show, respectively, intergenerational
correlation coefficients when education percentiles and truncated normal expectations are used. Both of our preferred
approaches undo the effect of changing marginal distributions. When either of these approaches is used, the there is no
downward trend in correlation coefficient over the study period. From 1982 to 1992, the coefficient actually increases
significantly. On the other hand, from 1992 to 2004, there is a large and significant decrease in the coefficient, resulting
in a return to roughly the 1982 level of mobility. This difference suggests that patterns in relative mobility in education
are not well captured by using years of education, because of the issue of changing marginal distributions.
In comparison to our preferred methods, consider results from an ordered logit regression, where parental education
dummies are the main regressors. The drawback of this method is the relative difficulty of assessing changes in
mobility over time. From the significant differences in coefficients in Table 4, it is clear that mobility has changed
in the time period we study. However, it is unclear what direction the change in mobility has taken, because the
22 These
23 The

12

results are also shown graphically in Figure 4.
decline is small for whites and larger for blacks, however, we do not focus on racial differences in mobility in our paper.

comparison has to be made across sets of 3 coefficients. This comparison highlights the advantage of our preferred
methods.
Our preferred specifications are most comparable with rank-rank regressions for education, reported in the appendix of
Hilger (2017). The empirical method used in his paper is a rescaling of our education percentiles approach. Because
the time periods only intersect partially, we compare our results for the 1982 and 1992 graduating classes. In levels,
the coefficients for 1982 are similar, however, where our results show a significant decrease in mobility for the 1992
graduating class: Hilger finds a small decrease for blacks and a small increase for whites.24
On the other hand, our results are consistent with the general trends in income rank-rank slopes documented in Chetty
et al. (2014b). Again, the time periods are only partially intersecting, hence we compare our results for the 1992 and
2004 graduating classes. Qualitatively, there appears to be a decrease in the intergenerational correlation coefficient
between these two years.25 While Chetty et al. study income mobility and we study education mobility, it is likely
that national trends would be positively correlated, since income and education are so highly correlated at the level of
individual persons.
Since education mobility is affected by a large number of socioeconomic factors, it is not possible to pinpoint a cause
for the non-monotone trend in education mobility. One trend that is consistent with our findings is one of parent
engagement in schools. Putnam (2000) finds that participation in Parent Teacher Associations declined from 1962 to
1982, and subsequently increased. Hence, it is likely that the class of 1992 experienced lower parent engagement in
schools, over the course of their entire K-12 education. If parent engagement in schools is more important for children
of less-educated parents, then parent engagement could be an explanation for the trends we find.
Other trends that have been studied in the economics research literature are also likely to have contributed to the education mobility trends we find. These include: motherhood earnings penalties (Dechter, 2014), which have been widening (Waldfogel, 1998) and may disproportionately affect low earning mothers (Budig and Hodges, 2010), changes
in family structure (Pew Research Center, 2015) and in fertility, as well as increasing affordability of high-quality
colleges (Kinsler and Pavan, 2011).

4.3

Robustness

We check how our results change as we vary several details of the specification. Overall, we find no substantive
differences to our main results. First, we examine how stratifying the sample by child gender changes the results. When
24 There is a small difference in our sample and Hilger’s: we do not observe any children who leave high school before grade 10. However, we
expect the impact of this difference to be essentially negligible, given the small number of children falling into this category.
25 Specifically, we compare the 1992 (2004) class to the 1974(1986) birth cohort. This claim still holds if we average the income rank-rank
coefficients for the birth cohorts immediately preceding and following.

13

we separate the sample by gender, we recalculate standardized years and education percentiles, in effect comparing
sons to other sons and daughters to other daughters. Alongside this, we also alter our measure of parent education.
Our baseline results use the maximum of the two parents’ education levels (where both parents are observed in the
data). We experiment with only using father’s or mother’s education. These results are presented in Table A2, and
show very similar patterns to our baseline results, for both of our preferred approaches.26
Additionally, we examine how our education percentile results change under different definitions of the sample. Our
baseline sample contains all parent-child pairs with non-missing child education and at least one non-missing parent
education variable. We further restrict the sample to families with two parents in the household, and even further by
requiring both parents to report education information. As Table A3 shows, varying the sample does not significantly
affect the estimated coefficients: furthermore, the slight changes are mostly in the levels of the coefficients and not the
trends. The fourth column of Table A3 shows the results when we use unweighted observations: again, these are quite
similar to the baseline patterns. The last column shows results when observations are weighted to be representative at
the state, rather than national, level.27
We also examine how the different categorization schemes for child education affect our results. In Table A4, the
first column contains our baseline results for education percentiles. In the second column, we recode child education
to use the same categories in each survey year. This measure of child education ends up only counting completed
degree attainment. In the third column, we additionally recode GEDs to be equivalent to high school graduates, since
there is some variation in the research literature regarding the equivalence of GEDs to traditional high school degrees.
For both of these changes to the baseline specification, our results are not substantially affected. The increase in the
intergenerational correlation coefficient from 1982 to 1992 becomes slightly smaller in magnitude. On the other hand,
the decrease in this coefficient from 1992 to 2004 becomes more pronounced.

4.4

Dependent and Independent Children

We compare our work to Hilger (2017) in one more respect. The main estimates from the previous work used Census
data, which limited the sample of children to those living with their parents (dependent children). Exploiting the NCES
data, we study the differences in educational mobility, between dependent children and independent children - those
not living with their parents. We estimate separate intergenerational correlation coefficients for each subsample, based
on whether the child was observed to be co-residing with at least one parent at the time of the latest follow-up.28
26 When years attained are used as the measure of human capital, there are some differences between the trends by gender of parent and child,
which we do not attempt to explain.
27 These weights are not included in the raw data, and were instead constructed for this study. For details on the construction, see Section E.4.
28 Depending on the exact survey, the follow-up occurred between 8 and 10 years after the grade 12 year of the child.

14

The results are presented in Table 5. Between dependent and independent children, the trends are similar, and both are
similar to the overall trend. However, there is a difference in the levels of the coefficient: education mobility appears
to be higher when only dependent children are studied. This suggests that there are meaningful differences between
dependent and independent children relating to mobility.

4.5

Variation across Space

We begin our study of geographic variation at the level of census regions. For this analysis, we retain the pooled
national sample and the regression specification for national trend analysis (8), but we allow the coefficient to vary by
census region as well as year. The results are presented in Figure 6. Looking first at the results from the intergenerational regression in years attained, there is a general increase in mobility for the Northeast, North and West census
regions, which is most pronounced for the West. In contrast, mobility in the South appears to have decreased slightly
between 1982 and 2004, although this is statistically insignificant.
Using our preferred methods, we again find that the South appears to be an outlier from the overall pattern of mobility
changes. In all other regions, education mobility is higher in 2004 than in 1982. In the South, the opposite is true,
and, comparing 2004 with 1982, the decrease in mobility is statistically significant. Within the other census regions,
the West stands out for a monotonic increase in mobility across the three survey years. In contrast, the Northeast
and North regions appear to be driving the overall mobility trend for the U.S.: decreasing from 1982 to 1992, and
increasing from 1992 to 2004.
Moving to finer geographies, we estimate education correlation coefficients separately by state according to regression
specification (9): these are summarized in Figure 7.29 Comparing the peaks of the densities across years, the basic
pattern of changes across time are preserved. Additionally, there is significant variation across states, within the same
time period. We decompose the variation in intergenerational correlation coefficients into two components: withinstate (and across years) and between-state. Table 6 shows that within-state and between-state components contribute
in a roughly equal manner towards overall variation in intergenerational correlation coefficients. In contrast to our
chosen empirical approaches, a years-on-years regression tends to overstate within-state variation in intergenerational
correlation coefficients.
The differences in education mobility across states could come from multiple differences in policy, demographics,
or other characteristics. We study one likely influence: the presence or absence of high school exit examinations.
29 We reiterate that, for this and all subsequent analysis at the state level, human capital measures are calculated relative to the marginal distribution
for the particular state-year pair. Additionally, we weight observations to be representative of the state population, rather than the national one. These
weights are constructed using decennial Census data. For details, see Section E.4.

15

The introduction - or increased difficulty - of such examinations is associated with reduced high school completion
rates (Warren et al., 2006). Furthermore, some evidence suggests that the impact of failing this examination appears
to be disproportionately high for low-income students: they are less likely to pass retake attempts, and hence more
likely to leave school without graduating (Papay et al., 2010). Since income and education are positively correlated in
the parent population, high school exit examinations could be a barrier against the upward mobility of students from
low-education families, and result in lower relative mobility.
We use state-by-year data on the presence of high school exit examinations to test this hypothesis.30 The exit exam
data covers 26 states, over a time period which varies slightly from state to state, but which generally begins in the
mid-1970s and ends in the mid-2000s. In order to derive the association between high school exit examinations
and educational mobility, we regress our estimated intergenerational correlation coefficients on an indicator for the
presence of high school exit examinations (HSEE) for that graduating class. The results are shown in Table 7. Our
preferred estimates include state fixed effects, so the coefficient of interest is identified by within-state changes in
mobility following the adoption (or removal) of exit examination requirements. We find that the introduction of high
school exit examinations is associated with a higher intergenerational correlation coefficient (i.e. lower educational
mobility).This trend is not surprising: additional high school graduation requirements are likely to disproportionately
affect the more disadvantaged students within that state (i.e. those with less-educated parents). However, while the
findings are similar by gender, they are only statistically significant (at the 10 percent level) for male children, and
become insignificant when both genders are pooled. Hence, while suggestive, the evidence for the effect of high school
exit examinations and education mobility is not strong. Furthermore, once state fixed effects are included, the positive
association only appears when using either education percentiles or truncated normal expectations, which underscores
the point that changes in marginal distributions could be obscuring meaningful patterns in relative mobility.

4.6

Comparison with Income Mobility

We compare the geographic patterns of education mobility with those for income mobility, taken from (Chetty et al.,
2014a). We choose to focus on their measure of relative income mobility: the rank-rank slope. This measure is
derived from regressing the parent’s rank in the national distribution of income for parents, against the child’s rank in
the national distribution of income for children. Hence, it is the closest analogue to our educational mobility measures,
which also attempt to measure the dependence of the child’s rank on the parent’s rank, albeit in education instead of
income. A priori, one would expect that education and income mobility would be closely associated, education is an
important determinant of income levels.
30 Data

16

on high school exit examinations was kindly provided by Rob Warren.

Chetty et al. provide income mobility measures estimated at the MSA level for the 1980-1982 birth cohorts. We
match these birth cohorts to the two closest high school graduating classes covered by the NCES surveys, assuming
standard grade advancement. These are the classes of 1992 (NELS) and 2004 (ELS), which correspond to the 1974
and 1986 birth cohorts, respectively. In each of these survey years, and for MSAs in which we have sufficient sample
size (N ≥ 30), we generate intergenerational education correlations separately by MSA.31 We then compare these
correlations to the income rank-rank slope, by regressing income correlation coefficients on education correlation
coefficients. We find significant positive correlations between income and education coefficients (Table 8). For both
of our preferred approaches, our findings imply similar, and substantial, effect sizes: across the cities we sample, a one
standard deviation increase in the education correlation coefficient is associated with a half standard deviation increase
in the income correlation coefficient. This suggests a close link between the two forms of intergenerational mobility.
On the other hand, as the R2 statistics show, intergenerational correlations in education only explain between 14 and
20 percent of the variation in intergenerational correlations in income.
One weakness of this analysis is the limited coverage of MSAs in the NCES data. The limited coverage calls into
question whether the patterns we find are representative of the entire country, especially because the NCES surveys
were not designed to provide a representative sample at the MSA level. To check that our results are not sensitive to
the sampling of MSAs, we repeat the analysis at the state level. At the state-level, income correlation coefficients are
only available for the 1986 birth cohort. We regress these coefficients against the education correlation coefficients
we have obtained. First, we include in the regression sample all high school classes for which we have education
correlation coefficients.32 (Table A6, left panel) For a more direct comparison, we next narrow the sample to the
class of 2004 (Table A6, right panel). Assuming that high school graduation occurs at age 18, the class of 2004
corresponds to precisely the 1986 birth cohort. In both cases, we still find positive associations between income and
education correlation coefficients, at the state level. These findings also yield a similar standardized effect size, which
is statistically indistinguishable to the MSA-level analysis. As expected, the strength of the association increases
slightly when the sample is restricted to the class of 2004.

4.7

Correlation with Local Characteristics

We examine which characteristics of local geographies are correlated with our measures of education mobility, at the
MSA level. While these comparisons are purely associational, they largely show that our educational mobility measures are correlated with local characteristics in the expected manner. In addition, we also compare these associations
31 For

the MSA-level analysis, the human capital measures are calculated with reference to the national distribution.
regression equation is Incomes,1986 = α + βEducations,t + φt + εs,t for high school graduating classes t = {1982, 1992, 2004}. The
coefficient of interest is β.
32 The

17

to analogous ones using income correlation coefficients instead of education. Local characteristics were gathered from
decennial census data, available on IPUMS (Ruggles, 2010). In addition to these basic characteristics, we also consider
residential segregation indices within each MSA, calculated using the Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB).33
To ensure adequate sample size within each MSA, we pool children of both genders within each MSA, and estimate
MSA-specific intergenerational correlation coefficients. Next, we pool all years of data and run univariate regressions
of these coefficients against the selected MSA characteristics, including survey year fixed effects. Hence, the results
describe the correlation between education mobility and other local characteristics across cities rather than across
time.34 For comparison, we also perform similar regressions with intergenerational correlation coefficients for income,
taken from Chetty et al. (2014a).35 Table 9 diplays these results.
In terms of correlation with local characteristics, our preferred specifications yield similar patterns to a conventional intergenerational regression of years attained. On the other hand, education mobility and income mobility are not always
affected in the same way by local characteristics. Racially segregated cities and cities with small child populations are
both associated with both lower income mobility as well as lower education mobility. On the other hand, a greater
fraction of minorities within an MSA is associated with lower income mobility but higher education mobility.36 While
we cannot provide a definite reason for this divergence, it is possible that areas with more minorities promote social
mobility in education policy, while simultaneously being characterized by labor market factors that impede mobility
(e.g. racial discrimination in employment).37

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we develop a method of estimating intergenerational correlations in educational attainment. This method
is tailored to categorical variables, furthermore, it allows for easy comparison of coefficients. This method allows for
estimates of mobility even when intergenerational earnings data are poor or unavailable. Implementing this method,
we show that educational mobility seems to have slightly increased for young adults who left high school between 1982
33 The calculation of segregation indices requires the racial composition of neighborhoods within each MSA - a higher level of geographical detail
than is available on IPUMS. Hence, for these indices, we turn to the Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB), which provides information at the
tract-level. Further details on the construction of local characteristics can be found in Appendix E.3.
34 We experimented with additionally including state effects: while the coefficients were roughly unchanged, there was a large loss in precision.
We do not present these results.
35 We analyze two sets of income correlation coefficients. The first set restricts the sample of MSAs to those in the NCES sample. The second
set includes all MSAs from the Chetty et al. (2014a) sample. Between these two samples, the associations with local characteristics are quite
similar, which also suggests that the sample of MSAs in the NCES sample is fairly representative. The exception to this is with the measure of the
segregation of the rich.
36 In Chetty et al. (2014a), there is a significant negative relationship between inequality and mobility, which we fail to replicate here. There are
two likely reasons for this: we use MSAs instead of commuting zones as the geographical area, and our income gini statistics are calculated from
census data instead of tax return data.
37 A similar explanation could also explain why we find no association between fraction of single parents (s a measure of family instability) with
education mobility, even though there is a strong negative association between this variable and income mobility.

18

to 2004, although the trend is non-monotone. In addition, there is substantial geographical variation in educational
mobility, and it tends to be positively correlated with income mobility, as expected. We found important regional
differences in mobility, with the South less mobile than other regions and failing to increase mobility during this time
period.
We have only begun to explore associations between educational mobility and local characteristics and policies. We
found that state level high school examinations are correlated with lower mobility over this period and also outlined a
set of correlations between community characteristics and mobility that should be the subject of future research.

19

Tables
Table 1: Sample Size Description
1984

Total observations
Child education observed
Baseline: 1+ Parent in household (education observed)
Both parents in household
Both parents’ education observed
Baseline MSA Sample: at least 50 surveyed
Baseline Sample
Total

1992

Daughters

Sons

Daughters

Sons

Daughters

5810
5650
4630
3600
3050
3570

6240
6090
5050
3680
3120
3910

11390
5040
4550
3430
3360
3880

11840
5800
5210
3790
3730
4450

7520
6030
5783
3680
3680
4480

7590
6640
6350
3980
3980
4961

9680

9770
31580

Notes:
Sample counts rounded to nearest 10.
Data: HSB (1982), NELS (1992), ELS (2004). Years denote high school graduating class.
Sample restrictions are cumulative.
NELS: Total observations for base year survey. Fewer than 14000 observations
were subsequently resurveyed late enough to assess final education.

20

2004

Sons

12130

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of Sample
Race

1982
1992
2004
Total

Education

Female

Black

Hispanic

Other

Years

High School

College

Father

Mother

Both

0.52
0.53
0.52
0.52

0.12
0.085
0.12
0.11

.
0.12
0.14
0.13

0.12
0.10
0.15
0.12

13.4
14.1
14.3
13.9

0.89
0.94
0.96
0.93

0.28
0.36
0.39
0.34

0.79
0.77
0.69
0.75

0.96
0.97
0.94
0.95

0.75
0.74
0.63
0.70

Parent Education
Mother

Father

1982
1992
2004
Total

Parent in Household

Maximum of Both Parents

Years

High School

College

Years

High School

College

Years

High School

College

13.1
13.6
14.0
13.6

0.75
0.85
0.88
0.83

0.23
0.29
0.34
0.29

12.7
13.0
13.7
13.2

0.79
0.86
0.88
0.85

0.15
0.19
0.29
0.21

13.5
13.8
14.8
14.1

0.34
0.20
0.19
0.24

0.25
0.29
0.43
0.33

Notes:
Data: HSB (1982), NELS (1992), ELS (2004).

21

Table 3: Education Intergenerational Regression Coefficients
Years Education

Years (standardized)

Education Percentile

Truncated Normal

0.281
(0.010)
0.263
(0.033)
0.255
(0.013)

0.386
(0.014)
0.301
(0.039)
0.329
(0.017)

0.354
(0.010)
0.463
(0.015)
0.325
(0.010)

0.362
(0.011)
0.488
(0.019)
0.326
(0.010)

p-value: 1982 = 1992?
p-value: 1992 = 2004?
p-value: 1982 = 2004?

0.605
0.825
0.129

0.042
0.499
0.012

0.000
0.000
0.068

0.000
0.000
0.018

N

30720

30720

30720

30720

1982
1992
2004

Notes:
Column headings denote categorization of education variable used in intergenerational regression.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)]/(total number).
Truncated Normal: conditional expectation of latent continuous variable, based on observed education category, and assuming latent variable takes
standard normal distribution.
Parent education: maximum of both parents.
Sample: children of both genders, with non-missing education and at least one parent with non-missing education.
Observations weighted for national representation. Displayed number of observations rounded to nearest10.
Controls: child race, child gender, state fixed effect.
Standard errors generated by bootstrap.

22

Table 4: Education Intergenerational Regression - Ordered Logit Marginal Effects
1982
HS Grad.
Some Post HS
Coll. Grad.
N

0.039
(0.003)
0.077
(0.006)
0.291
(0.018)

Graduating Class of Child
1992
0.135
(0.012)
0.243
(0.012)
0.575
(0.025)
29900

2004
0.156
(0.011)
0.236
(0.012)
0.450
(0.016)

Notes:
Displayed estimates are marginal effects on probability of reaching highest category (college graduate).
Parent education measured as maximum of both parents.
Children of both genders included.
Sample: all families where specified parent is in household, with non-missing education.
Observations weighted for national representation. Displayed number of observations rounded to nearest 10.
Controls: child race, child gender, state fixed effect.
Standard errors generated by bootstrap.

23

Table 5: Education Intergenerational Regression Coefficients: Comparing Dependent and Independent Children
Education Percentile

Truncated Normal

All Children

Independent

Dependent

All Children

Independent

Dependent

0.354
(0.010)
0.463
(0.015)
0.325
(0.010)

0.398
(0.012)
0.472
(0.020)
0.342
(0.012)

0.263
(0.019)
0.390
(0.032)
0.261
(0.022)

0.362
(0.011)
0.488
(0.019)
0.326
(0.010)

0.399
(0.010)
0.498
(0.020)
0.343
(0.012)

0.274
(0.019)
0.405
(0.033)
0.263
(0.025)

p-value: 1982 = 1992?
p-value: 1992 = 2004?
p-value: 1982 = 2004?

0.000
0.000
0.068

0.004
0.000
0.001

0.001
0.000
0.945

0.000
0.000
0.018

0.000
0.000
0.001

0.000
0.001
0.709

N

30720

20890

7330

30720

20890

7330

1982
1992
2004

Notes:
Dependent (independent) children are those residing (not residing) with a parent, 8-10 years after high school graduation.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)]/(total number).
Truncated Normal: conditional expectation of latent continuous variable, based on observed education category, and assuming latent variable takes
standard normal distribution.
Parent education: maximum of both parents.
Sample: children of both genders, with non-missing education and at least one parent with non-missing education.
Observations weighted for national representation. Displayed number of observations rounded to nearest 10.
Controls: child race, child gender, state fixed effect.
Standard errors generated by bootstrap.

24

Table 6: Variation in Education Intergenerational Correlation Coefficients: Within vs Between State
Years

SD - Within State
SD - Between States
Fraction Variance from Between
Observations

raw

standardized

0.25
0.18
0.17
123

0.30
0.22
0.24
123

Education Percentile

Truncated Normal

0.08
0.10
0.46
123

0.08
0.10
0.45
123

Notes:
Each observation is one intergenerational correlation coefficient, estimated separately for
each state x year. Sample includes children of both genders.
Columns denote categorization of education used in intergenerational regression.
Where relevant, parent/child education is measured relative to the respective state distribution.

25

Table 7: Regression of Education Intergenerational Correlation Coefficients on State High School Exit Examination
Presence
Years

Pooled Child Genders
Observations
Sons
Observations
Daughters
Observations
State FE
Marginal Distributions

Percentile

raw

standardized

0.0608∗
(0.0234)
69

0.0744∗
(0.0297)
69

0.0522
(0.0337)
69

0.0659∗
(0.0291)
63

0.0715∗
(0.0332)
63

0.0639∗
(0.0292)
64
No

0.0786∗
(0.0379)
64
No

Normal

Years

Percentile

Normal

0.0430
(0.0413)
69

0.0706
(0.0432)
69

0.0656
(0.0434)
69

0.0487
(0.0310)
63

0.0615
(0.0400)
63

0.0876+
(0.0434)
63

0.0897+
(0.0499)
63

0.0505
(0.0477)
64
Yes

0.0577
(0.0602)
64
Yes

0.0751
(0.0571)
64
Yes
National

0.0716
(0.0579)
64
Yes
State

raw

standardized

0.0499
(0.0338)
69

0.0381
(0.0332)
69

0.0396
(0.0422)
63

0.0383
(0.0402)
63

0.0628
(0.0421)
64
No
National

0.0433
(0.0436)
64
No
State

—————————————————————————————————————————————————————Notes:
Each observation is a regression coefficient from a state x year specific intergenerational regression.
Columns differ by categorization of education used.
Parental education measured as maximum of both parents’.
Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)] / (total number)
Education variables calculated using parent/child position in respective state distribution.
Normal: conditional expectation of latent continuous variable, based on observed education category, and assuming
latent variable takes standard normal distribution.
Rows display results from different child samples: pooled and separate by gender.
High school exit exam variable: indicator for presence during graduating year of sample.

26

Table 8: Regression of Intergenerational Correlation Coefficients (Income on Education)
Years Attained

IG Correlation, Education
Mean (S.D.), Education Coefficient

Truncated Normal

2004

1992

2004

1992

2004

0.287∗∗
(0.0848)

0.166∗∗
(0.0598)

0.171∗
(0.0648)

0.160∗∗
(0.0467)

0.159∗
(0.0587)

0.148∗∗
(0.0414)

0.25
(0.23)

0.22
(0.12)

0.44
(0.13)

0.29
(0.16)

0.46
(0.14)

0.29
(0.16)

0.264
34

0.138
50

0.179
34

0.187
34

0.209
50

Mean (S.D.), Income Coefficient
R2
Observations

Education Percentile

1992

0.35 (0.05)
0.197
50

Notes:
Each observation is one MSA. Excludes MSAs with sample size below 30.
Parental education measured by maximum over both parents.
Income coefficient: rank-rank slope of 1980-1982 birth cohorts and their parents.
Column headings show categorization of education used to obtain intergenerational
correlation coefficient. Coefficients estimated using children of both genders.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5 *
(number with equal education)] / (total number).
Truncated Normal: conditional expectation of latent continuous variable, based on observed
education category, and assuming latent variable takes standard normal distribution.
Class of 1992 (2004) represents 1974 (1986) birth cohort.
In secondary regression, education coefficients weighted inversely by standard error.

27

Table 9: Correlations between Education IG Coefficient and MSA Characteristics
Education IG Correlation

Income Rank Slope

Years Attained

Education Percentile

Truncated Normal

Restricted Sample

Full Sample

Log. Family Income

0.02
(0.15)

0.13
(0.19)

0.11
(0.19)

0.11
(0.09)

-0.12+
(0.06)

Income Gini

-0.10+
(0.05)

-0.09
(0.06)

-0.12∗
(0.06)

0.08
(0.10)

0.09
(0.07)

Segregation of Rich (above 50k income)

-0.17∗∗
(0.06)

-0.12
(0.08)

-0.11
(0.08)

-0.35∗∗
(0.08)

0.03
(0.06)

Segregation of Poor (below 10k income)

0.08
(0.06)

0.08
(0.07)

0.12+
(0.07)

0.43∗∗
(0.08)

0.40∗∗
(0.06)

Fraction Minority

-0.13∗∗
(0.05)

-0.13∗
(0.06)

-0.16∗∗
(0.06)

0.09
(0.11)

0.19∗∗
(0.06)

Segregation of Minorities

0.19∗∗
(0.05)

0.22∗∗
(0.06)

0.24∗∗
(0.06)

0.65∗∗
(0.07)

0.63∗∗
(0.05)

Fraction under 5

-0.16∗
(0.07)

-0.14
(0.08)

-0.15+
(0.08)

-0.37∗∗
(0.08)

-0.18∗∗
(0.06)

Fraction above 65

0.09
(0.06)

0.05
(0.07)

0.07
(0.07)

0.20∗
(0.09)

0.11+
(0.06)

Fraction Single Parent

0.00
(0.08)

-0.01
(0.10)

-0.01
(0.09)

0.31∗∗
(0.09)

0.42∗∗
(0.06)

134
1982, 1992, 2004
Yes

134
1982, 1992, 2004
Yes

134
1982, 1992, 2004
Yes

111
2004
No

231
2004
No

Observations
High School Graduating Class
Year Effects

Notes.
Each observation is one MSA x year.
Dependent variable: Intergenerational correlation coefficient, obtained from separate regressions by MSA x survey year.
Column headings show categorization of education used in intergenerational regression.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)]/(total).
Truncated Normal: conditional expectation of latent human capital, based on observed education, and assuming latent variable
takes standard normal distribution.
Parent education measured from maximum of both parents. Child: sons and daughters.
Dependent variable and MSA characteristics standardized to mean 0, sd 1.

28

Figures

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Figure 1: Marginal Distribution of Parental Education across Years

1982

1992
Dropout
Some Post−secondary

2004
High School Degree
College Degree

Years denote high school graduating class.
Data: HSB (1982), NELS (1990), ELS (2004).
Observations in data weighted for national representation.
Parental education measured by maximum of both parent’s.

29

Figure 2: Intergenerational Plot of Education Percentiles (top) and Truncated Normal Expectations (bottom)

0

.2

.4
.6
.8
Parent Education Percentile

1

Both genders. Education Percentile
.4
.6
.2

Both genders. Education Percentile
.4
.6
.2

.2

Both genders. Education Percentile
.4
.6

.8

2004

.8

1992

.8

1982

0

.2

.4
.6
.8
Parent Education Percentile

1

0

.2

.4
.6
.8
Parent Education Percentile

1

Parent education measured by maximum of both parents.. Child: Both genders..
Education Percentile: [Obs. with strictly lower education + 0.5 * Obs. with equal education] / (Total obs.)
Ramsey RESET Test for non−linearity, p−values: 1982 = 0.14, 1992 = 0.11, 2004 = 0.43.

−2

−1
0
1
Parent Truncated Normal Expectation

2

Both genders. Truncated Normal Expectation
−.5
0
.5
−1

Both genders. Truncated Normal Expectation
−.5
0
.5
−1

−1

Both genders. Truncated Normal Expectation
−.5
0
.5

1

2004

1

1992

1

1982

−2

−1
0
1
Parent Truncated Normal Expectation

2

−2

−1
0
1
Parent Truncated Normal Expectation

2

Parent education measured by maximum of both parents.. Child: Both genders..
Truncated Normal Expectation: Truncated normal expectation computed assuming that latent human capital takes standard normal distribution.
Ramsey RESET Test for non−linearity, p−values: 1982 = 0.33, 1992 = 0.18, 2004 = 0.58.

30

Figure 3: Parent-Child Intergenerational Plot of Years Attained: Raw (top) and Standardized (bottom)

5

10
15
Parent Years Education

20

Both genders. Years Education
14
15
12

13

Both genders. Years Education
14
15
13
12

12

13

Both genders. Years Education
14
15

16

2004

16

1992

16

1982

5

10
15
Parent Years Education

20

5

10
15
Parent Years Education

20

Parent education measured by maximum of both parents.. Child: Both genders..
Years Education: Some years imputed based on partial degree completion.
Ramsey RESET Test for non−linearity, p−values: 1982 = 0.40, 1992 = 0.00, 2004 = 0.05.

5

10
15
Parent Years Education

20

Both genders. Years Education
14
15
12

13

Both genders. Years Education
14
15
13
12

12

13

Both genders. Years Education
14
15

16

2004

16

1992

16

1982

5

10
15
Parent Years Education

20

5

10
15
Parent Years Education

20

Parent education measured by maximum of both parents.. Child: Both genders..
Years Education: Some years imputed based on partial degree completion.
Ramsey RESET Test for non−linearity, p−values: 1982 = 0.40, 1992 = 0.00, 2004 = 0.05.

31

Figure 4: Education IG Correlation Coefficients over Time

.6

.6
.5

education percentile

.5

years education

.4

.4

p = 0.00

.3

.3

p = 0.00
p = 0.61

.2

.2

p = 0.82

1982

1992

2004

1982

1992

2004

.5

p = 0.00

.4

.4

.5

.6

truncated normal expectation

.6

years education (standardized)

p = 0.50

p = 0.00
.3
.2

.2

.3

p = 0.04

1982

1992

2004

1982

1992

2004

Graph titles indicate education variable used in intergenerational regression.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)]/(total number).
Truncated Normal Expectation: expectation of latent continuous variable, conditional on observed education category, and assuming that latent va
Observations weighted for national representation. Parental education measured as maximum of both parents..
Sample: all families where specified parent is in household, with non−missing education.
Controls: child race, child gender, state fixed effect.
95% confidence intervals shown.
P−value of test for equality, between this survey year and previous survey year.

0

20

40

percent
60

80

100

Figure 5: Marginal Distribution of Child Education across Survey Years

1982

1992

Dropout
Some Post−secondary
Years denote high school graduating class.
Data: HSB (1982), NELS (1990), ELS (2004).
Observations in data weighted for national representation.

32

2004
High School Degree
College Degree

Figure 6: Education IG Correlation Coefficients by Region
Years Attained

.4

.5

*

*

Education Percentile
*
+
*
*
*

Truncated Normal
*
*

*

*

*

*

+

+

.3

+

*

0

.1

.2

*

All

NE

N

S

*

+

W

All

*

*

NE N
S
W
Census Region

*

All

NE

N

*

*

S

W

High School Graduating Class
1982

1992

2004

Graph titles indicate education variable used in intergenerational regression.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) +
0.5(number with equal education)] /(total number).
Truncated Normal: conditional expectation of latent continuous variable, based on observed
education category, and assuming latent variable takes standard normal distribution.
Sample: children of both genders, with non−missing education and at least
one parent with non−missing education.
Parental education measured using maximum of both parents.
Controls: child race, gender, state fixed effect. Standard errors clustered by state.
Significance stars − Above: test of equality between current and previous survey year.
Below: test of equality between first and last survey year. (+ 0.1 * 0.05)

0

2

4

6

Figure 7: Distribution of State-specific Education Mobility Coefficients

0

.2

.4
1982
2004

.6

1992

Coefficients from intergenerational regression of education percentiles. Parent/child education is measured relative to the respective state distribution.
Coefficients estimated separately for each state x year.
Parental education measured as maximum of both parents’.
Sample: children of both genders.
In plotting density, coefficients weighted inversely by their respective standard error.

33

A

Derivation of Intergenerational Human Capital Regression

The model outlined here is very close to that of Solon (2004), with some changes to the technology of human capital
production in order to generate the linear functional form. Each parent can spend (after-tax) income on consumption
or invest in the human capital of the next generation (10). This investment is converted into human capital using a
linear technology (11). Aside from private investment, human capital also depends on government investment. Finally,
parental income is also linear in parental human capital (12).

(1 − τ )yig = cig + Ii,g+1

(10)

hig = ν + θIig + Gig + ei1

(11)

yig = µ + ρhig

(12)

Parents maximize utility based on Cobb-Douglas preferences (Equation (13)), which leads to investment which is
linear in parental human capital (14). Finally, because of the linear technology of human capital, child human capital
is also linear in parental human capital (15).

B

Ui0 = (1 − α) log ci0 + α log hi1

(13)

Ii1 = αθ(1 − τ )(µ + ρhi0 ) − (1 − α)(ν − ei1 − Gi1 )

(14)

hi1 = αθ(ν + θ(1 − τ )µ) + αθ2 (1 − τ )ρhi0 + (1 + θ + αθ)(Gi1 + ei1 )

(15)

Numerical Example

To best understand the issue with changing marginal distributions, we focus on an example where the child’s human
capital is perfectly observed (and continuous). However, only (discrete) parental education is observed. This simplification is made to focus attention on the marginal distribution of parent’s education, and the problem described holds
when only child education is observed as well.
In this example, the marginal distribution of parental education changes over time. Hence, human capital is denoted
as hi,g,t , for family i, generation g, and year t. In both time periods t = 1, 2, the underlying relationship between
parental human capital and child human capital is identical:

hi,1 = hi,0 + εi
34

In time period 1, parental human capital is distributed as follows: hi,0,t ∼ U (10, 20). In time period 2, the distribution
has shifted to the right: hi,0,1 ∼ U (11, 21). Thus, between these two time periods, parental human capital undergoes
a general increase.

While hi,1,t is observable to the researcher, hi,0,t is not. Instead, only e1,0,t is observed:

ei,0,t





1 hi,0,t <= 12




= 2 hi,0,t ∈ (12, 16]






3 hi,0,t > 16

In the situation described above, education standards (e.g. college admission requirements) are not changing, but
parental human capital is increasing. As a result, more parents from year 2 attain high levels of education.

With this setup, estimating the equivalent of (3) for each year will yield the following coefficients {βj,t }, where j
indexes level of education:

β1,1 = 11

β1,2 = 11.5

β2,1 = 14

β2,2 = 14

β3,1 = 18

β3,2 = 18.5

This example highlights two issues. First, with a set of three intergenerational coefficients per year, it is difficult to
make a comparison and determine which year had higher mobility. Second, in our judgment, the estimated mobility
coefficients should be identical across years, because the relative position of parents within the distribution still exerts
the same influence on the child’s relative position. The discrete nature of education provides the appearance of a
change, because the shifts in the distribution of parental education are not accounted for.

Finally, in the above example, it is the distribution of parental human capital that shifts. However, in an observationally
equivalent manner, The change in coefficients could be caused be a combination of educational standards changing,
i.e. ei,0,1 6= ei,0,2 , and the distribution of human capital changing. For example, keeping all features of year 1 the
35

same, but changing parental human capital and education standards to the following:

hi,0,2 ∼ U (10, 22)

ei,0,2





1 hi,0,2 <= 13




= 2 hi,0,t ∈ (13, 15]






3 hi,0,t > 15

results in the same set of estimated coefficients.

C

Alternative Measures of Mobility in Education

In measuring mobility, there is inevitably some loss in reducing a complex phenomenon to a single parameter. The
discrete nature of education presents some additional challenges. These challenges will become apparent when we
turn to some descriptive statistics in the data.
In this section, we discuss some alternative ways to measure mobility that have been employed in the literature. In
general, these methods are problematic, when it comes to making comparisons across different periods/cities. The
papers that are cited in this section have not focused on such comparisons.

C.1

Ordinal Variable Regressions

One response to the discreteness of education data is to use ordinal variable regressions: e.g. the ordered logit. This
approach solves, in a straightforward manner, the issue of the child marginal distribution. If, for example, college
admissions standards decrease from one year to the next, the estimated cut-points for the ordered logit will shift
downwards in the second year.
However, it is not only the marginal distribution of child’s education that is changing - the marginal distribution of
parent’s education is changing as well. Figure 1 documents evidence of such changes. For the HSB onwards, the
changes in the marginal distribution of father’s education show no clear pattern. However, the changes appear to be
non-negligible.
The changing marginal distribution of parent’s education is not directly addressed by the standard ordinal variable
regression. It is in the treatment of parent’s education, not the child’s, that our approach is distinct from ordinal
variable regressions.
Furthermore, as prior studies have shown, the use of an ordinal variable regression does not address the issue of
36

non-linearity in years attained (Nguyen et al., 2005). Hence, in this context, it is still costly to approximate parental
educational attainment by years attained.

C.2

Transition Matrices

One way of depicting mobility is to look at a transition matrix across generations, otherwise known as a mobility
matrix. Table A7 presents mobility matrices, roughly ten years apart. Since education is discrete and relatively
sparse, terminal educational attainment is aggregated into 4 categories. (dropouts, high school graduates, some postsecondary education, college degree) The transition matrices shown are size transition matrices, because they use
absolute categories.
Table A7 suggests an increase in the average level of education. In principle, to measure mobility as a relative concept,
percentiles of education could be used in order to generate a quantile transition matrix. Practically, the sparseness of
education means that percentiles are not very meaningful. However, the table should also suggest that a comparison
of two mobility matrices is difficult, and hence some sufficient statistics are desirable. Some such measures that are
commonly used are given in Table A8.
Broadly speaking, these matrix-based measures can be broken down into two categories: eigenvalue measures and
off-diagonal measures. We find both of these to be unsuitable for dealing with education data, for different reasons.
The eigenvalue measures are unsuited to measuring changes in mobility because they assume a stationary process and
measure the time taken for the intergenerational process to become independent of initial conditions (i.e. the marginal
distribution of education). For comparisons across time, it is assumed that the process itself might be changing, and
hence the time taken to depart from initial conditions is not of importance. Furthermore, such measures ignore mobility
once the stationary distribution has been attained.
When applied to absolute categories (as opposed to relative quantiles), the off-diagonal measures are poorly suited to
the measurement of mobility for another reason: they conflate differences in marginal distributions with differences in
mobility. For example, consider the following matrices A and B:

1


0

A=

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

0



0
0




0
0


 B=


0
0


1
0

1

0

0

1

0

0

0

0


0


0



1

1

These two matrices are very similar. In A, a child achieves the exact same level of education as his parent. In B, the
37

child achieves a level of education that is a single level above his parent’s. Assuming that children of highly educated
parents stay in the top category, there is some pooling at the top, but otherwise the society is still highly immobile:
parents in the lowest education category never send their children out of the lowest level of education within the child’s
generation. However, off-diagonal measures of mobility will record a substantial increase in mobility. In the case of
M1 , this change is 0 to 1. Under some regularity assumptions on the underlying process, this change represents the
maximal possible change in the mobility index (Shorrocks, 1978).
Essentially, the problem arises because education mobility matrices must be constructed using absolute categories.
When the child marginal distribution is not the same as the parent marginal distribution, the mobility matrix interprets
this shift as a change in mobility. To some researchers, this interpretation of mobility is not problematic. However,
because one of our objectives is to compare education mobility with income mobility, we prefer to retain the notion of
relative mobility in our estimates.
Unlike our approach, transition matrices offer the ability to focus on particular aspects of mobility. For example, the
probability that the child of high school dropouts becomes a college graduate is one element of the transition matrix,
and the probability that the child attains a higher education level than their parent is a function of several elements of
that matrix. Because we choose to focus on relative mobility as a general concept, we do not make use of this feature.

D

Comparison of Methods Using Simulated Data

To compare each empirical approach, we simulated 250 families, each with a single parent and a single child. Parents’
human capital hi,0 is drawn from the standard normal distribution. Child human capital hi,1 is a weighted sum of parents’ human capital and an idiosyncratic shock, which is distributed i.i.d. standard normal (16). The intergenerational
correlation between parent and child human capital is 0.25.

hi,1 = 0.25 hi,0 + 0.75 εi , ε1 ∼ N(0, 1)

(16)

We simulate discrete orderings of human capital into education levels in two different time periods. In each time period,
we use the same draws of human capital. However, each time period has a different categorization of latent human
capital into four discrete education levels, for parents and for children. Table A9 describes these categorizations. In the
simulated data, the marginal distribution of parent and child human capital follows the standard normal distribution.
Table A9 presents the minimum quantile of this distribution needed to attain a particular education level in a given
time period. These quantiles were chosen to closely match the marginal distributions of parent and child education we
38

observe in the data.
We estimate intergenerational correlations using four different empirical approaches. Figure A2 presents the results.
Before addressing the empirical approaches, we present estimated intergenerational correlations under an unrealistic
scenario: when latent human capital is observed. In this scenario, the estimated parameters are close to the true
value, moreover they are - by construction - identical to each other. Moving to feasible empirical approaches, we first
consider an intergenerational regression of years of education. In both time periods, the point estimates are relatively
close to the true parameter. However, the difference between the estimates in both time periods is relatively large, such
that the standard errors do not overlap. Since our research objective is to document trends in relative mobility over
time, as well as patterns across geographics, the size of the difference is a cause for concern. When a standardized
measure of years is used instead, the difference in estimated parameters remains large.
In contrast, using our chosen empirical approaches (education percentile and truncated normal expectations), the
estimated parameters vary less across time periods. Relative to the standard error, the difference in coefficients across
time periods appears to be negligble. In our view, this is the main advantage presented by our chosen methods.
Additionally, we note that using both of our methods, and in both time periods, it is not possible to reject the hypothesis
of the true parameter.

E
E.1

Data
Derivation of Education Variables

For all three surveys, parental education variables are measured at the baseline survey. The construction of these
variables is relatively straightforward: they are taken directly from the raw data. The rest of this section will describe
the construction of child education variables: this is more complicated because child education information is elicited
across multiple survey waves, with different levels of specificity.
For the HSB, child education variables are taken from the wave 5 survey, administered in 1992. In this survey, two
questions are important. The first is whether the respondent obtained a high school degree by 1986 (four years after
the normal graduation date). The second question asks about the level, if any, of post-secondary education possessed
at the time of survey. If either response is missing, the observation is dropped, because the final level of educational
attainment is unclear. Additionally, if the response to the post-secondary education question is “None”, and the
question about high school degree is missing, then the exact level of education is similarly unclear. In this case, degree
attainment information from the wave 4 survey (1986) is used to infer educational attainment at high school graduate
39

and below. Where the wave 4 response is missing, we also drop the observation. While the wave 4 question could
also be used for information on higher education levels, there is a high chance that the responses for higher education
levels will not represent terminal levels of education.
For the NELS, child education variables are constructed using the 4th follow-up survey (2000) as a starting point.
Our child education variables are again constructed from two variables in the source data. The first variable concerns
post secondary education as of the year 2000. For respondents with no post-secondary experience, this variable is
coded as missing. In this case, child education is filled in using a second question about the high school degree /
GED attainment of the child, again as of year 2000. This question allow identifies dropouts, but does not differentiate
between GED and conventional high school degree recipients. For this, we obtain the relevant information from a pair
of questions about high school diploma type. This question was first asked in the 3rd follow-up (1994) and also in the
4th follow-up, for respondents who had completed such a degree.
For the ELS, the basis for our child education variable is the educational attainment question in the 3rd follow-up
(2012). This variable is supplemented by a GED attainment variable from the same follow-up. Finally, a small
number of respondents were dropouts at the 2nd follow-up (2006) and missing at the 3rd follow-up; we count these
respondents as dropouts as well.

E.2

Marginal Distribution of Education

In order to make a comparison with the NCES surveys, data on parents was drawn from the decennial census (years
1980 − 2000), downloaded from IPUMS (Ruggles, 2010). Each census year was matched to the closest NCES survey
(i.e. the 1980 census was matched to the HSB, etc.)
Within each census year, household heads reporting at least one child, along with their spouses, formed the basis for
our sample. Refining this sample, we created a more comparable sample based on the age of the children. In order to
do so, we aasumed that children graduate from highschool at age 18, and calculated the age the child would have been
during the year the census was taken. Finally, since the census data only reports the age of the eldest and youngest
child, parents were included in the final sample as long as the age interval between the eldest and youngest child
spanned the appropriate age.
Table A10 presents the results of the comparison for parents. The best comparison can be made for the percentages
under “Dropout” and “Coll grad”, because these categories are directly comparable between NCES survey and census.
In contrast, the percentages for “HS Grad” and “some PSE” are not suited for comparison - in the census, only degree
attainment counts as post-secondary education, and other forms of post-secondary education are treated as “HS Grad”.
40

On the other hand, in the NCES surveys, incomplete post-secondary education is separated from non-attempt, to
varying degrees.
Restricting the comparison to the two specified categories, the marginal distributions of parental education appear to
be quite similar, between the NCES surveys and the census. The worst match comes from Mothers, in 1982, where
the discrepancy is dropout rates is 7 percentage points.

E.3

Local Characteristics

The variables in Table 9 are taken from the Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB). The NCDB contains tract-level
statistics based on Census data. Because data is only available in decennial census years, we match the survey base
year to the closest census year. The meaning of most of the variables is straightforward, save for the isolation and
dissimilarity indices. The dissimilarity index measures how uniformly different groups (whites and minorities) are
distributed across neighborhoods (a neighborhood in our sample corresponds to the census tract). It takes values
between zero and one, and higher values mean less uniform distribution. Denoting neighborhoods within an MSA by
n, the dissimilarity index is calculated as:
N
1 X wn
mn
−
2 n=1 W
M

where wn denotes the number of whites in a neighborhood and W =

E.4

P

n

wn , and respectively for minorities m.

State Weights

Since the weights provided in the NCES surveys are designed to provide a nationally-representative sample, they may
not be suited for analyses at the state level. To remedy this issue, for our state-level analysis, we construct statebased weights which are intended to be more representative of state compositions. We base these weights on the
closest decennial Census to the NCES survey in question: i.e. 1980, 1990, and 2000 for the HSB, NELS and ELS
respectively. For each Census year, we restrict the sample to heads of households and their spouses (if present in
household) reporting a child of high school age (15 to 18 years). We then generate frequency weights by state based
on the following parental characteristics: single/two-parent household, maximum education of parents, race of head
of household.

Supplementary Tables

41

Table A1: Marginal Distribution of Parent and Child Education

42

Table A2: Education Intergenerational Regression Coefficients - Varying Parent/Child
Years Education

Father
s.e.
N
Father
s.e.
N
Mother
s.e.
N
Mother
s.e.
N

Years (standardized)

Education Percentile

Truncated Normal

1982

1992

2004

1982

1992

2004

1982

1992

2004

1982

1992

2004

Son

0.272
(0.017)

0.269
(0.016)

0.384
(0.024)

0.354
(0.017)

0.363
(0.014)

0.415
(0.020)

0.351
(0.018)

0.367
(0.015)

0.342
(0.018)

0.375
(0.017)

Son

0.282
(0.022)

0.260
(0.017)

0.316
(0.025)

0.301
(0.019)

0.294
(0.014)

0.309
(0.018)

0.295
(0.015)

Daughter

0.320
(0.017)

0.285
(0.014)

0.358
(0.019)

0.326
(0.016)

0.348
(0.016)

0.308
(0.017)

0.354
(0.014)

0.458
(0.032)
10820
0.456
(0.026)
11380
0.435
(0.024)
13450
0.437
(0.027)
15290

0.373
(0.017)

0.261
(0.014)

0.446
(0.022)
10820
0.431
(0.026)
11380
0.406
(0.027)
13450
0.411
(0.029)
15290

0.363
(0.016)

0.294
(0.014)

0.227
(0.055)
10820
0.335
(0.035)
11380
0.203
(0.051)
13450
0.313
(0.034)
15290

0.366
(0.021)

Daughter

0.201
(0.047)
10820
0.257
(0.026)
11380
0.230
(0.057)
13450
0.306
(0.033)
15290

0.348
(0.019)
0.312
(0.015)
0.320
(0.017)

Notes:
Column headings denote categorization of education variable used in intergenerational regression.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)]/(total number).
Truncated Normal: conditional expectation of latent continuous variable, based on observed education category, and assuming latent variable takes
standard normal distribution.
Sample: all families where specified parent is in household, with non-missing education.
Observations weighted for national representation. Displayed number of observations rounded to nearest 10.
Controls: child race, state fixed effect.
Standard errors generated by bootstrap.

43

Table A3: Education Intergenerational Regression Coefficients - Varying Sample/Weights
Baseline Sample & Weight

+ 2 Parents in HH

+ 2 Parent Edu. Nonmiss.

Baseline Sample, unweighted

0.354
(0.010)
0.463
(0.015)
0.325
(0.010)

0.371
(0.010)
0.464
(0.024)
0.350
(0.013)

0.387
(0.010)
0.461
(0.023)
0.350
(0.012)

0.347
(0.008)
0.431
(0.008)
0.332
(0.009)

p-value: 1982 = 1992?
p-value: 1992 = 2004?
p-value: 1982 = 2004?

0.000
0.000
0.068

0.001
0.000
0.234

0.001
0.000
0.009

0.000
0.000
0.205

N

30720

21470

20220

30770

1982
1992
2004

Notes:
Displayed coefficients from intergenerational regression of education percentiles.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)]/(total number).
Parent education measured by maximum of both parents.
Baseline sample: children of both genders, with non-missing education and at least one parent with non-missing education.
Baseline: observations weighted for national representation using survey weights. Displayed number of observations rounded to nearest 10.
Controls: child race, child gender, state fixed effect.
Standard errors generated by bootstrap.

44

Table A4: Education Intergenerational Regression Coefficients - Varying Categorization of Education
Education Percentile

Completed Degrees

+ GED = HSG

0.354
(0.010)
0.463
(0.015)
0.325
(0.010)

0.352
(0.010)
0.426
(0.016)
0.295
(0.010)

0.343
(0.011)
0.410
(0.016)
0.294
(0.009)

p-value: 1982 = 1992?
p-value: 1992 = 2004?
p-value: 1982 = 2004?

0.000
0.000
0.068

0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.003

N

30720

30720

30720

1982
1992
2004

Notes:
Displayed coefficients from intergenerational regression of education percentiles.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)]/(total number).
Parent education measured as maximum of both parents.
Sample: children of both genders, with non-missing education and at least one parent with non-missing education.
Observations weighted for national representation.Total observations rounded to nearest 10.
Controls: child race, child gender, state fixed effect.
Standard errors generated by bootstrap.

45

Table A5: Regression of Education Intergenerational Education Correlation Coefficients on State Income Inequality
Measure
Years
Pooled Child Genders
Observations
Sons
Observations
Daughters
Observations
State FE
Marginal Distributions

Education Percentile

Truncated Normal

Years

Education Percentile
∗

Truncated Normal

-0.398
(0.279)
123

-0.329
(0.335)
123

-0.0435
(0.299)
123

-0.0116
(0.298)
123

0.616
(0.396)
123

0.835
(0.523)
123

1.202
(0.564)
123

1.302∗
(0.527)
123

-0.731∗
(0.300)
97

-0.379
(0.474)
97

-0.0844
(0.450)
97

-0.120
(0.469)
97

0.687
(0.589)
97

0.856
(0.884)
97

1.122
(0.958)
97

1.125
(0.876)
97

-0.530
(0.429)
100
No

-0.147
(0.449)
100
No
National

0.131
(0.419)
100
No
State

0.233
(0.406)
100
No
State

0.215
(0.721)
100
Yes

1.071
(0.750)
100
Yes
National

1.374
(0.832)
100
Yes
State

1.466+
(0.803)
100
Yes
State

—————————————————————————————————————————————————————Notes:
Each observation is a regression coefficient from a state x year specific intergenerational regression.
Columns differ by categorization of education used.
Parental education measured as maximum of both parents.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)] / (total number)
Education percentiles calculated child position in national distribution, and alternatively in state distribution.
Truncated Normal: conditional expectation of latent continuous variable, based on observed education category, and assuming
latent variable takes standard normal distribution.
Rows display results from different child samples: pooled and separate by gender.
State income inequality measure: gini coefficient.

46

Table A6: Regression of Intergenerational Correlation Coefficients (Income on Education, State Level)
Years Attained

IG Correlation, Education
Mean (S.D.), Education Coefficient

Truncated Normal

2004

All Classes

2004

All Classes

2004

0.358∗∗
(0.0935)

0.482∗∗
(0.161)

0.210∗∗
(0.0754)

0.265+
(0.150)

0.225∗∗
(0.0703)

0.310∗
(0.126)

0.25 (0.20)

0.36 (0.10)

Mean (S.D.), Income Coefficient
Survey Year Fixed Effect
Observations

Education Percentile

All Classes

0.35 (0.10)

0.27 (0.04)
Yes
122

No
42

Yes
122

No
42

Yes
122

No
42

Notes:
Each observation is one state x survey year.
Dependent variable: Income rank-rank slope, measured from 1986 birth cohort.
Column headings show empirical method used for estimating intergenerational correlation.
All Classes: Regression sample contains high school graduating classes of 1982, 1992, 2004.
2004: Regression sample only contains high school graduating class of 2004.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)]
/ (total number).
Truncated Normal: conditional expectation of latent continuous variable, based on observed education
category, and assuming latent variable takes standard normal distribution.
In intergenerational regression for education, children of both genders included.
Parental education: maximum of both parents.
In secondary regression, education coefficients weighted inversely by standard error.

47

Table A7: Parent - Child Mobility Matrices by Survey Year

Dropout
High School Degree
Some Post-secondary
College Degree

Dropout

High School Degree

16.74
7.719
4.395
1.922

67.97
65.82
57.30
36.16

Dropout
Dropout
High School Degree
Some Post-secondary
College Degree

Dropout
High School Degree
Some Post-secondary
College Degree

HSB (1984)
Some Post-secondary

NELS (1992)
High School Degree
Some Post-secondary

14.10
7.113
2.528
0.346

29.26
31.17
18.10
3.138

Dropout

High School Degree

14.57
6.936
3.583
2.049

20.80
21.74
13.67
5.435

College Degree

7.664
10.90
11.77
8.867

7.626
15.56
26.53
53.05
College Degree

50.82
45.70
53.63
34.48
ELS (2004)
Some Post-secondary

5.819
16.01
25.74
62.04
College Degree

54.07
52.83
57.12
40.42

Notes:
Parental education: maximum of both parents.
Sample: children of both genders, with non-missing education for self and at least one parent.
Observations weighted for national representation.

48

10.57
18.49
25.62
52.10

Table A8: Matrix-based Summary Measures of Mobility
M1

P
m− i pii
m−1

M2

2nd largest eigenvalue

M3
M4
M5

| det(P )|
P
m−m i πi pii
m−1
P P
i
j πi pij |i−j|
m−1

49

Table A9: Minimum Quantile of Parent/Child Human Capital for Attaining Each Level of Education
Years of Education
8
12
Time Period 1
Parent
0
15
Child
0
7
Time Period 2
Parent
0
5
Child
0
7

50

14

16

50
65

75
75

25
17

59
65

Table A10: Marginal Distribution of Parents’ Education - NCES vs. Census
Father

Dropout
High School
Some Post-secondary
College

Dropout
High School
Some Post-secondary
College

Mother

1982

NCES
1992

2004

0.24
0.31
0.22
0.23

0.14
0.22
0.35
0.29

0.13
0.29
0.27
0.30

1982

Census
1992

2004

0.27
0.36
0.17
0.21

0.16
0.33
0.27
0.24

0.13
0.40
0.21
0.26

Dropout
High School
Some Post-secondary
College

Dropout
High School
Some Post-secondary
College

1982

NCES
1992

2004

0.20
0.43
0.22
0.15

0.14
0.29
0.40
0.17

0.13
0.27
0.35
0.25

1982

Census
1992

2004

0.27
0.45
0.17
0.11

0.16
0.39
0.28
0.17

0.13
0.42
0.23
0.22

51

Supplementary Figures

20

Reading score, standardized
40
60

80

Figure A1: Standardized Reading Scores by Years of Education (NCES Children)

10 11 12 13 14 16 17 18 21

1982

10 11 12 13 14 16 17 18 21

1992
2004
High School Class, Years of Education

excludes outside values

52

10 11 12 13 14 16 17 18 21

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

mean / standard error

0.5

Figure A2: Estimates of Intergenerational Correlations in Education, Using Different Empirical Approaches

Latent Human Capital

Years

Standardized

Percentile Means

Truncated Normal

For each empirical approach, Left and Right points represent intergenerational correlation estimate under Time Period 1 and 2, respectively.
Time periods differ in mapping between human capital and education level (A9). Horizontal line denotes true value of intergenerational
correlation parameter (0.25) in each time period.
Bars show standard errors.

53

Figure A3: Education IG Correlation Coefficients over Time (Mother-Daughter)

.5

.5
.45

education percentile

.45

years education

.4
.35

.35

.4

p = 0.05

p = 0.00

.25

.25

p = 0.54

.3

.3

p = 0.72

1982

1992

2004

1982

2004

.5
.45
.4

p = 0.00

.35

.35

.4

.5

truncated normal expectation

.45

years education (standardized)

1992

p = 0.72
.3

p = 0.00

.25

.25

.3

p = 0.25

1982

1992

2004

1982

1992

2004

Graph titles indicate education variable used in intergenerational regression.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)]/(total number).
Truncated Normal Expectation: expectation of latent continuous variable, conditional on observed education category, and assuming that late
Observations weighted for national representation. Parental education measured from mother..
Sample: all families where specified parent is in household, with non−missing education. Sample restricted to daughters.
Controls: child race, state fixed effect.
95% confidence intervals shown.
P−value of test for equality, between this survey year and previous survey year.

54

Figure A4: Education IG Correlation Coefficients over Time (Father-Daughter)

.5

education percentile

.5

years education

.4

.4

p = 0.01

.3

.3

p = 0.01

.2

p = 0.89

.2

p = 0.22

1982

1992

2004

1982

2004

.5

truncated normal expectation

.5

years education (standardized)

1992

.4

.4

p = 0.01

p = 0.67
.3

p = 0.00

.2

.2

.3

p = 0.05

1982

1992

2004

1982

1992

2004

Graph titles indicate education variable used in intergenerational regression.
Education Percentile = [(number with strictly less education) + 0.5(number with equal education)]/(total number).
Truncated Normal Expectation: expectation of latent continuous variable, conditional on observed education category, and assuming that late
Observations weighted for national representation. Parental education measured from father..
Sample: all families where specified parent is in household, with non−missing education. Sample restricted to daughters.
Controls: child race, state fixed effect.
95% confidence intervals shown.
P−value of test for equality, between this survey year and previous survey year.

55

References
Azam, M. and Bhatt, V. (2015). Like father, like son? intergenerational educational mobility in india. Demography,
52(6):1929–1959.
Black, S. E. and Devereux, P. J. (2011). Recent developments in intergenerational mobility. Handbook of labor
economics, 4:1487–1541.
Blanden, J., Gregg, P., and Machin, S. (2005). Intergenerational mobility in europe and north america. Sutton Trust
Report.
Blanden, J. and Machin, S. (2004). Educational inequality and the expansion of uk higher education. Scottish Journal
of Political Economy, 51(2):230–249.
Breen, R. and Jonsson, J. O. (2005). Inequality of opportunity in comparative perspective: Recent research on educational attainment and social mobility. Annu. Rev. Sociol., 31:223–243.
Budig, M. J. and Hodges, M. J. (2010). Differences in disadvantage: Variation in the motherhood penalty across white
women’s earnings distribution. American Sociological Review, 75(5):705–728.
Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P., and Saez, E. (2014a). Where is the land of opportunity? the geography of intergenerational mobility in the united states. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P., Saez, E., and Turner, N. (2014b). Is the united states still a land of opportunity?
recent trends in intergenerational mobility. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chevalier, A., Denny, K., and McMahon, D. (2003). A multi-country study of inter-generational educational mobility.
Dechter, E. K. (2014). Maternity leave, effort allocation, and postmotherhood earnings. Journal of Human Capital,
8(2):97–125.
Goldring, T., Lange, F., and Richards-Shubik, S. (2015). Testing for changes in the ses-mortality gradient when the
distribution of education changes too. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Heineck, G. and Riphahn, R. T. (2009). Intergenerational transmission of educational attainment in germany-the last
five decades. Journal of Economics and Statistics, 229(1):36–60.
Hertz, T., Jayasundera, T., Piraino, P., Selcuk, S., Smith, N., and Verashchagina, A. (2007). The inheritance of
56

educational inequality: International comparisons and fifty-year trends. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis &
Policy, 7(2).
Hilger, N. G. (2017). The great escape: Intergenerational mobility in the united states, 1930-2010. Economic Journal,
forthcoming.
Kinsler, J. and Pavan, R. (2011). Family income and higher education choices: The importance of accounting for
college quality. Journal of Human Capital, 5(4):453–477.
Nguyen, A., Haile, G., and Taylor, J. (2005). Ethnic and gender differences in intergenerational mobility: A study of
26-year-olds in the usa. Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 52(4):544–564.
Papay, J. P., Murnane, R. J., and Willett, J. B. (2010). The consequences of high school exit examinations for lowperforming urban students: Evidence from massachusetts. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 32(1):5–23.
Pew Research Center (2015). Parenting in america: Outlook, worries, aspirations are strongly linked to financial
situation.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: America’s declining social capital. In Culture and politics, pages 223–234.
Springer.
Ramsey, J. B. (1969). Tests for specification errors in classical linear least-squares regression analysis. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), pages 350–371.
Ruggles, S. (2010). Integrated public use microdata series: Version 5.0 [machine-readable database].
Shorrocks, A. F. (1978). The measurement of mobility. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages
1013–1024.
Solon, G. (2004). A model of intergenerational mobility variation over time and place. Generational income mobility
in North America and Europe, pages 38–47.
Waldfogel, J. (1998). Understanding the” family gap” in pay for women with children. Journal of economic Perspectives, 12(1):137–156.
Warren, J. R., Jenkins, K. N., and Kulick, R. B. (2006). High school exit examinations and state-level completion and
ged rates, 1975 through 2002. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 28(2):131–152.
Winship, S. (2014). Relative and absolute mobility across generations. In Furchtgott-Roth, D., editor, Income Inequality in America, chapter 6, pages 20–21. The Manhattan Institute.

57

