                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHO’S MINDING THE KIDS? EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON THE DEMAND
                        FOR CHILD CARE QUALITY

                                         James Gordon
                                        Chris M. Herbst
                                          Erdal Tekin

                                      Working Paper 25335
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25335


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2018, Revised October 2020




The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions provided by seminar
participants at San Diego State University and conference participants at the annual meeting of
the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management (APPAM). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by James Gordon, Chris M. Herbst, and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who’s Minding the Kids? Experimental Evidence on the Demand for Child Care Quality
James Gordon, Chris M. Herbst, and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 25335
December 2018, Revised October 2020
JEL No. J13,J2,J23,J24,J3

                                         ABSTRACT

Despite the well-documented benefits of high-quality child care, many preschool-age children in
the U.S. attend low-quality programs. Accordingly, improving the quality of child care is
increasingly an explicit goal of government policy. However, accomplishing this goal requires a
thorough understanding of the factors that influence parents’ child care decisions. This paper
provides the first evidence on the demand for child care characteristics in the market for home-
based care. Using a randomized audit design, we study three dimensions of caregiving:
affordability (i.e., the hourly price of child care), quality (i.e., caregiver education and
experience), and convenience (i.e., caregiver car ownership and availability). We find that while
parents are extremely sensitive to the cost of child care, they also have strong preferences for
quality, particularly caregivers’ educational attainment. Furthermore, we obtain mixed results on
the convenience dimensions of child care, with parents valuing those owning a car but not those
with more availability. Finally, we find significant heterogeneity in child care preferences
according to families’ age of youngest child, race and ethnicity, and willingness-to-pay. Our
findings are consistent with the notion that the problem of low-quality in the U.S. child care
market may be explained by lack of affordability or the informational resources to identify high-
quality care, rather than an undervaluation of such care by parents.

James Gordon                                    Erdal Tekin
School of Public Affairs                        School of Public Affairs
American University                             American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW                    4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8070                       Washington, DC 20016-8070
USA                                             and IZA
james.gordon@american.edu                       and also NBER
                                                tekin@american.edu
Chris M. Herbst
School of Public Affairs
Arizona State University
Mail Code 3720
411 N. Central Ave., Ste. 450
Phoenix, AZ 85004-0687
and IZA
chris.herbst@asu.edu
I. Introduction

          Evidence on the benefits of high-quality child care is overwhelming. Numerous studies

demonstrate that high-quality care can improve children’s cognitive and social-emotional

development, enabling them to perform better in school and in the labor market (Peisner-Feinberg et

al., 2001; Dearing et al., 2009; Auger et al., 2014; Herbst, 2013; Barnett et al., 2013; Campbell et al.,

2014; Gathman & Sass, 2018; Gormley et al., 2018).2 Furthermore, the benefits of high-quality care

may accrue not only to those who have access to it, but to society as a whole. For example, such care

may reduce the cost to society of problems associated with poor education, such as low earnings,

unstable employment, dependence on social welfare services, increased crime and drug use, and

teenage childbearing (Temple & Reynolds, 2007; Vandell & Wolfe, 2000; Heckman, 2008).

          Despite the well-understood benefits of high-quality child care, many U.S. children receive

care that is of low- to mediocre-quality (NRC, 2000; Herbst, 2018; Barnett et al., 2010; Bassok &

Galdo, 2016; Burchinal et al., 2010; Dowsett et al., 2008; Vandell & Wolfe, 2000). For example,

according to the National Center for Education Statistics, 67 percent of the center-based arrangements

attended by preschool-age children are rated to be either low- or medium-quality (U.S. Department of

Education, 2014). This problem appears to extend to home-based relative and non-relative

arrangements, for which 43 and 48 percent are low- and medium-quality, respectively. Moreover, child

care arrangements are often of poorer quality for disadvantaged children. For example, only 16 percent

of children from families in the bottom income quintile receive care rated to be good or better.

          One of the most common explanations for the low level of child care quality is a market failure

driven by parents’ lack of information on how to recognize high-quality caregivers or to understand

the benefits of such care for their children and society at large (Blau, 2001; Herbst et al., 2018; Mocan,


2 Child care quality is generally measured in two ways. The first is based on observing what actually takes place in the child care
settings, including children’s interactions with caregivers and other children. These features are described as indicators of process
quality. The second is based on relatively tangible and easy-to-observe characteristics of child care settings and the quality of
caregivers, such as the staff-child ratio, classroom size, and the formal education and training of the caregivers. This set of attributes
is described as indicators of structural quality (Herbst & Tekin, 2010).

                                                                    2
2007).3 The empirical evidence is largely consistent with this view. For example, child care searches

are typically short in duration, with many parents considering just one caregiver or making their

decision within one day (Layzer et al., 2007; NSECE, 2014). Furthermore, parents are less likely to

inquire about the quality-related attributes of child care (e.g., licensing and turnover) and more likely

to inquire about its convenience and cost (e.g., fees and hours of operation) (NSECE, 2014).

Accordingly, there are sharp inconsistencies between the quality ratings of parents and trained

observers, where the former consistently rates the quality of their child’s caregiver more favorably than

the latter (Herbst et al., 2018; Forry et al., 2013; Cryer & Buchinal, 1997; Mocan, 2007).4 Furthermore,

other research finds that various measures of quality do not predict parent ratings of satisfaction with

their caregiver (Bassok et al., 2018). Instead, the practical dimensions of child care—related to

convenience and reliability—play a major role in parent decision-making and satisfaction (Mamedova

& Redford, 2013; Layzer & Goodson, 2006; Barbarin et al., 2006; Rose & Elicker, 2008; Sonenstein

& Wolf, 1991).

          Although the literature points to parents’ inability to make informed decisions, there are several

important gaps in our understanding of how consumers make their child care choices and whether those

choices have implications for market-wide quality. First, the existing evidence relies on descriptive

analyses of parent surveys to identify the characteristics of child care that are valued when selecting a

provider (e.g., Chaudry et al., 2011; Weber, 2011; Layzer et al., 2007; Forry et al., 2013; Bassok et al.,

2018; Davis & Connelly, 2005; Sandstrom et al, 2012; Mamedova and Redford, 2013; Cryer &


3
  This market failure is likely to perpetuate itself because, when parents fail to recognize high-quality care, the demand for high-
quality care would be lower—resulting in lower prices—than would be the case if parents were perfectly informed. Lower prices
would in turn drive out higher-quality providers from the market thereby causing market-wide quality to fall further (Blau, 2001;
Vandell & Wolfe, 2000; Herbst & Tekin, 2016; Herbst et al., 2018). These quality problems are reflected in part by stagnant wages,
low skills, and high rates of turnover among workers (Bassok et al., 2013; Boyd-Swan & Herbst, 2018; Herbst, 2018).
4
  In fact, parents usually report high levels of satisfaction with their child care arrangement. For example, a study of low-income
families in Louisiana finds that 69 percent of parents are very satisfied with their child’s program and would likely choose their
program again (Bassok et al., 2018). Another study of low-income families receiving child care subsidies finds that approximately
three-quarters of mothers rate the quality of their child’s program as either excellent or perfect (Raikes et al., 2012). Most recently,
Herbst et al., (2018) examine consumer reviews of child care providers posted on the website Yelp.com and conclude that parents
overall are highly satisfied with their child care provider, and that there are differences between low- and high-income parents in
the weights they place on various attributes of child care.

                                                                   3
Buchinal, 1997). Much of this work relies on a “check all that apply” approach to measuring

preferences: parents are presented with a hypothetical list of child care characteristics, and they indicate

which ones are important to their decision. This approach has clear limitations because parents may

feel obliged to provide socially desirable answers. In addition, these surveys do not require parents to

make trade-offs between various child care attributes, which is a hallmark of real decision-making.

Thus, studies rarely observe actual parent choices. A related drawback with prior work is that parent

preferences are probed ex-post, that is, after a decision has been made. To the extent that parent

evaluations of child care are correlated with the choices available to them, results obtained from these

studies may be subject to selection bias.

        In this paper, we examine the determinants of parent demand for the quality and non-quality

attributes of home-based child care using data from a large field experiment. In particular, we design

and implement an audit-style study, in which we randomly assign several characteristics to fictitious

caregiver profiles that were created on a large, online child care job service that connects families with

providers. Between March 2017 and May 2018, we used the fictitious profiles to respond to 8,000 “job

advertisements” placed by parents in eight large U.S. cities. We then examine the propensity of an

applicant with a given set of randomly assigned characteristics to receive an interview request. Our

study focuses on caregivers’ education and work experience as the primary signals of quality, and we

rely on car ownership status and the level of availability to reflect the non-quality, or convenience,

attributes. In addition, the on-line job service allows caregivers to specify their hourly wage

expectation, thereby providing an opportunity to study the impact of prices on child care demand.

Together, these data allow us to examine the extent to which characteristics that reflect caregivers’

observable quality and non-quality characteristics are valued by parents during the child care search.

        Our work makes several contributions to literature on child care decision-making. First, by

randomly assigning a number of quality and non-quality attributes to caregiver profiles, we are able to

experimentally induce parents’ demand for child care. Importantly, our study provides an assessment
                                                     4
of actual decision-making—by measuring parents’ responses to fictitious caregiver profiles—which

neutralizes social desirability biases and allows for a clear understanding of how parents prioritize

various options. In addition, given that parents are shown caregivers with a randomly chosen set of

characteristics, our research design ensures that all unobserved determinants of child care choices are

averaged out across the choice set presented to parents.

        Second, the evidence on child care decision-making comes overwhelmingly from studies of

the formal, regulated segment of the child care market (i.e., center-based programs). Although the

center-based market—which contains 129,000 programs serving nearly seven million preschool-age

children—is clearly important, there is very little research on the unregulated, in-home sector (NSECE,

2014). However, in-home child care is a nontrivial and growing segment of the market. Currently,

there are one million in-home, paid child care providers serving 2.3 million young children, and another

2.7 million unpaid caregivers serving over four million children (NSECE, 2016). Moreover, it is now

common for parents to rely on online services to find and hire in-home caregivers. According to a

survey conducted by Care.com—the world’s largest online platform for finding home-based child

care—73 percent of parents report using an online service to arrange for such a provider. Indeed,

Care.com alone includes nearly 13 million families seeking home-based child care services from 10

million registered caregivers. Therefore, by studying the in-home, online child care market, this paper

fills an important gap in the literature.

        Finally, the particular online market we study is unique in that parents have access to a

substantial amount of information about a given child care provider. Indeed, a typical caregiver profile

includes not only basic demographic information, as well as complete education and work experience

histories, but also lists of special skills, certifications, spoken languages, and hobbies. In addition,

caregivers commonly post photos and videos of themselves, and they provide open-ended (written)

introductory statements. The website also provides parents with caregiver ratings and reviews from

previous families. Our study therefore provides an opportunity to examine preferences for child care
                                                   5
in a market in which the inefficiencies from information asymmetry are unlikely to be as severe as they

are for center-based programs, about which it would be impossible or extremely costly for consumers

to gather comparably detailed information. As a result, our findings may shed light on the debate over

whether the U.S.’s child care quality problems stem from parents’ inability to afford high-quality care,

their inability to identify the characteristics of such care, or their unwillingness to pay for it.

        Our key results can be summarized as follows. First, we show that parents are very sensitive

to the price of child care. Our estimates imply that caregivers charging $10-$15 per hour have a one-

in-three chance of receiving an interview, while those charging $20-$25 have a one-in-eight chance.

Nevertheless, we find that parents have strong preferences for quality, particularly caregivers’

educational attainment. Although parents appear to value work experience, the estimates imply that

they may view experience as having declining positive effects on quality. Second, we find mixed

evidence on the convenience dimensions of child care, with parents valuing those owning a car but not

those with more availability. Finally, although our estimates imply that parents overall value quality

over convenience, we uncover substantial heterogeneity in child care preferences across sub-groups of

families defined by the age of the youngest child, race and ethnicity, and willingness-to-pay.

        These findings provide important insights into why child care quality in the U.S. tends to be

low. We show that parents value both the quality and convenience attributes of child care, and they

behave in a manner consistent with a willingness to pay for them. Importantly, we also document that

when they are forced to make a trade-off between quality and convenience, many parents demonstrate

a preference for quality within a given price range. This suggests that at the heart of the quality problem

lies parents’ inability to afford high-quality child care or their lack of informational resources on how

to identify such care, as opposed to under-valuing caregivers’ quality-related attributes. As a result,

consumer education about the benefits of high-quality child care may be an effective policy for

increasing the demand for high-quality programs.



                                                      6
        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II provides a description of the home-

based child care market. We then discuss the design of our field experiment, along with the analytical

strategy, in Section III. Section IV presents the results, and we conclude in Section V with a discussion

of policy implications.

II. The Home-Based Child Care Market

        For the purposes of this paper, it is useful to think of the child care workforce as being

employed in either center- or home-based settings. Programs within the center-based sector—which

can be public or private and for- or non-profit—are generally licensed and regulated, and they operate

out of either their own stand-alone building or one that is shared with another organization. In contrast,

the home-based sector is lightly or entirely unregulated, and its workers care for one or more children

in the provider’s own home or in the home of the child(ren). There are three sub-sectors within the

home-based market: listed, unlisted but paid, and unlisted and unpaid. The term “listed” refers to

operators of licensed and regulated home-based child care programs—usually functioning as small,

independent businesses—that appear on state or national lists of early care and education services

(NSECE, 2016).

        This paper studies parent preferences in the unlisted, paid market. Such caregivers are likely

to be seeking work within the home of the family requesting a child care provider and paid directly by

the parents at a negotiated rate. It is common for these individuals to be nannies, au pairs, and

babysitters who are found and hired on child care job websites, such as the one we rely on in this study.

In addition, such caregivers generally have no prior relationship with the family, as is the case in this

study (NSECE, 2016). Care provided by these individuals is regularly scheduled by the family and

occurs for a large number of hours each week, which is not surprising given that parents use this child

care as a work support. Finally, these caregivers are unlicensed, and they operate outside of states’

regulatory regimes.



                                                    7
       The most recent estimates suggest that the unlisted, paid sector comprises a large and growing

segment of the overall home-based market. Currently, it includes approximately 919,000 workers who

care for an estimated 2.3 million preschool-aged children each week. This is significantly larger than

the listed sector, which includes 118,000 workers who look after 750,000 children, but is smaller than

the unlisted, unpaid sector, which contains 2.7 million workers who care for nearly four million

children (NSECE, 2016). The size of the unlisted, paid sector is also comparable to the center-based

market, which is estimated to contain 129,000 programs and over 900,000 employees who care for

approximately seven million preschool-aged children (NSECE 2014; Herzenberg et al., 2005).

       Caregivers within the unlisted, paid sector are generally less skilled and more disadvantaged

than their counterparts in other child care sectors, particularly those in the center-based and listed,

home-based markets (Boyd-Swan & Herbst, 2018; NSECE, 2016). In particular, such individuals are

younger, less likely to be married, and reside in households with lower incomes. For example, the

annual median household income of unlisted, paid workers is approximately $25,000, while that for

listed workers is nearly $45,000 (NSECE, 2016). In addition, unlisted, paid caregivers are substantially

more likely to have no more than a high school diploma (51 percent) than their counterparts in the

center-based (16 percent) and listed, home-based (33 percent) sectors, and they are less likely to have

a bachelor’s degree or more (15 percent versus 42 percent and 15 percent, respectively). Such

individuals are also less likely to be making early education human capital investments, such taking

college courses (12 percent versus 32 percent and 30 percent, respectively) and holding a Child

Development Associate (CDA) certification (seven percent versus 26 percent and 38 percent,

respectively). Finally, although unlisted, paid caregivers are employed as child care workers for nearly

41 hours per week, a sizable share of these individuals (28 percent) are employed in at least one other

paid position. By comparison, only 13 percent of listed caregivers hold multiple jobs.




                                                   8
III. Experimental Design and Statistical Analysis

The Field Experiment

         The setting for our field experiment is a large, on-line service that connects parents to

prospective child care providers.5 The website allows parents to search for full- and part-time

caregivers, nannies and babysitters, and those able to provide specialized services (e.g., tutoring and

special needs’ care). Using this platform, we responded to a wide variety of caregiving jobs posted by

parents in eight large cities: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, District of Columbia, Philadelphia,

Phoenix, and Seattle.6 Within each city, we limited the child care job search to a 30-mile radius around

the city center, as measured by a downtown zip code. This distance was chosen because it encompasses

both the central city and surrounding suburban regions; it provided access to a large number of jobs;

and it is noted by the website as being the most common distance used by real job seekers.

         To construct a caregiver profile, the job service requires individuals to provide a considerable

amount of information about themselves, including their name, age, gender, residential location,

position sought, and hourly wage expectation. Individuals may also provide one or more photos and/or

introductory videos as well as a brief written (personal) statement of no more than 1,000 words. In

addition, individuals can list specific skills and certifications (e.g., coursework in early childhood

education, CPR, and first aid), provide the ratings and reviews from other families, and indicate

whether the telephone number, email address, and social media accounts have been verified. Finally,

caregivers answer a series of close-ended questions related to their educational attainment (i.e., level,

institution, and field of study), work experience, and availability. Our field experiment studies the

impact of five job seeker characteristics within the profile: wage expectation, educational attainment,

work experience, level of availability, and car ownership status. The job platform allows individuals


5
  The current project has been reviewed and cleared by the Institutional Review Boards (IRB) at the authors’ institutions.
6
  Although the selected cities are demographically and economically diverse, and provide potentially important regional variation,
they may not be representative of the informal caregiving market in small to medium sized cities as well as rural areas. As such,
caution should be used in generalizing our results to other locales.

                                                                9
to select an hourly wage expectation from a menu containing five categorical options. Our study

assigned fictitious profiles to one of three wage categories: $10-$15 per hour, $15-$20 per hour, or

$20-$25 per hour. Second, each profile was assigned to one of three levels of education: high school

diploma, an associate’s degree, or a bachelor’s degree.7 Next, we randomly assigned profiles to one of

two levels of availability. The first, which we refer to as “neutral availability”, does not provide any

specific information in the profile on the days and hours of availability. The second level, referred to

as “high availability”, notes explicitly in the personal statement that the caregiver is available at night

and on the weekend. Fourth, profiles were assigned to note whether the caregiver owns a car.8

          Together, these four treatments produced 36 possible configurations within the profiles (i.e.,

three wage categories × three levels of education × two levels of availability × two car ownership

categories = 36 combinations). Each configuration was represented by a randomly assigned sequence

number ranging from one to 36. We then randomized the fifth treatment—years of work experience—

to each sequence number. The experience variable took one of the values from the set {1, 3, 5, 7, 9}.910

Data collection then proceeded by sequence number in which the caregiver profiles for all eight cities

were adjusted to include the characteristics that corresponded to a given number. Thus, our data

collection evolved over the course of 36 rounds. We utilized this two-step randomization method to

reduce the number of application rounds to a manageable number. Were we to expand the set of


7
  For profiles with an associate’s degree, we listed a large, public community college in the city as the institution of attendance. If
the profile had a bachelor’s degree, except for the District of Columbia, the institution listed was a large, public university in the
state where the city was located. For profiles in the District of Columbia, a large, public university in Maryland was chosen.
8
  We consider the last two measures as proxies for convenience, but of course, there are other attributes that capture convenience,
such as the willingness to care for multiple children and proximity to the child’s home.
9
  It is important to note that the job service provides two ways for caregivers to describe their work experience. First, individuals
can select the total number of years of experience from a pull-down menu. Second, individuals can list each family caregiving
experience obtained inside and outside of the service as well as all relevant employers (e.g., child care center). This information
requires the dates of employment and a discussion of job responsibilities. It then undergoes a verification process, during which
the service apparently contacts families and employers to ensure that the information is accurate. Given that the second option
required substantially more information that would be checked by the service, we ultimately decided to leave this part of the profile
blank, and instead simply noted the number of years of work experience in the pull-down menu.
10
   Nine years was chosen as the maximum years of experience because the job service allows caregivers to select from the pull-
down menu individually-numbered years from one to nine. After the ninth year of experience, the only other option is “10+” years
of experience. Importantly, in the home-based unlisted, paid market, about 17 percent of child care providers have one year or less
of experience, while about 63 percent have less than 10 years (NSECE, 2016). Thus, the experience levels we use are likely to be
comparable to most other child care providers.

                                                                  10
sequence numbers to accommodate the work experience treatment, data collection would have required

180 rounds to complete.11 Therefore, we decided to assign work experience to one or more of the 36

sequence numbers. A summary of the randomization of experience by wage category and education is

provided in Appendix Table 6. A breakdown of response rates across all 36 rounds is provided in

Appendix Table 7.

          Following a brief pilot study in early 2017, our fieldwork began in March of 2017 and ended

in May of 2018. We responded to 1,000 parent job postings in each city. One application was submitted

in response to each posting, giving us a total sample of 8,000 postings/applications. For each sequence

number, our goal was to apply for the same number of jobs in each city so that all treatment

configurations were equally represented in the data. Nevertheless, some variation in application counts

is present, ranging from a low of 19 postings/applications per city for two sequence numbers to a high

of 36 postings/applications for two additional sequence numbers. The average number of applications

per round was 27.8 with a standard deviation of 4.7.

          To ensure comparability over time, the process of selecting jobs to apply for was standardized

across each application round. Specifically, job postings were first sorted by date, so that we applied

only for the most recently posted positions.12 We then limited the pool of potential jobs to those with

a profile picture (to limit our sample to serious job opportunities), those posted by parents (as opposed

to a child care center or other formal provider), those located within 30 miles of the central city zip

code, and those offering ongoing part- or full-time jobs.1314 Requests for specific attributes in the job



11
   We estimated that 180 rounds would require approximately three years of continuous data collection. We were concerned that
such a long period of data collection would increase the odds of being detected by job service. In addition, such a long period was
deemed cost prohibitive.
12
   By applying for the most recently posted positions, our goal was to ensure that the job advertisements were being actively
monitored by parents and that a caregiver had not yet been hired. Imposing this requirement, which was achieved by sorting by
“job post date” on the website, means that our data overwhelmingly include job advertisements posted on the same day, the day
before, or two days before the application was submitted.
13
   The online job platform allows parents to list the job as either one-time, part-time, or full-time. Our study excluded one-time jobs
on the assumption that parents would be more likely to consider the assigned profile attributes for ongoing, permanent positions as
compared to time-critical or one-off babysitting jobs.
14
   Given that our fictitious profiles were female only, we excluded jobs that stipulated a preference for male child care providers.

                                                                  11
postings were not considered in our application process, with applications completed sequentially

starting with the most recently posted job. To reduce the effect of time zones on the application process,

caregiver profiles were submitted to parents moving from East to West coast, beginning with the

District of Columbia and ending with Seattle. Applications were completed between 6PM and 2AM

Eastern Standard Time.

         For a given sequence number, we used eight identical profiles—one for each city—to apply

for child care jobs. The only difference between profiles was the caregiver’s first name.15 Although the

profiles included different surnames, the platform reports only the first letter of surnames to parents,

making any variation irrelevant for our purposes. All profiles were constructed to reflect a 30-year-old

white female; we included in all eight profiles the identical photo of a fictitious female applicant. In

order to ensure that our profiles appeared legitimate and were competitive with other job seekers, we

included a valid and verified email address (which varied across profiles) as well as other

characteristics (which did not vary) in the profiles. In particular, all caregivers were English speakers

only, non-smokers, had first aid training, and were comfortable around pets. We also noted caregiving

experience with different age groups, twins, sick children, and children with special needs. As a proxy

for parent references, each profile included a fictitious but verified five-star review from a parent.

Finally, each profile included an identical introductory personal statement about the caregivers’ interest

and skill working as a child care provider.

         When responding to parent job postings, the job service by default sends an introductory

message to parents, which notes the caregiver’s interest in the position and discusses all of the relevant

treatments studied in the paper. Until this point, parents will not have seen the caregiver profiles but




15
   Names were chosen from a list of the most common baby names in 1987 in the U.S. according to the Social Security
Administration: https://www.ssa.gov/OACT/babynames/index.html. The actual names, as they appeared to parents were: Marie
W; Laura B; Maddie T; Kim W; Jennifer P; Jessica S; Amanda G; and Sarah C. The same name was used in a given city
throughout the entire period of data collection, but initially each name was randomly assigned to that city.

                                                           12
are now given the option to click on the profile to learn more about the individual.16 In an effort to

ensure that a given parent was sampled just once, we compared each new parent job posting to

previously applied-for positions. Parents that had already been studied were ignored in the newest

application round.

Coding Responses from Parents

          Since the job service platform acts as a closed eco-system, all initial contact between parents

and caregivers occurs through the website’s internal messaging system. The system provides parents

with several options for responding to applicants: to send a crafted message discussing their interest

(or lack of) in an applicant, to use an automated response that rejects the applicant, and to use an

automated response to request a phone call or meeting. To provide parents with sufficient time to

respond to the fictitious job seekers, they were given six days from the day we submitted the application

to make contact. On the sixth day, we collected responses, then changed the treatment variables to

prepare for the next round. We then waited at least two days to ensure the profiles were updated on the

platform before sending out the next set of applications.17

          The primary outcome variable is a binary indicator equal to one if a given job

application/caregiver profile received an explicit request for an interview.18 Approximately 25 percent

of our profiles received such a “positive” response from parents. For the remaining (75 percent of)

profiles, parents either did not respond to the caregiver or provided a negative response. Specifically,

negative responses are those in which parents submitted a system-generated message indicating they



16
   For example, one such introductory statement from a fictitious caregiver reads: “Hi, my name is Kim and I am responding to
your job for a child care worker in the Atlanta area. I hold a high school diploma and have 1 year of professional experience
working as a babysitter. I own my own car and have plenty of availability including evenings and weekends. I’m a non-smoker,
and I am looking for a job that pays between $10 & $15 per hour. If this is reasonable to you, please get back to me at your earliest
convenience. Thanks, Kim.”
17
   For example, if applications were processed on a Friday, responses were recorded the following Thursday, and the next set of
applications were sent out on the next Saturday at the earliest. This introduced day-of-week variation within the experiment.
18
   In a small number of cases, the caregiver also received a request by the parent for additional background information such as a
resume or professional references; a request by the parent to answer one or more questions about the position (e.g., whether the
caregiver had experience looking after multiple children simultaneously); or a request by the parent for more information about the
logistics of the job (e.g., inquiring whether the caregiver had a car or was available on weekends).

                                                                 13
are not interested, or those in which parents crafted their own message communicating their

disinterest.19 Although the main analysis reports results based on the measure of interview requests, we

also examine the determinants of negative responses.

Statistical Analysis

         To estimate the causal effect of the randomized profile characteristics, we estimate

regressions of the following form:

[1]      Responseijct = βo + X´β1 + Z´β2 + αc + δt + εijct,

where Responseijct is a binary indicator equal to one if the ith profile/application submitted in response

to job advertisement j in city c at time t received an interview request and zero otherwise, and X is the

set of randomly assigned profile characteristics. Our baseline model includes a set of city fixed effects

(α) and time effects (δ). The time controls capture various sources of temporal heterogeneity in parent

preferences for child care. Specifically, we incorporate dummy variables for the day of the week in

which a given application was submitted, a dummy variable capturing months in which school is

unlikely to be in session (i.e., the summer months and December), and a dummy variable for the year

in which the application was submitted.20 The baseline model also includes controls for a variety of

parent and family characteristics, Z, such as parent gender (one dummy variable), race/ethnicity (five

dummy variables), the number of children in the household, a dummy variable for whether the parent

was seeking full-time child care, a dummy variable for whether the caregiver was required to have a

car, and the highest amount (per hour) that a given parent was willing to pay the caregiver (a potential




19
   We encountered a few cases in which parents expressed dissatisfaction with some aspect of the profile (e.g., parents expressed
an unwillingness to pay the hourly wage revealed on the profile, and asked if the applicant was willing to accept a lower wage).
Such cases were coded as a non-positive responses (i.e., as a zero in the main outcome variable).
20
   We experiment with other month-of-application controls, including dummy variables for calendar-quarter. Estimates from these
models are very similar to those reported in the tables and are available upon request.

                                                               14
proxy for family income).21 We estimate this model using ordinary least squares regression (OLS),

with the standard errors clustered on the application sequence number.22

IV. Results

Summary Statistics

          Our presentation of results begins with a discussion of the parent response rates (Table 1) as

well as summary statistics for the fictitious caregiver characteristics (Appendix Table 1) and family

characteristics (Appendix Table 2). Each table displays information on the full sample and for each

city in which applications were submitted. We then present results from “balance” tests of the

relationship between caregiver and family characteristics (Appendix Table 3). As shown in Table 1,

the overall positive response rate is approximately 25 percent. The city-specific positive response rate

varies from a low of 16 percent in Phoenix to a high of 41 percent in Seattle. Not shown in the table is

the negative response rate, which is 16 percent overall. This varies between 13 percent in Seattle and

20 percent in Chicago and Phoenix. Appendix Table 1 shows the proportion of caregiver profiles

containing each randomly assigned characteristic. The proportions overall and within each city are

consistent with the assignment probabilities set forth in the research design. Such patterns provide

initial evidence that random assignment was undertaken successfully. Appendix Table 2 presents the

characteristics of the families (i.e., job-posters) to which our fictitious applicants responded. Fully 81

percent of the job-posters are female, and 75 percent are white. Posters’ gender is indeterminate in

about six percent of cases, while race/ethnicity is indeterminate in five percent of cases. In addition,

families requested care for 1.8 children on average. Full-time care is needed by 41 percent of families,

and 73 percent state that a car is required for the job. Families are willing to pay caregivers at most


21
   Gender was coded based on the name of the parent owning the online account, while race and ethnicity were coded based on
the profile picture provided in the parent profile. In both cases, when any ambiguity existed, we coded the variable as
“unknown”. Our other parent and family characteristics were provided as part of the standard job advertisement. That is, parents
were required to specify whether they needed full-time or part-time assistance, whether they required applicants to have a car, the
number of children to be cared for, and a desired pay range.
22
   We experiment with logit and probit models as well. Marginal effects obtained from these estimations are very similar to those
reported in the tables.

                                                                15
$19.42 per hour. Appendix Table 3 examines whether the caregiver treatments are balanced across

families’ observable characteristics. We detect very few systematic differences, again suggesting that

random assignment was performed largely successfully.

Descriptive Results

        To motivate the forthcoming regression analysis, Table 2 presents the raw response rate for all

levels of the caregiver treatments. We also show the corresponding chi-squared statistic from a test of

the null hypothesis of no association between each characteristic and parent responses. It is clear from

the first three rows that parent demand is sensitive to the wage expectation stated by caregivers. Indeed,

parent responses are sharply decreasing in the hourly price of child care, from 34 percent when prices

are $10-$15 to 14 percent when prices rise to $20-$25. However, parents also have strong preferences

for two important signals of caregiver quality: educational attainment and work experience. As for

education, the response rate increases from 22 percent among caregivers with a high school diploma

to 27 percent among those with a bachelor’s degree. Although the relationship for work experience is

not monotonic, the data suggest that parents are willing to reward caregivers with more experience.

For example, 22 percent of those with one year of experience received an interview, a figure which

increases to 28 percent among caregivers with nine years of experience. The final sets of results relate

to the measures of caregiver convenience: car ownership and availability. It appears that parents are

somewhat more attracted to car owners than non-car owners (26 percent versus 23 percent), but are

indifferent between those with higher levels of availability and those whose availability status is neutral

(24 percent versus 25 percent).

Baseline Regression Results

        Table 3 presents the main regression results establishing the causal effect of each profile

characteristic on the probability of receiving an interview request. The results are based on the full set

of 8,000 applications. Each column provides estimates from an increasingly rich specification. Column

(1) includes only the profile characteristics; column (2) adds the family controls; column (3) adds the
                                                    16
city fixed effects; and column (4) adds the time effects. Coefficients on the profile characteristics are

robust to the inclusion of all additional controls, thereby providing another indication that random

assignment was undertaken successfully. Nevertheless, adding these variables generally improves the

precision of the regression estimates. Appendix Table 4 re-estimates the full model, using as the

outcome variable the binary indicator of a negative parent response.

        Results in Table 3 confirm that the demand for child care is strongly influenced by prices. The

estimates in column (4) imply parents are nearly eight percentage point less likely to seek an interview

when the caregiver wage is set at $15-$20 per hour, and 21 percentage points less likely to respond

when the wage is $20-$25 per hour (compared to a wage of $10-$15 per hour). Given that the overall

response rate is 25 percent, these estimates translate to reductions of 31 percent and 83 percent,

respectively. Nevertheless, parents respond favorably to caregivers with more education and work

experience. It appears that the relationship between education and parent responses is monotonic.

Whereas individuals with an associate’s degree are six percentage points (or 25 percent) more likely

to receive an interview, those with a bachelor’s degree are nine percentage points (or 37 percent) more

likely to receive an interview (compared to applicants with a high school diploma). As for experience,

while it is clear that three, five, seven, and nine years of work experience are preferred over one year

of experience, the relationship is not fully monotonic. In particular, the response rate initially increases

in experience, peaking at seven years, but then declines for applicants with nine years of experience.

This inverted U-shape indicates that there may be declining returns to work experience in the informal

child care labor market.

        The last two profile characteristics in Table 3 probe parent preferences for the convenience

aspects of child care: caregiver car ownership and availability. Parents reward job-seekers with a car,

for whom the likelihood of receiving an interview increases by nearly four percentage points (or 15

percent). It is possible that parents are attracted to car owners not only because it makes caregiving

more convenient (i.e., via the provider’s ability to transport children to appointments and activities),
                                                    17
but also because it may signal other favorable characteristics, including financial stability and maturity.

Therefore, the coefficient on car ownership may represent an upper bound estimate on the convenience

dimension of this potentially bundled (i.e., multi-dimensional) characteristic. On the other hand,

parents seem to be indifferent toward caregivers indicating a higher level of availability (i.e., available

to provide care at night and on weekends). Indeed, the coefficient on “high” availability is close to zero

and statistically insignificant.

        The models shown in Appendix Table 4 examine the determinants of explicitly negative parent

responses. Specifically, we re-estimate the full model outlined in equation [1], this time using the

binary indicator for negative responses as the outcome variable. The most salient predictor of such

responses is caregiver wage expectation, with higher wages producing a monotonic increase in the

likelihood of a negative response. All other caregiver characteristics, including the non-quality

attributes related to car ownership and availability, generate a lower likelihood of receiving negative

feedback from parents. Together, these results largely mirror those from the model of positive parent

responses: parents are averse to paying higher prices, but they value signals of caregiver quality, such

as educational attainment, and convenience, as measured primarily by car ownership.

Heterogeneity by the Age of the Youngest Child

        The next set of results examine whether parent preferences for caregiver characteristics vary

with the age of the youngest child in the family. This analysis is motivated by theoretical models of

household production in which parents view child development as a cumulative process, with time

allocation, consumption, and investment decisions being made sequentially throughout the

developmental period (e.g., Todd & Wolpin, 2003). A key insight from these models is that parents

may place different weights on the value of time versus monetary investments depending on the age

of child, and that these investments may in turn have heterogeneous, age-specific effects along the

developmental pathway. Results from recent empirical studies are largely consistent with these

predictions. For example, Del Boca et al. (2014) and Cunha et al. (2010) show that parental time
                                                    18
investments are extremely important in the first few years of life, and decline as children age, while

the value of monetary inputs increases with age. Consistent with these patterns, several studies find

negative effects of non-parental child care time—particularly informal care—for infants and toddlers

(e.g., Bernal & Keane, 2011; Fort et al., 2016; Herbst, 2013). Therefore, it is important to understand

how parents—who are looking to reduce the time investment in their children by purchasing non-

parental services—evaluate various child care characteristics at different points in the developmental

process.

          Table 4 presents separate regression estimates by four categories of the youngest child’s age:

zero to six months, six months to three years, four to six years, and seven or more years.23 Generally

speaking, there is substantial variation in parent preferences across younger versus older children.

Those with older children are less sensitive to price of child care (at least in the $15-$20 range), which

implies that parents with young children may prefer to direct their monetary resources to inputs other

than non-parental care. Indeed, the parents of younger children are likely to be younger themselves

compared to parents of older children, and therefore possess lower income on average. Thus child

care expenses comprise a larger fraction of their overall income, potentially making them more

sensitive to the price of care. Alternatively, it could be that parents with young children do not

have a realistic grasp of the cost of child care, and their sensitivity to higher prices is driven by

unfamiliarity.

          The estimates in Table 4 also suggest that the demand for caregiver quality generally rises

with child age: parents with very young children (i.e., ages zero to six) have weaker preferences

for education and experience, while those with school-age children (i.e., ages seven and over) have

stronger preferences. Given the importance of high-quality care for the cognitive and social-


23
   Admittedly, these categories may not be ideal, but we had little control over their definition, given that the job service requires
parents to indicate the age(s) of their child(ren) using these predefined categories. Nevertheless, they do offer an opportunity to
study younger versus older preschool-age children as well as younger versus older school-age children.

                                                                 19
emotional development of young children, these results highlight the importance of policies

facilitating access to quality care for new parents or for those of very young children, such as

education campaigns focused on the benefits of high-quality care for young children or a tiered

subsidy system with more generous vouchers for such children. Finally, our results suggest that

caregiver car ownership is most valued for older preschool-age children. This likely reflects the

perceived responsibilities of caring for children who are old enough to benefit from outside activities,

but not yet old enough to be enrolled in school.

Additional Sub-Group Analyses

        We undertake two other types of sub-group analyses. First, as shown in Appendix Table 5, we

examine whether there is heterogeneity in parent demand across the eight cities included in the study.

We then examine in Table 5 heterogeneity across a range of family characteristics. Looking first at the

city-specific analyses, we find some interesting differences in parent preferences. For example,

although parents in most cities reveal an aversion to higher caregiver wages, those in Boston are willing

to pay for more expensive child care. Similarly, with the exception of Boston, parents generally favor

caregivers with post-secondary degrees over those with a high school diploma, particularly those in

Atlanta and Seattle. However, there appears to be more variation in parent preferences for work

experience. Those in Atlanta, D.C., Philadelphia, and Seattle have strong preferences for work

experience, while those in the remaining cities tend to be indifferent. Finally, results for the non-quality

attributes are similarly mixed. Effects of car ownership range from strongly positive in Chicago and

Atlanta to null in Dallas, D.C., and Seattle. Even more striking is that while parents in several cities

favor applicants with “high” availability, those in Atlanta, Boston, and Seattle are actually less likely

to respond positively to such individuals.

        Table 5 presents the regression results disaggregated by demographic sub-group. Columns (1)

and (2) show results separately for white and non-white parents, respectively. Although both sets of


                                                    20
parents are equally sensitive to the cost of child care, white parents show stronger preferences for the

quality attributes of child care, while non-white parents show stronger preferences for the practical or

convenience features of child care. It is important to note, however, that all of our fictitious caregivers

are white. Therefore, it is possible that non-white parents’ comparatively low demand for caregiver

education and experience may be commingled with their preferences for an own-race provider. In other

words, minority caregivers’ education and experience may elicit more favorable responses from

parents of the same background. Alternatively, these results may reflect the possibility that minority

parents are more resource-constrained.

        The next two columns [columns (3) and (4)] show results according to parents’ revealed

willingness-to-pay for child care. Recall that the job service allows parents to indicate a preferred lower

and upper bound on the hourly wage offer to caregivers. This analysis breaks the upper bound wage

offer at the sample median ($20 per hour), and estimates the model separately on parents willing to

pay below and at/above that amount. Note that this variable may capture ability to pay—or families’

income level—as much as it does willingness to pay. Not surprisingly, the results show that high

willingness-to-pay parents are less sensitive to the cost of child care than their low willingness-to-pay

counterparts. However, there is consistent evidence that high-paying parents are more attracted to

caregivers’ quality signals, while low-paying parents are equally, if not more, attracted to the

convenience features of child care. Together, this evidence suggests that the wage offer variable is

more indicative of families’ income level, rather than willingness-to-pay. If this variable measured

willingness-to-pay, one would expect different responses to the price of child care (as we find here),

but there is little reason to believe that preferences over caregiver education and experience would vary

after controlling for prices. That these preferences do vary suggests that we are capturing heterogeneity

in child care demand by family income level.

        The next three columns [columns (5) to (7)] examine differences in child care demand

according to the number of children in the family. Interestingly, parents are about equally sensitive to
                                                    21
prices no matter the number of children. This may be a function of parents’ interpretation of caregivers’

wage expectation. If parents expect to pay the same hourly rate irrespective of the number of children,

then families with more children actually pay less per hour, per child than those with fewer children.

However, we also find that multiple-child families are substantially more attracted to caregivers with

higher levels of education and experience than their single-child counterparts. In addition, the former

has stronger preferences for caregivers who own a car. That multiple-child families place a higher

value on the quality components of child care makes intuitive sense in light of the possibility that such

parents expect to pay the same hourly wage as their single-child counterparts: the marginal unit of

caregiver quality costs less in multiple-child families than in single-child families.

        The final sets of analyses are based on subsets of parents looking for part- or full-time child

care [columns (8) and (9)] and parents who do not require or do require the caregiver to provide her

own transportation [columns (10) and (11)]. Few differences emerge between families looking for a

part- or full-time caregiver: both types of families are equally sensitive to the price of child care, and

both have similar preferences for the quality and non-quality characteristics of the caregiver.

Differences do emerge, however, when comparing families with and without a transportation

requirement. First, it is not surprising that caregivers who own a car are more likely to receive a positive

response from families that make such a requirement than their counterparts that do not have this

requirement. Second, we find that parents with a transportation requirement demand higher-quality

caregivers, at least as measured by caregiver education. Indeed, the coefficients on the two post-

secondary degrees are substantially larger than the corresponding coefficients among families without

a transportation requirement. For these parents, car ownership and education may be viewed as

complementary attributes. Finally, parents without a transportation requirement place a higher value

on availability, implying that these characteristics may be substitutes.




                                                    22
Parents’ Willingness to Pay for Caregiver Quality and Convenience

          The final set of analyses probes parents’ willingness to pay for various child care provider

characteristics. To do so, we present the raw parent response rates for the three levels of caregiver wage

expectation separately by educational attainment (Figure 1), car ownership status (Figure 2), and

availability (Figure 3).24

          Looking first at Figure 1, we find that within each level of education there is a negative

relationship between child care prices and positive parent responses. This confirms the full sample

results shown in Tables 2 and 3. As to the question of whether parents are willing to pay for more

highly educated caregivers, the answer appears to depend on the level of education. On the one hand,

consider caregivers with a high school diploma and an associate’s degree, both of whom charge the

lowest hourly price ($10-$15). Not surprisingly, at this comparatively low price level, parents prefer

those with more education, as shown by the increased response rate from 28 percent (high school) to

35 percent (associate’s degree). However, when caregivers charge the highest hourly price ($20-$25),

the response rate declines from about 14 percent (high school) to 10 percent (associate’s degree).

          Thus it appears that parents are willing to pay for an extra two years of education at the lower

end of the education distribution only when the price of child care is relatively low. Now consider, on

the other hand, caregivers with an associate’s degree and a bachelor’s degree. Once again, parents are

willing to reward those with more education when the cost of child care is low ($10-$15), as shown by

the moderate increase in the response rate from 35 percent (associate’s degree) to 38 percent

(bachelor’s degree). Furthermore, they remain more attracted to caregivers with a bachelor’s degree

even when they charge the highest hourly price ($20-$25); indeed the response rate increases

substantially between those with an associate’s degree (10 percent) and a bachelor’s degree (18



24
  In results not reported in the paper, we estimate the regression equivalent of these descriptive analyses. The pattern of results is
very similar to that reported here, which is not surprising given the experimental research design. These results are available upon
request.

                                                                 23
percent). Therefore, it appears that parents are willing to pay for an extra two years of education at the

upper end of the education distribution even when the price of child care is relatively high.

        Figures 2 and 3 repeat the analysis for the two measures of convenience. When the price of

child care is comparatively low, parents are indifferent between individuals without and with a car

(response rates of 33 percent and 34 percent, respectively). However, those with a car are preferred by

parents at higher price levels. When the hourly price increases to $15-$20 the response rate increases

from 24 percent (no car) to 29 percent (car), and when prices rise again to $20-$25 the response rate

increases from 12 percent (no car) to 15 percent (car). Conversely, as shown in Figure 3, parents favor

more available caregivers only at relatively low price levels. At the highest hourly price, it appears that

parents penalize individuals with more availability, as shown by the reduction in the response rate from

16 percent (neutral availability) to 11 percent (high availability). Together, these analyses suggest that

parents do not place equal weight on all dimensions of convenience: they are willing to pay for car

ownership, but are not willing to pay for availability.

V. Conclusions

        This study provides credible evidence on the demand for child care characteristics in the market

for home-based care. The analysis focuses on randomly assigning three dimensions of caregiving:

affordability (i.e., the hourly price of child care), quality (i.e., caregiver education and experience), and

convenience (i.e., caregiver car ownership and availability). We find that parents are extremely

sensitive to the cost of child care. Caregivers charging $10-$15 per hour have a one-in-three chance of

receiving an interview; when the hourly wage increases to $20-$25, the odds fall to one-in-eight. We

also find that parents have strong preferences for quality, particularly caregivers’ educational

attainment. Although parents appear to value work experience, the relationship takes a reverse U-

shape, indicating that parents may view experience as having declining positive effects on quality.

Furthermore, we find mixed evidence on the convenience dimensions of child care, with parents

valuing those owning a car but not those with more availability. Finally, we show that child care
                                                     24
preferences are not stable across sub-groups of families, particularly as it relates to families’ age of

youngest child, race and ethnicity, and willingness-to-pay.

         To put our results in context, we provide back-of-the-envelope calculations on parents’

monetized valuation of various signals of caregiver quality and convenience. These calculations are

presented as a dollar denominated range and are based on point estimates from our empirical results.25

For comparative purposes, we estimate the relative value parents place on education and car ownership

for the full sample and for several sub-groups.26 All calculations are shown in Table 6.

         For the full sample (Panel A), the regression estimates imply that families value hiring a

caregiver with a BA degree between $180 and $242 more than a caregiver with a high school diploma,

and a caregiver with an AA degree between $121 and $163 more than a caregiver with a high school

diploma. Our estimates also suggest that families value a caregiver with their own car between $72

and $97 more than a caregiver without access to a car. Two observations are noteworthy. First, it seems

clear that parents value quality and convenience; indeed the monetized preferences for both attributes

imply that both represent important factors parents consider in the hiring process.27 Second, parents

place a much higher value on quality over convenience, with the lower bounds of our estimates on

education being larger than the upper bound estimate on car ownership.

         The remaining calculations in Table 6 show that caregiver quality is valued more by parents

with older children (Panel B) and those with a higher willingness-to-pay (Panel D). An important

contrast is seen between white and non-white parents (Panel C). Here, while white parents appear to

place significantly more value on education, non-white parents appear to place more value on



25
   The calculations are made in the following manner: (βattribute / βwage) * wage difference * 40 hours per week, where the wage
difference is the difference in caregiver hourly wage expectation-categories at the mid-points ($5 per hour). Note that average
weekly hours of work in the unlisted paid sector is 42 hours (NSECE, 2016), while 41 percent of job postings in this experiment
were full-time.
26
   The regression estimates are based on those reported in column (1) of Table 3, columns (1) and (2) of Table 4, and columns (1)
through (4) of Table 5.
27
   It is worth noting again that our interpretation of car ownership as strictly representing “convenience” may be complicated by
the possibility that it may also represent other desirable caregiver attributes.

                                                               25
convenience. Thus, although parents generally appear to prefer quality over convenience, non-white

parents may represent an important exception: our estimates suggest that they view hiring someone

with a car as being worth between $88 and $149 more than someone without a car, but they view hiring

someone with a BA as being worth between $14 and $24 more than someone with a high school

diploma. As suggested previously, as a car may include some unobserved measure of quality as well

as convenience, it is plausible that car ownership is regarded as an important indicator of quality for

non-white families.

        Taken together, our results show that parents largely value quality over convenience in the

home-based child care market. This is important from a policy perspective, as it implies that a lack of

information as opposed to under-valuing quality may be contributing to the low level of quality in the

child care market. Therefore, consumer education initiatives are likely to be effective at encouraging

parents to consume higher-quality care. A key assumption underlying such initiatives is that parents

care about quality and are willing to consume it, but are unable to distinguish between low- and high-

quality caregivers. Thus by providing information to consumers, education campaigns seek to drive

demand toward high-quality providers while encouraging low-quality providers to improve. Our

results suggest that parents do indeed value quality, and are willing to pay for it, which bodes well for

the success of such policies.

        It is somewhat concerning, however, that non-white and low willingness-to-pay families have

weaker preferences for quality than their white and high willingness-to-pay counterparts. In fact, some

measures of convenience—at least as conceptualized in the current study—are preferred by these

families more than the measures of quality. There are at least three possible explanations for these

patterns. First, such families may place relatively little value on quality as defined by caregiver

education and experience. This explanation is consistent with previous research showing that various

measures of program quality do not predict parents’ satisfaction with their child’s arrangement (e.g.,

Bassok et al., 2018). Instead, what drives satisfaction is parent ratings of convenience, as measured by
                                                   26
hours of operation and location (Sonenstein & Wolf, 1991). Second, these families may value quality,

but they do not believe that education and experience are accurate signals of quality. Indeed, there is

little evidence to suggest that teachers’ observable characteristics are correlated with quality in center-

based settings (e.g., Blau, 2001; Early et al., 2006; Early et al., 2007). If this evidence applies to the

home-based sector as well, this explanation implies that parents are accurate assessors of quality, and

do not value characteristics that may not improve child development. Finally, it is possible that parents

value high-quality care, but are unable to afford it. This explanation is consistent with race/ethnicity

and willingness-to-pay serving as proxies for family socioeconomic status. It is well-known that the

child care cost burden is heavier among low- than high-income families (Herbst, 2018). As a result,

the former may be less likely to demand characteristics that are perceived to be more costly. However,

this explanation is less satisfying in our context because the randomization of profile characteristics

ensured that parents were equally likely to see low- and high-cost high-quality caregivers.

        One final noteworthy observation stems from our results. It appears that parents are fairly

discerning in their evaluation of child care. The evidence suggests that parents do not value equally

both signals of quality—with education valued more than experience—nor both signals of

convenience—with car ownership valued over availability. In addition, while parent demand is

monotonically related to caregiver education, the relationship is non-monotonic with respect to

experience. Such patterns imply that parents are thoughtful in considering the trade-offs between

various bundles of caregiver characteristics. Although it is somewhat surprising that parents are

indifferent toward those with more availability, a potential explanation is that the parents in our

sample—who are looking for longer-term care arrangements rather than single-day babysitters—are

less interested in individuals willing to work at night and on the weekend, because they are seeking

employment-related child care as opposed to date-night child care.




                                                    27
       There are several limitations of our study. For example, our primary outcome measure is

based on parental responses that reflect an explicit request for a job interview. A positive response

as indicated by an interview request does not necessarily mean that the applicant would be hired.

Therefore, our analysis models the decision for an intent-to-hire rather than the decision to hire.

Furthermore, we are only able to consider a limited number of factors that parents typically

consider in hiring decisions due to tractability. And although car ownership and availability are

attributes that are likely to be conceived as signals of convenience by parents, it is possible that

these factors may also be perceived, at least by some parents, as proxies for other attributes such

as income and passion for child care. Finally, our results can only speak to the online child care

market for home-based care. It is not clear whether and to what extent the findings from our study

can be generalized to hiring decisions in other child care markets.




                                                 28
                                             References
Auger, E., Farkas, G., Burchinal M.R., Duncan, G., & Vandell, D. (2014). Preschool Center Care
Quality Effects on Academic Achievement: An Instrumental Variables Analysis. Developmental
Psychology. 50. 2559-71.

Barbarin, O. A., McCandies, T., Early, D., Clifford, R. M., Bryant, D., Burchinal, M., et al. (2006).
Quality of Prekindergarten: What families are looking for in public sponsored programs. Early
Education and Development, 17(4), 619-642.

Barnett, S.W., Epstein, D.J., Carolan, M.E., Fitzgerald, J., Ackerman, D.J., & Friedman, A.H. (2010).
The state of preschool 2010 (pp. 1-256). National Institute for Early Educational Research. Rutgers,
NJ. Retrieved from http://nieer.org/sites/nieer/publications/state-preschool-2010.

Barnett, S.W., Jung, K., Youn, M., & Frede, E. (2013). Abbott preschool program longitudinal
effects study: Fifth grade follow-up. National Institute for Early Educational Research. Rutgers, NJ.
Retrieved from http://nieer.org/sites/nieer/files/APPLES%205th%20Grade.pdf

Bassok, D., Fitzpatrick, M., Loeb, S., & Paglayan, A. S. (2013). The early childhood care and
education workforce in the United States: Understanding changes from 1990 through 2010.
Education Finance and Policy, 8(4), 581-601.

Bassok, D., & Galdo, E. (2016). Inequality in preschool quality? Community level disparities in
access to high quality learning environments. Early Education and Development, 27(1), 128-144.

Bassok, D., Gibbs, C. R., & Latham, S. (2018). Preschool and Children’s Outcomes in Elementary
School: Have Patterns Changed Nationwide Between 1998 and 2010? Child Development.

Bernal, R. & Keane, M. (2011). Child care choices and children’s cognitive achievement: The case
of single mothers. Journal of Labor Economics, 29, 459-512.

Blau, D.M. (2001). The Childcare Problem: An Economic Analysis. New York: Russell Sage.

Boyd-Swan, C., & Herbst, C. M. (2018). The demand for teacher characteristics in the market for
child care: Evidence from a field experiment. Journal of Public Economics, 159, 183-202.

Burchinal, M., Vandergrift, N., Pianta, R., & Mashburn, A. (2010). Threshold analysis of association
between child care quality and child outcomes for low-income children in pre-kindergarten
programs. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 25(2), 166-176.

Campbell, F., Conti, G., Heckman, J.J., Moon, S.H., Pinto, R., Pungello, E. and Pan, Y., (2014).
Early childhood investments substantially boost adult health. Science, 343(6178), pp.1478-1485.

Chaudry, A., Pedroza, J. M., Sandstrom, H., Danziger, A., Grosz, M., Scott, M., ...Ting, S. (2011).
Child care choices of low-income working families. Retrieved from
http://www.urban.org/publications/412343.html.

Cryer, D., & Burchinal, M. (1997). Parents as child care consumers. Early Childhood Research
Quarterly, 12(1), 35-58.

                                                  29
Cunha, F., Heckman, J. & Schennan, S. (2010). Estimating the technology of cognitive and non-
cognitive skill formation. Econometrica, 78(3), 883-931.

Davis, E. E., & Connelly, R. (2005). The influence of local price and availability on parents’ choice
of child care. Population Research and Policy Review, 24, 301-334.

Dearing, E., McCartney, K. & Taylor, B.A., 2009. Does higher quality early child care promote low‐
income children’s math and reading achievement in middle childhood? Child development, 80(5),
pp.1329-1349.

Del Boca, D., Flinn, C. & Wiswall, M. (2014). Household choices and child development. Review of
Economic Studies, 81(1), 137-85.

Dowsett, C.J., Huston, A.C., Imes, A.E., & Gennetian, L. (2008). Structural and process features in
three types of child care for children from high and low income families. Early Childhood Research
Quarterly, 23(1), 69-93.

Early, D. M., Bryant, D., Pianta, R., Clifford, R., Burchinal, M., Ritchie, S., Howes, C., & Barbarin,
O. (2006). Are teachers’ education, major, and credentials related to classroom quality and children’s
academic gains in pre-kindergarten? Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 21(2), 174-195.

Early, D. M., Maxwell, K. L., Burchinal, M. et al. (2007). Teachers’ education, classroom quality,
and young children’s academic skills: Results from seven studies of preschool programs. Child
Development, 78 (2), 558-580.

Forry, N., Tout, K., Rothenberg, L., Sandstrom, H. &Vesely, C. (2013). Child care decision-making
literature review. OPRE brief, 45.

Fort, M., Ichino, A., & Zanella, G. (2016). Cognitive and non-cognitive costs of daycare 0-2 for girls.
IZA Discussion Paper No. 9756. Bonn, Germany: Institute for the Study of Labor.

Gathmann, C., & Sass, B. (2018). Taxing Childcare: Effects on Childcare Choices, Family Labor
Supply, and Children. Journal of Labor Economics, 36(3), 665–709. https://doi.org/10.1086/696143

Gormley Jr, W.T., Phillips, D. & Anderson, S., (2018). The Effects of Tulsa’s Pre‐K Program on
Middle School Student Performance. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 37(1), 63-87.

Heckman, J.J. (2008). Schools, skills, and synapses. Economic Inquiry, 46(3), 289-324.

Herbst, C.M., & Tekin, E. (2010). Child care subsidies and child development. Economics of
Education Review, 29(4), 618-638.

Herbst, C.M. (2013). The Impact of Non-Parental Child Care on Child Development: Evidence from
the Summer Participation “Dip”. Journal of Public Economics, 105, 86-105.




                                                  30
Herbst, C.M., & Tekin, E. (2016). The Impact of Child‐Care Subsidies on Child Development:
Evidence from Geographic Variation in the Distance to Social Service Agencies. Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 35(1), 94-116.

Herbst, C.M. (2018). The Rising Cost of Child Care in the United States. A Reassessment of the
Evidence. Economics of Education Review, 64, 13-30.

Herbst, C.M., Desouza, K.C., Alashri, S., Kandala, S.S., Khullar, M., & Bajaj, V. (2018). What do
Parents Value in a Child Care Provider? Evidence from Yelp Consumer Reviews. IZA Discussion
Paper No. 11741. Bonn, Germany: Institute of Labor Economics.

Herzenberg, S., Price, M., & Bradley, D. (2005). Losing ground in early childhood education.
Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.

Layzer, J. I., Goodson, B. D., & Brown-Lyons, M. (2007). National Study of Care for Low-Income
Families: Care in the home: A description of family child care and the experiences of the families
and children that use it: Final Report.

Layzer, J. I., & Goodson, B. D. (2006). Care in the home: A description of family child care and the
experiences of the families and children who use it. National Study of Child Care for Low-Income
Families, Wave I Report. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.

Mamedova, S, & Redford, J. (2013). Early Childhood Program Participation, From the National
Household Education Surveys Program of 2012 (NCES 2013-029), National Center for Education
Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. Washington, DC.

Mocan, N. (2007). Can consumers detect lemons? An empirical analysis of information asymmetry
in the market for child care. Journal of Population Economics. 20. 743-780. 10.1007/s00148-006-
0087-6.

National Research Council & Institute of Medicine (2000). From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The
Science of Early Childhood Development. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

National Survey of Early Care and Education Project Team (2014). Characteristics of Center-based
Early Care and Education Programs: Initial Findings from the National Survey of Early Care and
Education (NSECE). OPRE Report #2014-73a, Washington DC: Office of Planning, Research and
Evaluation, Administration for Children and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.

National Survey of Early Care and Education Project Team (2016). Characteristics of home-based
early care and education providers: Initial findings from the National Survey of Early Care and
Education. OPRE Report No. 2016-13, Washington, DC: Office of Planning, Research and
Evaluation, Administration for Children and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.

Peisner‐Feinberg, E.S., Burchinal, M.R., Clifford, R.M., Culkin, M.L., Howes, C., Kagan, S.L., &
Yazejian, N. (2001). The relation of preschool child‐care quality to children's cognitive and social
developmental trajectories through second grade. Child Development, 72(5), pp.1534-1553.


                                                  31
Raikes, H., Torquati, J., Wang, C., & Shjegstad, B. (2012). Parent experiences with state child care
subsidy systems and their perceptions of choice and quality in care selected. Early Education &
Development, 23(4), 558-582, DOI: 10.1080/10409289.2011.574268
Rose, K. K., & Elicker, J. (2008). Parental Decision Making About Child Care. Journal of Family
Issues, 29(9), 1161–1184. https://doi.org/10.1177/0192513X07312103.

Sandstrom, H., Giesen, L., & Chaudry, A. (2012). How contextual constraints affect low-income
working parents’ child care choices. Perspectives on Low-Income Families Brief 22. Washington,
DC: The Urban Institute.

Sonenstein, F. L. and Wolf, D. A. (1991), Satisfaction with Child Care: Perspectives of Welfare
Mothers. Journal of Social Issues, 47: 15-31.

Temple, J.A. & Reynolds, A.J. (2007). Benefits and costs of investments in preschool education:
Evidence from the Child–Parent Centers and related programs. Economics of Education
Review, 26(1), pp.126-144.

Todd, P. & Wolpin, K. (2003). On the Specification and Estimation of the Production Function for
Cognitive Achievement. Economic Journal, 113, F3-F33.

U.S. Department of Education. (2014). U.S. Department of Education National Center for Education
Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics. Tables 202-50 & 202.60 USGPO, Washington, DC.
Accessible at https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/current_tables.asp.

Vandell, D., & Wolfe, B. (2000). Child care quality: Does it matter and does it need to be
improved? (Vol. 78). University of Wisconsin—Madison: Institute for Research on Poverty.

Weber, R. (2011). Understanding Parents’ Child Care Decision-Making: A Foundation for Policy
making, OPRE Research-to-Policy, Research-to-Practice Brief OPRE 2011-12. Washington, DC:
Office of Planning, Research and Evaluation, Administration for Children and Families, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.




                                                  32
                          Figure 1: Positive Response Rate, by Caregiver Education and Wage Level

                         45                                                                ns
                                                                                    38.2
                         40
Positive Response Rate


                                                         34.6
                         35
                              28.3                               29.4 *
                         30
                                                                                                25.5 *
                                     24.0
                         25
                                                                                                         18.0*
                         20
                                            13.5
                         15
                                                                          9.6 *
                         10
                          5
                          0
                                5


                                0


                                5




                                                           5


                                                           0


                                                           5




                                                                                         5


                                                                                         0


                                                                                         5
                              $1


                              $2


                              $2




                                                         $1


                                                         $2


                                                         $2




                                                                                       $1


                                                                                       $2


                                                                                       $2
                            0-


                            5-


                            0-




                                                       0-


                                                       5-


                                                       0-




                                                                                     0-


                                                                                     5-


                                                                                     0-
                         $1


                         $1


                         $2




                                                    $1


                                                    $1


                                                    $2




                                                                                  $1


                                                                                  $1


                                                                                  $2
                              High School              AA Degree                   BA Degree




                                                            33
    Figure 2: Positive Response Rate, by Caregiver Car Ownership and Wage Level


                         40
                                                                                    ns
                                   33.4                                      33.8
                         35
Positive Response Rate


                                                                                               29.1 *
                         30
                                                23.7
                         25

                         20
                                                            12.3                                             14.6 *
                         15

                         10

                          5

                          0
                                     5



                                                 0



                                                              5




                                                                               5



                                                                                            0



                                                                                                               5
                                   $1



                                               $2



                                                            $2




                                                                             $1



                                                                                          $2



                                                                                                             $2
                                 0-



                                             5-



                                                          0-




                                                                           0-



                                                                                        5-



                                                                                                           0-
                              $1



                                          $1



                                                       $2




                                                                        $1



                                                                                     $1



                                                                                                        $2
                                          No Car                                         Car




                                                                   34
                Figure 3: Positive Response Rate, by Caregiver Availability and Wage Level


                         40
                                                                                    ns
                                   32.8                                      34.6
                         35
Positive Response Rate

                                                                                                       ns
                                                                                                27.7
                         30
                                                25.1
                         25

                         20
                                                            16.4
                         15
                                                                                                             11.1 *
                         10

                          5

                          0
                                     5



                                                 0



                                                              5




                                                                               5



                                                                                            0



                                                                                                               5
                                   $1



                                               $2



                                                            $2




                                                                             $1



                                                                                          $2



                                                                                                             $2
                                 0-



                                             5-



                                                          0-




                                                                           0-



                                                                                        5-



                                                                                                           0-
                              $1



                                          $1



                                                       $2




                                                                        $1



                                                                                     $1



                                                                                                        $2
                                          Neutral                                        High




                                                                   35
        Table 1: Positive Response Rate,
              Overall and by City
City                                  Rate
Full sample                           0.247
                                     (0.431)
Atlanta                               0.182
                                     (0.386)
Boston                                0.298
                                     (0.458)
Chicago                               0.239
                                     (0.427)
Dallas                                0.230
                                     (0.421)
D.C.                                  0.257
                                     (0.437)
Philadelphia                          0.201
                                     (0.401)
Phoenix                               0.157
                                     (0.364)
Seattle                               0.410
                                     (0.492)




                      36
  Table 2: Positive Response Rate, by Caregiver Characteristic
                                    Response       Chi-Squared
                                      Rate           Statistic
Wage: $10-$15                         0.336         289.9***
                                     (0.472)
Wage: $15-$20                         0.264
                                     (0.441)
Wage: $20-$25                         0.135
                                     (0.342)

Education: high school                   0.217            23.2***
                                        (0.412)
Education: associate’s degree            0.251
                                        (0.434)
Education: bachelor’s degree             0.274
                                        (0.446)

Work Experience: 1 year                  0.219            36.1***
                                        (0.414)
Work experience: 3 years                 0.266
                                        (0.442)
Work experience: 5 years                 0.197
                                        (0.398)
Work experience: 7 years                 0.265
                                        (0.441)
Work experience: 9 years                 0.275
                                        (0.447)

Non-car owner                            0.233             8.2***
                                        (0.423)
Car owner                                0.260
                                        (0.439)

Availability: neutral                    0.253               1.8
                                        (0.435)
Availability: high                       0.240
                                        (0.427)
Notes: Standard deviations are shown in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p
< 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                  37
       Table 3: The Determinants of Receiving a Positive Parent Response
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)
Wage: $15-$20                     -0.079*** -0.079*** -0.079*** -0.076***
                                    (0.021)     (0.020)     (0.020)    (0.017)

Wage: $20-$25                          -0.201***    -0.204***    -0.204***     -0.205***
                                         (0.017)      (0.017)      (0.017)       (0.014)

Education: associate’s degree          0.054***     0.055***      0.055***     0.062***
                                        (0.019)      (0.019)       (0.019)      (0.019)

Education: bachelor’s degree           0.083***     0.085***      0.085***     0.092***
                                        (0.019)      (0.019)       (0.019)      (0.017)

Work experience: 3 years                0.051**      0.048**      0.048**       0.034*
                                        (0.022)      (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.018)

Work experience: 5 years               0.059***     0.063***      0.063***     0.069***
                                        (0.019)      (0.020)       (0.020)      (0.024)

Work experience: 7 years               0.098***     0.095***      0.096***     0.085***
                                        (0.022)      (0.022)       (0.022)      (0.026)

Work experience: 9 years                0.077**      0.078**      0.079**       0.072**
                                        (0.031)      (0.031)      (0.031)       (0.032)

Car owner                               0.024*       0.024*        0.024*       0.037**
                                        (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.014)      (0.014)

Availability: high                         -0.010       -0.010       -0.010       0.003
                                          (0.013)      (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.014)
Observations                               8,000        8,000         8,000       8,000
Treatment variables                          Y            Y             Y           Y
Parent/family controls                       N            Y             Y           Y
City fixed effects                           N            N             Y           Y
Time effects                                 N            N             N           Y
Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the application sequence level, are shown in
parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                           38
         Table 4: Heterogeneity by the Age of the Youngest Child in the Family
                                      (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)
                                      0-6       6 Months-         4-6            7+
                                   Months         3 Years       Years           Years
Wage: $15-$20                     -0.121***      -0.106***      -0.017         -0.003
                                    (0.019)        (0.025)     (0.028)         (0.036)

Wage: $20-$25                          -0.209***      -0.213***       -0.226***       -0.183***
                                        (0.020)        (0.026)         (0.029)         (0.035)

Education: associate’s degree          0.035*         0.061***        0.061**          0.114***
                                       (0.020)         (0.020)        (0.028)         (0.038)

Education: bachelor’s degree            0.035         0.101***        0.127***        0.122***
                                       (0.022)         (0.029)        (0.038)         (0.036)

Work experience: 3 years               -0.000         0.049**          0.039           0.048
                                       (0.015)        (0.024)         (0.036)         (0.031)

Work experience: 5 years                0.040          0.072*          0.050           0.120***
                                       (0.028)         (0.039)        (0.044)         (0.042)

Work experience: 7 years               0.046**        0.102***         0.043         0.143***
                                       (0.021)         (0.036)        (0.042)         (0.047)

Work experience: 9 years                0.011           0.069         0.117*          0.148**
                                       (0.030)         (0.049)        (0.059)         (0.062)

Car owner                               0.026           0.034*         0.079***        0.021
                                       (0.016)         (0.018)        (0.029)         (0.031)

Availability: high                       0.017           0.001           0.001         -0.021
                                        (0.016)         (0.019)         (0.021)        (0.030)
Observations                             2,153           2,885           1,409          1,473
Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the application sequence level, are shown in parentheses. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                 39
                                                               Table 5: Sub-Group Analyses
                              (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)              (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)        (11)
                            White        NW        Low Pay     High Pay    1 Kid     2 Kids          3+ Kids        PT           FT       No Car        Car
Wage: $15-$20             -0.079***    -0.067**    -0.155***    -0.024   -0.079*** -0.073***         -0.071*    -0.084***    -0.065***   -0.108***   -0.064***
                           (0.017)      (0.025)     (0.017)     (0.020)   (0.023)   (0.020)           (0.042)    (0.024)      (0.018)     (0.025)     (0.018)

Wage: $20-$25             -0.201***   -0.226***    -0.313***   -0.136***   -0.205***    -0.202***   -0.218***   -0.212***    -0.194***   -0.212***   -0.205***
                           (0.015)     (0.027)      (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.024)      (0.019)     (0.038)     (0.021)      (0.019)     (0.024)     (0.015)

Education: AA degree       0.075***      0.043      0.041**     0.070***      0.035     0.065***    0.136***     0.064**     0.062***     -0.008      0.089***
                            (0.018)     (0.029)     (0.019)      (0.022)     (0.021)     (0.018)     (0.043)     (0.028)      (0.013)     (0.030)      (0.019)

Education: BA degree       0.117***      0.008     0.057***     0.111***    0.059**     0.092***    0.190***     0.088***    0.096***      0.011      0.125***
                            (0.020)     (0.022)     (0.013)      (0.023)    (0.022)      (0.019)     (0.038)      (0.024)     (0.016)     (0.027)      (0.020)

Work experience: 3 yrs      0.027      0.049**       0.001      0.055**       0.023       0.030       0.060      0.050**       0.009       0.038       0.033*
                           (0.019)     (0.023)      (0.015)     (0.023)      (0.018)     (0.020)     (0.047)     (0.024)      (0.016)     (0.024)      (0.019)

Work experience: 5 yrs     0.098***      0.004      0.036*      0.089***      0.030     0.069***    0.172***      0.069*     0.066***     0.070*      0.072***
                            (0.028)     (0.026)     (0.018)      (0.030)     (0.029)     (0.024)     (0.052)      (0.034)     (0.018)     (0.040)      (0.023)

Work experience: 7 yrs     0.110***      0.018      0.044*      0.106***     0.052*     0.079***    0.191***     0.097**     0.064***     0.067*      0.094***
                            (0.027)     (0.030)     (0.023)      (0.030)     (0.027)     (0.025)     (0.061)     (0.038)      (0.018)     (0.039)      (0.026)

Work experience: 9 yrs     0.090**       0.029       0.026      0.096**       0.008      0.081**    0.207***       0.067     0.076***     -0.029      0.112***
                           (0.033)      (0.040)     (0.022)     (0.041)      (0.035)     (0.037)     (0.065)      (0.045)     (0.024)     (0.043)      (0.035)

Car owner                  0.037**     0.050**      0.027**     0.040**       0.021      0.038**     0.093**     0.038**     0.035***      0.023      0.042**
                           (0.015)     (0.019)      (0.011)     (0.019)      (0.016)     (0.017)     (0.034)     (0.018)      (0.011)     (0.016)     (0.017)

Availability: high           -0.008       0.036       0.021*      -0.006       0.012       -0.008       0.019     0.008       -0.006      0.034*       -0.006
                            (0.014)      (0.024)      (0.012)     (0.018)     (0.017)      (0.014)     (0.031)   (0.019)      (0.012)     (0.017)      (0.017)
Observations                  5,968       1,633        3,216       4,784       3,387        3,304       1,307     4,695        3,305       2,201        5,799
Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the application sequence level, are shown in parentheses. NW: non-white. PT: part-time care needed. FT: full-time care
needed. No Car: transportation not required. Car: transportation required. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                               40
            Table 6: Interpretation of the Empirical Estimates
                                                Estimated Weekly Value
                                                   (low to high range)
Panel A: Full Sample
BA degree vs. HS diploma                              [$180, $242]
AA Degree vs. HS diploma                               [$121, 163]
Car vs non-car owner                                   [$72, $97]

Panel B: Age of youngest child
0-6 months: BA degree vs. HS diploma                   [$58, $67]
6-36 months: BA degree vs. HS diploma                 [$167, $190]
                                                       [$43, $50]
0-6 months: Car vs. non-car owner
6-36 months: Car vs. non-car owner                     [$64, $64]

Panel C: Parents’ Race/Ethnicity
White: BA degree vs. HS diploma                       [$233, $296]
Non-white: BA degree vs. HS diploma                    [$14, $24]

White: Car vs. non-car owner                           [$74, $94]
Non-white: Car vs. non-car owner                      [$88, $149]
Panel D: Parents’ willingness-vs-pay
Low: BA degree vs HS diploma                           [$73, $74]
High: BA degree vs HS diploma                         [$326, $925]

Low: Car vs non-car owner                               [$35, $35]
High: Car vs non-car owner                             [$118, $333]
Notes: The Simulations shown in the table are based on point estimates
reported in column (4) of Table 3, columns (1) and (2) of Table 4, and
columns (1) through (4) of Table 5.




                                       41
             Appendix Table 1: Summary Statistics for the Treatment Variables, Overall and by City
                                 Full  Atl.      Bos.      Chic.  Dallas   D.C.     Phil.     Phoenix   Seattle
Wage: $10-$15 (%)               0.331 0.331      0.331     0.331  0.331    0.331    0.331      0.331    0.331

Wage: $15-$20 (%)               0.349    0.349    0.349    0.349   0.349   0.349    0.349     0.349     0.349

Wage: $20-$25 (%)               0.320    0.320    0.320    0.320   0.320   0.320    0.320     0.320     0.320

Education: high school (%)      0.340    0.340    0.340    0.340   0.340   0.340    0.340     0.340     0.340

Education: associate’s degree   0.346    0.346    0.346    0.346   0.346   0.346    0.346     0.346     0.346
(%)

Education: bachelor’s degree    0.314    0.314    0.314    0.314   0.314   0.314    0.314     0.314     0.314
(%)

Work experience: 1 year (%)     0.208    0.208    0.208    0.208   0.208   0.208    0.208     0.208     0.208

Work experience: 3 years (%)    0.305    0.305    0.305    0.305   0.305   0.305    0.305     0.305     0.305

Work experience: 5 years (%)    0.155    0.155    0.155    0.155   0.155   0.155    0.155     0.155     0.155

Work experience: 7 years (%)    0.189    0.189    0.189    0.189   0.189   0.189    0.189     0.189     0.189

Work experience: 9 years (%)    0.143    0.143    0.143    0.143   0.143   0.143    0.143     0.143     0.143

Car owner (%)                   0.513    0.513    0.513    0.513   0.513   0.513    0.513     0.513     0.513

Availability: high (%)          0.506    0.506    0.506    0.506   0.506   0.506    0.506     0.506     0.506




                                                      42
      Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics for the Parent and Family Characteristics, Overall and by City
                             Full      Atl.      Bos.     Chic.  Dallas    D.C.       Phil.   Phoenix Seattle
Female (%)                  0.813     0.836      0.797    0.804   0.814   0.809      0.834     0.810      0.800

Gender unknown (%)             0.062    0.047    0.060        0.062   0.064   0.067   0.053    0.067     0.073

White (%)                      0.746    0.582    0.837        0.766   0.723   0.661   0.780    0.814     0.805

Black (%)                      0.123    0.323    0.035        0.081   0.144   0.184   0.105    0.072     0.036

Hispanic (%)                   0.022    0.015    0.011        0.030   0.038   0.022   0.016    0.036     0.005

Asian (%)                      0.030    0.021    0.028        0.039   0.018   0.029   0.027    0.019     0.059

Other race/ethnicity (%)       0.030    0.025    0.035        0.037   0.028   0.034   0.026    0.014     0.041

Race/ethnicity unknown (%)     0.050    0.034    0.054        0.047   0.049   0.070   0.046    0.045     0.054

Number of children (no.)       1.778    1.730    1.792        1.806   1.808   1.767   1.808    1.780     1.731

Full-time care needed (%)      0.413    0.425    0.320        0.461   0.441   0.425   0.383    0.445     0.405

Car required (%)               0.725    0.835    0.661        0.618   0.793   0.678   0.737    0.793     0.684

Highest hourly pay offer ($)   19.42    18.58    21.31        18.80   18.52   19.85   19.17    17.67     21.43




                                                         43
                   Appendix Table 3: Balance Tests of the Treatment Variables Across the Family Characteristics
                             (1a)       (1b)      (2a)       (2b)      (3a)      (3b)       (4a)     (4b)        (5a)                     (5b)
                            White       NW        Low        High     1 Kid    2+ Kids       PT       FT       No Car                     Car
                                                  Pay        Pay
Wage: $10-$15               0.331      0.331     0.344      0.322*    0.333     0.329      0.334    0.327       0.325                     0.333
Wage: $15-$20               0.350      0.342     0.342      0.354     0.356     0.344      0.345    0.355       0.353                     0.347
Wage: $20-$25               0.319      0.327     0.314      0.324     0.310     0.327      0.322    0.317       0.322                     0.319

Education: high school         0.339       0.340       0.328       0.348*      0.330       0.347      0.341       0.339       0.335       0.342
Education: AA degree           0.344       0.357       0.356       0.340       0.353       0.341      0.341       0.353       0.350       0.344
Education: BA degree           0.317       0.303       0.316       0.313       0.317       0.312      0.318       0.308       0.314       0.314

Work experience: 1 yr          0.209       0.218       0.225       0.197*      0.204       0.211      0.199       0.221*      0.214       0.206
Work experience: 3 yrs         0.310       0.282*      0.301       0.308       0.313       0.300      0.311       0.296       0.296       0.309
Work experience: 5 yrs         0.154       0.157       0.160       0.152       0.161       0.151      0.149       0.164*      0.163       0.152
Work experience: 7 yrs         0.185       0.202       0.183       0.193       0.178       0.197*     0.197       0.178*      0.186       0.190
Work experience: 9 yrs         0.141       0.140       0.132       0.151*      0.144       0.142      0.144       0.142       0.141       0.144

Car owner                      0.517       0.502       0.508       0.516       0.518       0.509      0.527       0.494*      0.503       0.517

Availability: high              0.507       0.487       0.516     0.500       0.515      0.499         0.506        0.506       0.496      0.510
Observations                    5,968       1,633       3,216     4,784       3,387      4,611         4,695        3,305       2,201      5,799
Notes: NW: non-white. PT: part-time care needed. FT: full-time care needed. No Car: transportation not required. Car: transportation
required. * indicates that the pairwise difference in the means of the treatment variables is statistically significant at the 0.10 level.




                                                                       44
         Appendix Table 4: OLS Results for the Likelihood of Receiving a
                          Negative Parental Response
                                    (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)
Wage: $15-$20                    0.035***      0.036***     0.036***     0.044**
                                  (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.019)

Wage: $20-$25                          0.169***      0.170***     0.170***      0.172***
                                        (0.014)       (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.020)

Education: associate’s degree          -0.029**      -0.029**      -0.029**     -0.026**
                                        (0.014)       (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.012)

Education: bachelor’s degree           -0.034**      -0.034**      -0.034**      -0.023
                                        (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.015)

Work experience: 3 years                -0.018         -0.017      -0.017        -0.018
                                        (0.016)       (0.016)      (0.017)       (0.018)

Work experience: 5 years                -0.027         -0.026      -0.026        -0.016
                                        (0.020)       (0.020)      (0.020)       (0.020)

Work experience: 7 years                -0.028         -0.027      -0.027        -0.024
                                        (0.019)       (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.019)

Work experience: 9 years               -0.042**      -0.037*       -0.038*       -0.018
                                        (0.020)      (0.020)       (0.020)       (0.027)

Car owner                               -0.014         -0.014      -0.014        -0.011
                                        (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.012)

Availability: high                         0.000         -0.002       -0.002      -0.001
                                          (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.012)     (0.011)
Observations                               8,000          8,000        8,000       8,000
Treatment variables                          Y              Y            Y           Y
Parent/family controls                       N              Y            Y           Y
City fixed effects                           N              N            Y           Y
Time effects                                 N              N            N           Y
Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the application sequence level, are shown in
parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                            45
         Appendix Table 5: OLS Results for the Likelihood of Receiving a Positive Parental Response, by City
                              (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)                    (8)
                              Atl.       Bos.        Chic.      Dallas       D.C.        Phil.       Phx.                  Seattle
Wage: $15-$20               -0.042       0.057    -0.138*** -0.166*** -0.138*** -0.141*** -0.095***                         0.048
                            (0.028)     (0.044)     (0.035)    (0.026)     (0.030)     (0.027)     (0.033)                 (0.056)

Wage: $20-$25                   -0.217***      0.035      -0.290*** -0.295*** -0.326*** -0.280*** -0.159***                -0.115*
                                  (0.030)     (0.036)       (0.025)   (0.032)   (0.031)   (0.028)   (0.029)                (0.058)

Education: associate’s degree   0.117***       0.055        -0.022      0.058*        -0.005     0.067**      0.071**     0.145***
                                 (0.031)      (0.044)      (0.033)      (0.031)      (0.035)     (0.025)      (0.034)      (0.048)

Education: bachelor’s degree    0.137***       0.006       0.063*        0.047       0.078**     0.126***     0.125***    0.165***
                                 (0.031)      (0.046)      (0.035)      (0.047)      (0.035)      (0.040)      (0.026)     (0.056)

Work experience: 3 years           0.032       0.008        0.059        0.023        0.021      0.055**       -0.041      0.113*
                                  (0.043)     (0.035)      (0.037)      (0.036)      (0.029)     (0.025)       (0.031)     (0.056)

Work experience: 5 years        0.137***       -0.004       0.059        0.035      0.142***      0.085*       -0.005       0.111
                                 (0.039)      (0.062)      (0.049)      (0.051)      (0.045)      (0.047)      (0.044)     (0.075)

Work experience: 7 years         0.107**       0.053        0.048        0.000       0.089**     0.188***       0.046      0.166**
                                 (0.041)      (0.062)      (0.049)      (0.047)      (0.044)      (0.035)      (0.045)     (0.066)

Work experience: 9 years        0.188***       -0.021       0.050        0.008       0.104*      0.110**       -0.049      0.206*
                                 (0.059)      (0.063)      (0.065)      (0.070)      (0.058)     (0.053)       (0.046)     (0.103)

Car owner                        0.060**       0.046      0.116***      -0.002        0.004      0.042**      0.039**      -0.005
                                 (0.026)      (0.032)      (0.029)      (0.029)      (0.019)     (0.019)      (0.019)      (0.039)

Availability: high                -0.033      -0.099***      0.031        0.042*      0.041*     0.053***      0.042**      -0.054
                                  (0.022)       (0.020)     (0.033)       (0.023)    (0.022)       (0.018)      (0.020)     (0.037)
Observations                       1,000         1,000       1,000         1,000      1,000         1,000        1,000       1,000
Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the application sequence level, are shown in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                46
    Appendix Table 6: Experimental Rounds by Wage and Education on Experience
                               1 Year 3 Years 5 Years 7 Years 9 Years
Wage (per hour) & Degree         Exp     Exp.     Exp.    Exp.      Exp.    Total
$10-15 High School                1                         1         2       4
$10-15 Associates                 1        2                1                 4
$10-15 Degree                     1        1       1                  1       4
$15-20 High School                                 2        2                 4
$15-20 Associates                          2                1         1       4
$15-20 Degree                     2        2                                  4
$20-25 High School                                 1        2         1       4
$20-25 Associates                 2        1       1                          4
$20-25 Degree                              3       1                          4
Total                             7       11       6        7         5       36




                                       47
             Appendix Table 7: Response Rate Breakdown
                                                          Positive
Wage & School        Experience   Car   Availability   Response Rate
$10-15 High School       1        No       Low             0.22
                         7        Yes      Low             0.33
                         9        No        Hi             0.24
                         9        Yes       Hi             0.26
$10-15 Associates        1        Yes      Low             0.28
                         3        No        Hi             0.40
                         3        Yes       Hi             0.33
                         7        No       Low             0.29
$10-15 Degree            1        No       Low             0.37
                         3        Yes      Low             0.34
                         5        Yes       Hi             0.40
                         9        No        Hi             0.33
$15-20 High School       5        No        Hi             0.17
                         5        Yes      Low             0.25
                         7        No       Low             0.26
                         7        Yes       Hi             0.26
$15-20 Associates        3        No       Low             0.20
                         3        Yes      Low             0.29
                         7        Yes       Hi             0.28
                         9        No        Hi             0.32
$15-20 Degree            1        No       Low             0.16
                         1        Yes      Low             0.26
                         3        No        Hi             0.20
                         3        Yes       Hi             0.28
$20-25 High School       5        No        Hi             0.08
                         7        No       Low             0.14
                         7        Yes      Low             0.16
                         9        Yes       Hi             0.12
$20-25 Associates        1        No        Hi             0.05
                         1        Yes       Hi             0.06
                         3        Yes      Low             0.13
                         5        No       Low             0.13
$20-25 Degree            3        No        Hi             0.16
                         3        Yes       Hi             0.14
                         3        Yes      Low             0.18
                         5        No       Low             0.12




                                  48
