                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



THE EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS ON THE DISABILITY INSURANCE PROGRAM:
                  EVIDENCE FROM THE GREAT RECESSION

                                         Nicole Maestas
                                        Kathleen J. Mullen
                                        Alexander Strand

                                        Working Paper 25338
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25338


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2018




 This research was supported by 1) the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) through grant
 #1 DRC12000002-04 to the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) as part of the SSA
 Disability Research Consortium; and 2) the National Institutes of Health/National Institute on
 Aging (1R01AG056239). The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the
 author(s) and do not represent the views of SSA, NIH, any agency of the United States
 Government, or the NBER. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor
 any of their employees, makes any warranty, expressed or implied, or assumes any legal liability
 or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of the contents of this research.
 Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name,
 trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply endorsement,
 recommendation or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. We thank
 Francoise Becker, Fred Galeas, George Green and Thuy Ho for sharing their expertise with the
 data; Ken Couch, Austin Nichols, and David Stapleton for helpful comments; and Linda Li for
 diligent research assistance.

 At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
 research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25338.ack

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2018 by Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. All rights reserved. Short
 sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
 provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Economic Conditions on the Disability Insurance Program: Evidence from the
Great Recession
Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand
NBER Working Paper No. 25338
December 2018
JEL No. H51,H53,H55,J14

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine the effect of cyclical job displacement during the Great Recession on the Social
Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) program. Exploiting variation in the severity and timing of
the recession across states, we estimate the effect of unemployment on SSDI applications and
awards. We find the Great Recession induced nearly one million SSDI applications that otherwise
would not have been filed, of which 41.8 percent were awarded benefits, resulting in over
400,000 new beneficiaries who made up 8.9 percent of all SSDI entrants between 2008-2012.
More than one-half of the recession-induced awards were made on appeal. The induced
applicants had less severe impairments than the average applicant. Only 9 percent had the most
severe, automatically-qualifying impairments, 33 percent had functional impairments and no
transferable skills, and the rest were denied for having insufficiently severe impairments and/or
transferable skills. Our estimates imply the Great Recession increased claims processing costs by
$2.960 billion during 2008-2012, and SSDI benefit obligations by $55.730 billion in present
value, or $97.365 billion including both SSDI and Medicare benefits.

Nicole Maestas                                  Alexander Strand
Department of Health Care Policy                Social Security Administration
Harvard Medical School                          Office of Retirement and Disability Policy
180 Longwood Avenue                             500 E. St., NW
Boston, MA 02115                                Washington, DC 20254
and NBER                                        Alexander.Strand@ssa.gov
maestas@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Kathleen J. Mullen
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
Kathleen_Mullen@rand.org
1. Introduction

    Nearly nine million former workers receive Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI)
benefits, a number equivalent to about five percent of the U.S. labor force. As the program has
expanded, observers have debated the degree to which this program growth is due to past policy
changes and anticipated growth in the insured population, or declining labor market
opportunities for low-skilled workers. The SSDI program was designed to insure workers against
permanent earnings losses arising from a severe, and long-lasting disability. While some
disabilities qualify on medical criteria alone, disability awards can also take account of
vocational factors that indicate skill transferability—education, prior jobs, and age. Individuals
who have enough remaining work capacity to perform a prior job do not qualify for SSDI
benefits; but those whose remaining work capacity and skills do not transfer to existing jobs,
may be awarded SSDI benefits under medical-vocational criteria.
    Because labor market opportunities factor into SSDI decisions, low-skilled, older workers
may be especially likely to turn to the SSDI program should they lose their job during a cyclical
downturn. Workers who are laid off from a long-term job experience near-permanent losses in
earnings (Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan, 1993; Von Wachter, Song, and Manchester, 2009),
and these losses are especially large for older workers and those who are laid off during a
recession (Davis and von Wachter, 2011). For such people, the SSDI program is the only
available source of long-term earnings replacement prior to age 62—but only if they also have a
serious health problem.
    About 40 percent of SSDI applicants have at least some ability to work (Maestas, Mullen
and Strand, 2013). It is this group for whom the decision to participate in the labor force versus
apply for SSDI benefits may be sensitive to economic conditions. If they have a suitable job
match (possibly one that accommodates their disability), they choose to work; but it they lose
their job, they turn to the SSDI program. It is unknown whether these economically-induced
applicants are 1) workers with very severe (“listing-level”) impairments (e.g., chronic kidney
disease, Crohn’s Disease with complication), who qualify automatically regardless of whether
they have transferable skills; 2) workers with less severe functional impairments who lack
transferable skills, and therefore qualify under medical-vocational provisions, especially if they


                                                 1
are age 55 or older; or 3) workers with non-severe impairments or some transferable skills, who
do not qualify. 1
     Once people qualify for SSDI benefits, they rarely re-enter the labor force. Although SSDI
has incentive programs to encourage beneficiaries to work, 2 participation rates are low, perhaps
because the expected compensation from employment for someone with reduced earnings
capacity is often less than the value of stable cash benefits and Medicare coverage, especially
when factoring in the risk of future job loss. As a result, some productive workers who are
displaced during a downturn are not available for re-employment during the subsequent recovery
because they have entered the SSDI program; this creates efficiency losses for the economy as a
whole, and possibly also for the individual who foregoes the possibility of future income
growth. 3
     In this paper, we estimate the effect of cyclical job displacement during the Great Recession
on SSDI program participation. According to the National Bureau of Economic Research, the
Great Recession began in December 2007, when the national unemployment rate was 5.0
percent. In the months that followed, unemployment rose rapidly, peaking at 10.0 percent in
October 2009, four months after the recovery officially began. Figure 1 juxtaposes the monthly
unemployment rate (left axis) against the number of SSDI applications filed each month, and the
number of SSDI awards ultimately made to those applicants. 4 Organized in this manner, it is
visually evident that SSDI claims rose in lockstep with the unemployment rate, and so did SSDI
awards. 5 Figure 1 also reveals there were two distinct waves of applications during the Great


1
  According to Title 20 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the Listing of Impairments defines impairments that are
severe enough to prevent any gainful activity (§ 416.925) whereas the more general definition of disability is the
inability to do any substantial gainful activity (§ 404.1505). Also, our usage of “severe” follows one of several SSA
usages: “Severe means medical severity as used by the medical community. The term does not have the same
meaning as it does when we use it in connection with a finding at the second step of the sequential evaluation
processes… “ (Pt. 404, Subpt. P, App. 1).
2
  These include the Ticket to Work program, the Trial Work period, exclusion of Impairment-Related Work
Expenses from earnings, and other related provisions.
3
  Burkhauser and Daly (2011) show that people with disabilities have experienced no real income growth over the
past several decades.
4
  This is different from official statistics that would show awards by month of award. Because there can be
substantial time lags between filing and award, our method of plotting awards by initial filing date makes it easier to
detect the time series correlation between the unemployment rate and SSDI awards. In the figure, the number of
claims and awards are adjusted for monthly seasonality, smoothed using a 3-month moving average, and re-centered
around their initial value in October 2006, all to aid visual clarity.
5
  We use “awards” and “allowances” interchangeably, although the Social Security Administration draws an
administrative distinction between them. Specifically, applicants can be allowed benefits on medical review, but not

                                                           2
Recession. The number of awards appears to have increased sharply during the first wave, but
not as much during the second wave. This pattern motivates our use of a distributed lag model in
the empirical analysis to explore the extent of intertemporal shifting of SSDI applications in
response to economic shocks. The ratio of the award and application curves implies that the
SSDI allowance rate decreased during the Great Recession, which in turn suggests the recession-
induced claims were from applicants with less severe impairments, who in better economic times
would have worked.
     While compelling, Figure 1 is inconclusive owing to the possibility of confounding secular
trends in both claims and allowances. There are at least two potential confounders. First, the
Social Security Administration (SSA) began focused reviews of appellate claims decided by
administrative law judges in 2011 (Ray, 2014). These reviews revealed systematic decision
errors by judges, which once corrected, resulted in a steady reduction in the hearing-level
allowance rate. A second potentially confounding factor is demographic: the oldest members of
the Baby Boom cohort (b. 1946-1964) became eligible for early Social Security retirement
benefits in 2008 and full retirement benefits in 2012. Indeed, after decades of nearly continuous
growth, the size of the SSDI caseload began to plateau in 2010 (Social Security Administration,
2016; Table 3). Thus, as the leading edge of the Baby Boom began to age out of the disability
program at full retirement age and into the retirement program, the applicant pool could have
become slightly younger on average, resulting in relatively fewer applicants who would have
qualified at a higher rate due to their being ages 55 and older.
     Our analysis uses the universe of SSDI applications filed between 2006-2012 and tracks
their outcomes through the appellate level. To address potential confounding from secular trends,
we make use of variation in the timing and severity of the recession across U.S. states by
regressing the number of applications of a given type filed by state and month on state-month
unemployment. 6 We depart from the previous literature by specifying the independent variable
of interest as the state-month count of unemployed rather than the unemployment rate since the
denominator of the unemployment rate may change endogenously in response to economic
shocks. This methodology allows us to estimate the effect of cyclical unemployment on SSDI


awarded benefits if they are subsequently found to be ineligible for technical reasons (e.g., return to substantial
gainful activity).
6
  Bitler and Hoynes (2016) use a similar design to investigate the effects of the Great Recession on anti-poverty
programs.

                                                           3
applications and awards. Because our data also record the reasons for allowance or denial, we
can investigate the characteristics of recession-induced applicants and beneficiaries, and shed
light on the important question of whether the induced new beneficiaries were inframarginal
individuals who could have qualified automatically before the Great Recession but who preferred
to work as long as they had a job, or whether they were people without transferable skills whose
disabilities were closer to the margins of eligibility.
    Our analysis yields six key findings. First, the Great Recession induced new SSDI
applications that otherwise would not have been filed, and, to a lesser degree, accelerated the
timing of applications that would have been filed anyway at a later date. Specifically, we
estimate the Great Recession led 1.4 million former workers to apply for SSDI benefits during
2008-2012; nearly 1 million (72 percent) were induced in the sense they otherwise would not
have applied, while the rest (28 percent) would have applied anyway, and the timing of their
application was accelerated by only a few months. On net, the induced applicants (excluding the
accelerated applicants) accounted for 11.6 percent of all applications filed during 2008-2012.
    Second, more than one-half million of the recession-induced applicants were awarded
benefits; over 400,000 were induced awards to people who otherwise would not have entered the
SSDI program, while the rest were accelerated awards to people who would have entered the
program anyway at a later date. On net, the induced awardees (excluding accelerated awardees)
made up 8.9 percent of all new beneficiaries who entered SSDI during 2008-2012.
    Third, the Great Recession had little effect on the number of awards made at the initial
review level, but increased awards made at the appellate levels. The number of awards on appeal
rose by 5.0 percent at the reconsideration level and by 3.3 percent at the hearing level—for every
one-point increase in the unemployment rate. Compounding matters, the induced applicants were
much more likely to file an appeal than the average applicant if they were initially denied. As a
result, 53 percent of the induced new beneficiaries were allowed on appeal, compared to 37
percent of all new beneficiaries during 2008-2012. Separating the two types of appeals,
reconsideration awards accounted for 14 percent of induced awards, compared to 7.5 percent of
all awards, and awards made by administrative law judges accounted for 39 percent of induced
awards, compared to 30 percent of all awards.
    Fourth, we find the induced applicants had less severe impairments than the average
applicant, and those who were awarded benefits were more likely to be allowed on the basis of

                                                   4
functional limitations and no transferable skills. The mean allowance rate among induced
applicants was 42 percent (accounting for appeals), substantially lower than the average
allowance rate of 54 percent for the system as a whole, and indicating the induced applicants had
less severe impairments than the average SSDI applicant. Further, allowances to applicants with
listing-level impairments—automatically qualifying conditions that are identifiably severe —did
not rise by nearly as much as allowances to applicants for medical-vocational reasons—people
with functional disabilities and no transferable skills. Denials spiked for applicants with non-
severe and/or temporary disabilities. Furthermore, 62.3 percent of induced applicants and 58.7
percent of induced entrants had difficulty-to-verify conditions such as musculoskeletal and
mental diagnoses. Overall, the induced applicants were either allowed for medical-vocational
reasons (33 percent) or denied (58 percent); relatively few were allowed for severe, listing-level
impairments (9 percent).
    Fifth, because the induced applicants had less severe impairments than the average
applicant, and also more likely to appeal an initial denial, we find the Great Recession was only
partially responsible for the much-noted reduction in hearing allowance rates among
administrative law judges since 2009. In fact, absent the effects of the Great Recession, the
hearing-level allowance rate would have begun to decline sharply anyway, beginning with the
appellate hearings held for applications that were initially filed in 2010 (hearings that would have
been held in 2011 or later, given lengthy wait times for hearings during this period). Thus, the
Great Recession cannot explain the significant decline in the hearing-level allowance rate that
occurred after 2011, when SSA introduced focused reviews and new training initiatives to
improve the quality of judicial decision-making.
    Lastly, our estimates imply that the Great Recession had a significant impact on SSDI
program costs, both administrative processing costs and benefit obligations. We estimate
processing costs rose by $2.960 billion dollars during 2008-2012 as the system responded to an
influx of induced applications (excluding the accelerated applications), many of which were
reviewed more than once (and often three times) as they progressed from initial review to
reconsideration to the hearing level. The impact of the Great Recession on benefit obligations
was even more substantial because very few people leave the SSDI program to return to work
and qualification for SSDI benefits confers entitlement to Medicare benefits. Based on our
finding that the average induced beneficiary was 53 years old and therefore would claim SSDI

                                                 5
benefits for an average of 13 years (until death or aging out), our estimates imply the Great
Recession added $55.730 billion to SSDI benefit obligations in present value, or $97.365 billion
including both SSDI and Medicare benefits.
     These findings are novel and important contributions to the literature. Surprisingly, there are
no estimates of the effects of cyclical unemployment on SSDI program participation that are both
comprehensive (in accounting for applications and awards, including awards on appeal) and
nationally generalizable to the U.S. While Autor and Duggan (2003) showed that structural
changes in labor demand for lower-skilled workers in the 1980s and 1990s contributed to SSDI
program growth during that period, only a handful of studies have examined cyclical
fluctuations. Stapleton et al. (1998) showed that initial SSDI applications were responsive to the
annual unemployment rate across states during the 1980s and early 1990s, as did Cutler, Meara,
and Richards-Shubik (2012) and Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2015) for the 2000s. 7 In addition,
prior work has documented that people who apply for SSDI benefits during a recession have
greater work capacity than those who apply during expansions (Coe and Rutledge, 2013, and
Lindner, Burdick, and Meseguer, 2017) and have experienced a longer spell of non-employment
(Maestas, Mullen, and Strand, 2015).
     Stapleton et al. (1998) had data on initial awards (but not awards on appeal) and found that
these increased among men, but not women, in response to increases in the unemployment rate
in the 1980s through early 1990s. In contrast, Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2015) found initial
awards decreased in response to increases in the unemployment rate during 1992-2006, and were
unresponsive during 2006-2012, the period that included the Great Recession. Like the Stapleton
et al. (1998) study, Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2015) examined initial awards, but not awards
on appeal. The omission of awards on appeal is an important limitation. Historically, awards on
appeal have accounted for around 40 percent of all SSDI awards (Social Security Administration,
2016; Table 60). 8 Thus, for a full accounting of the effects of recessions on the disability
program, one must track and account for claims that progress beyond the initial review level.



7
  Consistent with these studies of the SSDI program, Nichols, Schmidt and Sevak (2017) found that applications for
the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program (the means-tested counterpart to SSDI), were responsive to the
unemployment rate during the Great Recession.
8
  This is because more than one-half of applicants whose application is initially denied files an appeal and the
allowance rate on appeal to an administrative law judge is higher than the allowance rate on initial review—59
percent versus 34 percent during 2006-2012.

                                                        6
     Lastly, two papers have examined the local effects of cyclicality on SSDI benefit payments
in areas heavily affected by extraction industries. 9 In a study of Appalachia in the 1970s and
1980s, Black et al. (2002) found SSDI payments responded counter-cyclically to earnings shocks
caused by the coal boom and bust cycle. A recent paper by Charles et al. (2018) extends the
Black et al. analysis to oil and gas price shocks between 1970 and 2010 and finds a similar
elasticity of SSDI payments with respect to area-level earnings. While these studies provide
important evidence of cyclical effects, neither is generalizable to the national level (by design),
and neither had the ability to directly measure and track the inflow of induced applications and
awards because they did not use claims data. Claims microdata is necessary to estimate the
number and characteristics of recession-induced SSDI applications and awards, the implied
lifetime costs of the benefits awarded to induced beneficiaries, including Medicare benefits, and
the administrative costs of processing an influx of recession-induced applications as they moved
through the review system.
     We next describe the institutional details of the SSDI program that are important for
understanding the analysis. This is followed by a summary of our administrative data files in
Section 3 and our empirical strategy in Section 4. Section 5 presents our main results, and
includes subsections on dynamic effects of the Great Recession, net effects for the system overall
and by administrative review level, and heterogeneous effects by type of applicant and type of
impairment. In Section 6, we discuss implications of our findings for the SSDI program’s
performance, in terms of the system’s allowance rates, administrative processing costs, and
financial obligations to beneficiaries. Section 7 concludes.


2. Background on SSDI

     The Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) program insures covered workers against
loss of ability to perform substantial gainful activity in the economy because of a medical
impairment that is expected to last at least twelve months (or result in death). The disability
decision process proceeds in five steps. Step 1 is performed by SSA field offices, and consists of
technical verification of SSDI insured status and confirmation that the applicant is not engaged in
substantial gainful activity (SGA), defined in 2018 as earning $1,180 per month or more (if not

9
 Rege et al. (2009) found that plant downsizing increased disability insurance claims of affected workers in
Norway.

                                                         7
blind). If these criteria are met, the field office collects all required application materials, and
forwards the application to the state-run Disability Determination Service (DDS) office, where it
is assigned to a disability examiner for medical review (Steps 2-5). Step 2 requires the examiner
to determine if the individual’s impairment is non-severe or temporary (i.e., expected to last less
than twelve months). If this is the case, then the claim is denied on this basis. Step 3 requires the
examiner to determine whether the applicant has a medical impairment that appears on SSA’s
“Listing of Impairments,” which includes over 100 impairments that are thought to be so severe
that they preclude any gainful activity. If the applicant is found to have a listed impairment (or an
unlisted impairment that “equals” the severity of a listed impairment), then the applicant
automatically qualifies for SSDI without further review of their actual functional capacity and
transferability of skills to other occupations. If the applicant does not have a listed impairment,
he or she is not denied benefits but proceeds to Step 4. At Step 4, the examiner determines
whether the individual is capable of performing any of their past jobs. If the applicant is found
able to perform a past job then his claim is denied; otherwise, it is evaluated at Step 5, for which
the examiner determines whether the applicant has the functional capacity and skills to perform
any job in the national economy—based on the vocational factors of age, education and work
history, regardless of whether such work exists in the applicant’s area of residence. An applicant
found capable of work is denied benefits; an applicant found incapable of work is allowed
benefits based on his combination of medical and vocational factors.
      Applicants denied benefits by the DDS have the option to appeal the decision. 10 The next
level of appeal depends on the applicant’s state of residence. Applicants residing in “non-
prototype” states appeal again to the DDS for “reconsideration” of their case; those denied at the
reconsideration level then have the option to request a hearing before an administrative law
judge. Applicants residing in “prototype” states skip the reconsideration step and go straight to
the hearing level. The ten prototype states are: Alabama, Alaska, California (LA North and LA
West Only), Colorado, Louisiana, Michigan, Missouri, New Hampshire, New York, and
Pennsylvania. At the hearing level, the judge is instructed to follow the same five-step disability
determination process as the DDS examiners, but new evidence may be presented. Applicants



10
  Allowed claimants may also appeal other aspects of their case, such as the onset date determined by the examiner,
which has implications for when applicants are eligible to begin receiving benefits (or back pay). We exclude such
appeals from our analysis.

                                                         8
whose claim is denied at the hearing level may further appeal to the Appeals Council. The
number of cases that progress to the Appeals Council is very small. 11 Applicants denied by the
Appeals Council can take their case to federal court, but this, too, is uncommon.
     Applications that progress to the hearing level can take a very long time—in some cases,
several years—to resolve. At the outset of the Great Recession, in fiscal year 2008, the average
processing time for hearing requests was 514 days. 12 Using administrative data on initial claims
filed in 2005, Autor et al. (2015) estimate an average cumulative processing time of 33.5 months
for claims that progressed to the hearing level, with half of all hearing-level claims taking at least
28.6 months to progress from initial filing date to final decision and 90 percent of these claims
taking at least 63.9 months. Hence, to observe the full effect of the Great Recession on the SSDI
caseload, it is important to allow for a very long follow-up period.


3. Data and Summary Statistics

     Our analysis data consists of all SSDI applications 13 filed between October 2006 and
December 2012 that received medical review by a state DDS. 14 We extract these application
records from the Social Security Administration’s “831” files. Each record in the 831 data
system represents a disability determination rendered by the DDS on either initial review or
reconsideration, and contains the application filing date, the applicant’s state of residence, the
DDS decision (e.g., allowed or denied), and the basis for the decision (i.e., why the application
was allowed or denied). Next, we determine which applicants subsequently appealed their initial
determination, to either the reconsideration level, the hearing level, or both. 15 Hearing-level
appeals are recorded in the Office of Hearings Operations (OHO) Case Processing and
Management System (CPMS). We match our database of applications to these systems and
record whether one or more appeals were filed at any point through September 2016, and if so,


11
   Specifically, the Appeals Council received 128,113 requests in FY2017. See
https://www.ssa.gov/appeals/DataSets/07_AC_Requests_For_Review.html, accessed 12/30/17.
12
   See SSA’s Annual Performance Plan for Fiscal Year 2010 and Revised Final Annual Performance Plan for Fiscal
Year 2009, pg. 11, https://www.ssa.gov/budget/hist/FY2010/FinalFY10APP.pdf, accessed 12/30/17.
13
   We include SSDI applications that are concurrently evaluated for SSI eligibility.
14
   We exclude technical denials, most of which are rendered by local field offices prior to sending the application to
the DDS for medical review. Common reasons for technical denial include insufficient work credits (resulting in
non-insured status) and engagement in substantial work activity.
15
   A small number of appeals progress to the Appeals Council or federal courts, but we do not track these outcomes
because they are too few to significantly impact system-wide allowance rates.

                                                          9
the outcome of the appeal. Consequently, we observe the universe of SSDI applications filed
between October 2006 and December 2012, and any appeals that occurred up to 10 years after
the initial application. 16
     Our primary measure of economic conditions is the state-level count of unemployed
persons, measured monthly and seasonally-adjusted, from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS). 17 The official unemployment level measures the number of “jobless persons who are
available to take a job and have actively sought work in the past four weeks.” The
unemployment rate, i.e., the unemployment level as a percent of the labor force, is one of several
major macroeconomic indicators that are used to monitor and define fluctuations in economic
activity. Empirically, changes in the unemployment rate are negatively correlated with changes
in GDP growth (Abel et al., 2013), another major indicator used to define economic expansions
and contractions. While the unemployment rate is the official measure of labor underutilization
in the economy, it has several well-known limitations. The main concern is that it understates
labor utilization because during a prolonged contraction many people who would prefer to work
become discouraged and stop searching; once that happens, they are no longer considered part of
the labor force, and they drop out of both the numerator and the denominator of the measured
unemployment rate. In addition, the official unemployment rate counts the underemployed
(people who are working fewer hours than they would like to for economic reasons) as if they
were fully employed. As a result, BLS offers several alternative measures of labor
underutilization designed to specifically capture discouraged workers, the long-term
unemployed, and involuntary part-time workers. Unfortunately, none of these series are
measured at the state-month level during our period of interest. Nonetheless, the different
measures of labor underutilization track one another closely over time, including across business
cycles, and this holds for states as well as the nation (Local Area Unemployment Statistics,
2017).
     In October 2006, the start of the fiscal year before the Great Recession began, the national
unemployment rate was only 4.4 percent. Although unemployment subsequently rose in all
states during the Great Recession, there was substantial variation across states in the timing and


16
   Our sample includes reapplications. A small fraction (3.3%) of applicants submit a new application to the state
DDS after being denied, often concurrent with an appeal (Autor, Maestas, Mullen and Strand, 2015).
17
   The unemployment series were extracted using the local area unemployment statistics searchable database
available at https://www.bls.gov/lau/#data.

                                                         10
magnitude of the increase in unemployment and in the subsequent recovery. Figure 2 shows the
variation in the unemployment rate by state and month between 2006 and 2012, with states
grouped by Social Security region for visual clarity. States within the same region often had very
different experiences. For example, the unemployment rate spiked rapidly in Michigan prior to
rising in nearby states, reached a high of 14.2 percent in late 2009, then declined relatively
quickly. Nevada also experienced rapid growth in unemployment, but high unemployment was
more persistent there, remaining above 10 percent well into 2012. States in the Dallas Region
(Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas) were notably less affected by the
Great Recession than states in other regions (although even there the unemployment rate
doubled), and two states—North Dakota and Nebraska—had low unemployment to begin with
and peaked at just 4.3 and 4.8 percent unemployment, respectively, during the Great Recession.
    Between October 2006 and December 2012, 10.2 million individuals applied for SSDI
benefits. As shown in Table 1, their mean age was 46.6, females comprised 48 percent, and 52
percent filed concurrently for means-tested SSI benefits—an indicator of impoverishment. About
one-quarter of applicants resided in a prototype state, and therefore would skip the
reconsideration step if their case progressed to an appeal. Some 32 percent of applicants applied
because of a musculoskeletal impairment, 20 percent applied because of a mental impairment, 9
percent indicated a circulatory disease, and 7 percent had a neoplasm (cancer). Only 34 percent
were allowed benefits at the initial determination, but 54 percent ultimately received SSDI
benefits.
    Figure 3 shows how these SSDI applications flowed through the disability review system,
from initial review to the hearing level. Overall, applications were filed at a rate of 135,945 per
month (see also Table 1), with 103,557 originating in non-prototype states and 32,388
originating from prototype states. The rate of initial allowance was slightly higher in prototype
states than in non-prototype states (36.6 versus 33.6 percent, respectively). Among applicants
who were initially denied, just over half chose to file an appeal of their initial denial (54.7
percent in non-prototype states, 52.6 percent in prototype states). In non-prototype states, these
applications proceeded to reconsideration, where only 14.8 percent were allowed. Among those
who were denied at reconsideration, 81.3 percent chose to further appeal this decision to the
hearing level. In contrast, appellants in prototype states moved directly from initial denial to the
hearing level. Hearing-level appeals were filed at a rate of 37,414 per month, for a total of 2.8

                                                  11
million over the 75 months in our sample period. 18 Of these, 58.6 percent were allowed, 27.1
percent were denied, and 14.4 percent were dismissed. 19
     Table 2 summarizes how allowances and denials were distributed across the different
justifications for determination at each level of administrative review. Initial allowances were
divided approximately evenly between listing-level allowances (most severe) and medical-
vocational allowances (less severe); reconsideration allowances were similarly evenly divided
between listing and medical-vocational allowances. In sharp contrast, the clear majority (85
percent) of allowances at the hearing level were medical-vocational allowances. 20 Among
denials, more applications were denied on initial review for non-medical reasons, or for being
non-severe or of short duration, than was the case among appellate denials. Denials on the basis
of medical-vocational factors (i.e., for being capable of past work or other work) were more
common on initial review than on appeal. About 14 percent of appellate cases were dismissed by
a judge.


4. Empirical Strategy

     Our goal is to estimate the number of SSDI applications induced by the Great Recession,
and among those, the number ultimately awarded. We begin by collapsing the claims microdata
to the state-month level by counting the number of initial claims filed in a state and month. We
then regress the number of initial claims per state-month on the number of unemployed persons
observed in the same state and month, as shown in equation (1):
                                  𝑦𝑦𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗 = 𝛽𝛽 𝑗𝑗 (𝐿𝐿)𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 + 𝛼𝛼𝑠𝑠 + 𝛿𝛿𝑡𝑡 + 𝜀𝜀𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗                        (1)
where yjst is the number of SSDI claims of outcome type j (e.g., all initial applications, all initial
allowances, all initial denials appealed, all appellate allowances, etc.) filed in state s in month-
year t. Ust is the number of unemployed persons in state s in month-year t. The function 𝛽𝛽 𝑗𝑗 (𝐿𝐿) is
a lag polynomial that measures the effects of both contemporaneous and past values of
unemployment on the number of SSDI applications filed in month-year t per state. We refer to
                                                            𝑗𝑗
𝛽𝛽 𝑗𝑗 as the sum of the individual lag weights 𝛽𝛽𝑘𝑘 , and thus 𝛽𝛽 𝑗𝑗 represents the cumulative, net

18
   As noted earlier, we exclude appeals of initial allowances that dispute some other aspect of their case such as the
date of disability onset (less than one percent of all appeals).
19
   The most common reasons for dismissal are abandonment and withdrawal.
20
   Hearing level allowances that are neither listing-level nor medical-vocational allowances include “fully favorable
decisions without a hearing” made by Senior Attorney Adjudicators based on (new) evidence in the appellant’s file.

                                                                 12
number of SSDI claims induced by current and past changes in unemployment. Lastly, as and 𝛿𝛿𝑡𝑡
are state and month-year fixed effects, respectively, which control for common national trends
and states differences in factors that affect the number of SSDI claims filed, such as population
size. 21
     To obtain the implied number of applications filed per month nationwide and per one-point
change in the national unemployment rate, we multiply 𝛽𝛽 𝑗𝑗 by 1.54 million (the number of
persons equaling one percent of the national labor force during our sample period). Although we
could have regressed the state application rate on the state unemployment rate, our approach
avoids confounding from state-time differences in labor force size (the denominator of the state
unemployment rate). In addition, because we keep the units the same on both sides of the
estimating equation (an individual person), the estimated coefficients give the number of SSDI
applications filed per unemployed person per month averaged across states, making it
straightforward to scale the coefficients to obtain the national number of applications filed per
unemployed person or per one-point change in the percent of the labor force that was
unemployed (i.e., the unemployment rate).
     We repeat this series of steps for each outcome type j to obtain the number of initial
applications filed between 2006-2012 that were eventually allowed, denied or dismissed at each
administrative level due to the Great Recession. For example, to estimate the number of induced
hearing level claims, we again collapse the microdata by state and initial filing month, but this
time we count only the number of initially denied claims that were decided at the hearing level
by September 2016. We then re-estimate equation (1) for this new outcome variable. Following
the same procedure, we further subset claims that proceeded to the hearing level according to
whether they were allowed, denied or dismissed, and the coefficients on unemployment at time t
from each model will sum to the coefficient on unemployment at time t from the model of the
total number of induced claims handled at the hearing level. Importantly, across all models, t
always refers to the initial filing month.
     Once we obtain an estimate of the number of induced applications of a given type (e.g.,
initial) and the corresponding number of induced allowances, we can compute the allowance rate


21
  Because our dependent variables are counts of the entire population of claims, and not rates, there is no need to
further weight the data to adjust for state differences in population size (as one would do in a rate-based model) or in
precision due to sampling variation (as one would do with survey-based measures of claims).

                                                          13
among induced applications of that type by dividing the estimated number of induced allowances
(given by the coefficient on unemployment in the equation for allowances) by the estimated
number of induced applications (given by the coefficient on unemployment in the equation for
applications).


5. Main Results

    This section begins by answering the question of whether the Great Recession induced new
SSDI applications, or merely accelerated applications that would have been filed anyway. We
then present estimates of the effects of changes in the unemployment rate by application outcome
(allowed or denied), overall and by administrative review level (initial, reconsideration, and
hearing level). This is followed by a series of robust tests to alternative specifications, including
common specifications in the prior literature. We then present an analysis of the characteristics
of the recession-induced applicants, in terms of disability severity and skill transferability, as
well as type of health impairment.


5.1. Dynamic Effects of Unemployment
    To understand whether the Great Recession resulted in new costs for the SSDI program, or
simply shifted forward costs that would have been incurred anyway, we begin with an analysis of
the dynamic effects of changes in unemployment. If such shifting occurs, one might expect an
increase in unemployment in a given month to increase SSDI applications contemporaneously,
and perhaps a few months later, but at the same time decrease SSDI applications a few months
or years in the future.
    To investigate this, we estimate equation (1) using a polynomial distributed lag model, and
compare it to a base model with no lags, which we estimate by ordinary least squares regression.
The two specifications are presented side-by-side in Table 3, first for the number of applications
filed (columns 1 and 2) and then for the number of allowances made at any level (columns 3 and
4). To select the polynomial degree and number of lags used for each model, we minimize the
Akaike Information Criteria (AIC)/Bayesian Information Criteria (BIC). Using these criteria, we
select a quartic polynomial and 14 monthly lags for the effect of unemployment on applications.
The model for allowances calls for a quadratic polynomial and 3 monthly lags of unemployment.



                                                  14
    In the distributed lag model for applications (Table 3, column 2), contemporaneous changes
in unemployment have the largest effect, and the first lag comes in statistically significant at
about one-third the size of the coefficient on contemporaneous unemployment. The coefficients
on lags 3 through 6 are negative (and statistically significant for lags 3 through 5), implying the
absence of applications that otherwise would have been filed in those months. In other words,
some of the additional applications filed in months 0 through 2 in response to an increase in
unemployment in month 0 were indeed shifted forward—albeit by only a few months. The
remaining lag weights are mostly positive, but comparatively small and in most cases statistically
insignificant. Figure 4 presents the estimated lag weights graphically, for the optimal quartic
polynomial, as well as for polynomials of greater and lesser degree. For all degrees, the same
pattern is evident; most of the impact of unemployment on SSDI applications in a given month
occurs contemporaneously, with a modest amount of shifting by only a few months.
    If we sum the positive lag weights, we find that the gross number of applications filed per
month for every one-point increase in unemployment was 6,455. Of these, 1,836 (28 percent)
were shifted forward (obtained by summing the negative lag weights). Thus, on-net, there were
4,619 induced new applications (s.e.=96) filed each month for every one-point increase in
unemployment (obtained by adding up the coefficients across all lags). Notably, 4,619 is
statistically equivalent to the base model estimate of 4,445 induced claims (s.e.=978), and thus
we can reasonably interpret the base model estimate as the number of induced new claims net of
any forward-shifted claims. In addition, the AIC/BIC criteria are virtually identical between the
two models. Thus, if the purpose is to estimate the total number of induced claims net of any
accelerated claims, the distributed lag model adds little value over the model with only
contemporaneous unemployment. Because this is our purpose, in the next sections, we use the
base specification with no lags.
    Importantly, dynamic effects were less important for allowances (Table 3, columns 3 and 4).
Most of the effect of unemployment at time t arises contemporaneously, with the first lag coming
in only one-fifth the size of the contemporaneous impact and not statistically significant. There
is, again, modest evidence of shifting, but just by a couple of months. In gross terms, there were
2,618 new awards made each month per one-point increase in unemployment, but 733 (28
percent) were shifted forward by 2 to 3 months—i.e., they would have been awarded anyway a
couple of months later—and therefore the net number of induced awards is 1,885. As in the

                                                 15
model for applications, the net number of induced awards is similar to the number of induced
awards implied by the base model with no lags (1,860) and the AIC/BIC criteria are nearly
identical across models. Thus, for awards too, the base model with contemporaneous
unemployment and no further lags is sufficient to capture the total number of net new induced
awards.
     Lastly, if we annualize the above monthly estimates and multiply by the observed difference
between the average unemployment rate of 4.6 percent in 2007 and the annual unemployment
rate each year from 2008-2012, we obtain an estimate of the gross number of applications and
awards attributable to the Great Recession, the number of induced claims that were new, and the
number that were merely accelerated. In total, we find the Great Recession led 1.4 million former
workers to apply for SSDI benefits during 2008-2012. Nearly 1 million (72 percent) were
induced and otherwise would not have applied, while the rest, approximately 400,000 (28
percent) would have applied anyway. In terms of awards, more than one-half million of the
recession-induced applicants were awarded benefits, and over 400,000 were induced awards to
people who otherwise would not have entered the SSDI program. The remainder, approximately
100,000, were accelerated awards to people who would have entered the program anyway 2 to 3
months later than they did.


5.2. The Effect of Unemployment on SSDI Claims, Allowances and Denials by Administrative
Review Level
     We present our main estimates in Table 4. Each group of numbers presents the estimated
effect of a one-point increase in the unemployment rate on the number of SSDI applications filed
per month of a given type for the nation as a whole. 22
     We find that a one-point increase in the unemployment rate induced 4,455 new SSDI claims
per month nationwide in the same month, representing a 3.3 percent increase in claims per one-
point increase in unemployment. Thus, at the peak of the recession in October 2009—when the
unemployment rate had risen by 5 points—the SSDI system was receiving 16.5 percent (3.3*5)


22
  As explained above, the coefficient 𝛽𝛽 𝑗𝑗 in equation (1) gives the number of new applications (of type j) filed per
month per state per person unemployed. In Table 4, we report the implied number of applications filed per month
nationwide and per number unemployed equal to one percent of the national labor force, obtained by multiplying 𝛽𝛽 𝑗𝑗
by 1.54 million (the number of persons equivalent to one percent of the national labor force in our sample period).
To obtain the annual impact, the reported monthly coefficients can be further multiplied by 12.

                                                         16
more claims than usual. Of these 4,455 induced claims, 873 claims were initially allowed
(marginally significant, p=0.062) and 3,582 claims were initially denied. In percent terms, initial
allowances increased by a marginally significant 1.9 percent per one-point increase in the
unemployment rate, while initial denials rose by 4.0 percent per one-point increase in
unemployment. To infer the initial allowance rate among the induced claims, we divide the
number of induced allowances (873) by the number of induced claims (4,455). This gives an
initial allowance rate of 19.6 percent among the induced claims, which is well below the initial
allowance rate of 34.3 percent for all claims received during this period (see Table 2). Thus, we
find that induced claimants were only 57 percent as likely as average claimants during the
sample period to be awarded SSDI benefits at the initial level. The fact that induced applicants
were less likely to qualify for benefits implies the average recession-induced claimant was
healthier than the average SSDI claimant.
     But, as Figure 3 showed, more than half of applicants who are initially denied go on to
appeal their initial decision—and many ultimately succeed—at either the reconsideration or
hearing level. To assess whether this was true for recession-induced claims, we estimate equation
(1) for the number of reconsideration claims, and, separately, for the subsets of reconsideration
claims that were allowed and denied. The second column of Table 4 shows that 1,997 individuals
filed for reconsideration each month, a 5.3 percent increase in the total number of
reconsideration claims, for every one-point increase in the unemployment rate. The implied rate
of appeal to reconsideration among induced applicants—possible only in non-prototype states—
is 72.4 percent, 23 substantially higher than the average rate of appeal to reconsideration of 54.7
percent (see Figure 3). Thus, induced claimants were much more likely to appeal an initial denial
to the reconsideration level than the average claimant during this time. This is not surprising
since the opportunity cost of continuing a claim—potential earnings—would have been lower for
recession-induced applicants. Among the induced claims filed for reconsideration, 259 per
month were allowed at that level. As a result, reconsideration allowances increased by 5.0
percent for every one-point increase in the unemployment rate. That said, reconsideration denials
also increased—there were 1,738 induced denials per month, representing an increase of 5.3

23
  Using the estimates in Table 4, the rate of appeal to reconsideration among induced applicants is
1997/(3582*0.77), where the denominator is the number of induced initial denials multiplied by 0.77, the proportion
of all initial denials that come from non-prototype states (recall reconsideration is not an option in prototype states).
The numerator is the number of induced reconsideration claims.

                                                           17
percent. On net, the allowance rate among induced reconsideration claims was 12.9 percent
(259/1,997)—lower than the average reconsideration allowance rate of 14.8 percent during this
period (see Figure 3).
     Claimants who are denied on reconsideration in non-prototype states or on initial review in
prototype states may file an appeal to the hearing level, where their case is heard by an
administrative law judge. Table 4, Column (3) shows that hearing-level appeals increased by
1,736 cases each month, a 4.6 percent increase in workload per one-point increase in
unemployment, or an increase of 23 percent at the peak of the recession. These hearing-level
appeals, which include appeals from both non-prototype and prototype states, comprised 48.5
percent (1,736/3,582) of all induced initial denials; once again, higher than the 41.9 percent
(37,414/(68,769+20,548), see Figure 3) of all initial denials that progressed to the hearing level
during this time. 24
     A substantial number of induced hearing-level appeals were allowed. Of the 1,736 hearing-
level appeals filed each month, 728 were allowed, a 3.3 percent increase in the number of
allowances for every one-point increase in unemployment (Table 4, Column (3)). Another 733
appeals were denied (a 7.2 percent increase in the number of denials), and 275 claims were
dismissed (a 5.1 percent increase in dismissals). Overall, the allowance rate among induced
claims at the hearing level was 41.9 percent (728/1,736), well below the average hearing-level
allowance rate of 58.6 percent during this period (Figure 3). Thus, even though the recession-
induced claims were allowed by judges at a lower rate than the average claim—presumably
because the recession-induced applicants had less severe impairments on average—a substantial
proportion of the recession-induced claims that proceeded to the hearing level (41.9 percent)
were nonetheless awarded benefits. In fact, our estimates imply that 53 percent
((728+259)/(873+259+728) from Table 4) of the induced beneficiaries were allowed on appeal
(reconsideration or hearing), compared to 39 percent of all new beneficiaries during 2006-2012.
Breaking apart the two types of appeals, reconsideration awards accounted for 14 percent of
induced awards, compared to 7.5 percent of all awards, and awards made by administrative law
judges accounted for 39 percent of induced awards, compared to 30 percent of all awards.


24
  If, alternatively, we calculate the appeal rate relative to the sum of initial denials from prototype states and
reconsideration denials from non-prototype states, then we find a hearing-level appeal rate of 67.8 percent among
induced applicants, slightly lower than the overall hearing-level appeal rate of 70.2 percent.

                                                         18
     Considering the combined effect of all review levels, we find that the number of SSDI
awards increased by 1,860 per month (2.5 percent) for every one-point increase in the rate of
unemployment (Table 4, Column (4)). Relative to the number of induced initial claims, we find
that 41.8 percent of all recession-induced applicants (1,860/4,455) were awarded SSDI benefits.
Scaling these estimates by the actual increase in the national unemployment rate experienced in
each year between January 2008 and December 2012 relative to the average unemployment rate
in 2006, we find the Great Recession induced a total of 997,475 additional SSDI applications and
416,454 additional SSDI disabled worker beneficiaries. Thus, recession-induced beneficiaries
accounted for 8.9 percent of the 4.5 million new beneficiaries who entered the SSDI program
during 2008-2012. 25 In Section 6, we investigate the characteristics of these new beneficiaries,
including the proportion who entered the program based on medical-vocational criteria.


5.3. Robustness
     It is possible that some individuals who became unemployed during the Great Recession
searched for new employment before applying for SSDI benefits. If this were the case, then the
relevant unemployment rate might not be economic conditions at the time of filing, but rather
conditions at the time they were laid off from their job. To explore this, we examine whether the
number of SSDI claims in month t is affected by the unemployment rate in the month of
disability onset, rather than the (later) filing month. Importantly, the date of disability onset is not
necessarily the date of medical onset; rather, it is the later of the medical onset date and the date
the applicant stopped working. If an individual who experienced onset of a medical problem
subsequently continued to work (perhaps with accommodations from their employer), but was
laid off during the recession, the established disability onset date could be the lay-off date. 26
Even if the applicant searched for a new job for several months, any subsequent SSDI
application should be attributed to economic conditions at the time of layoff. The date of
disability onset is determined by the disability examiner and is only recorded for initially allowed
claims in the 831 files; thus, this test can only be performed on this subset of claims. After sub-

25
   The total numbers of disabled worker applications and beneficiaries during 2008-2012 were computed from our
data extract, which differs slightly from official statistics owing to definitional differences.
26
   Applicants who have had an impairment for a long time can allege an earlier onset date, but SSA will set the
“established onset date” to be no earlier than the date the applicant most recently stopped working. The established
onset date determines how much back pay is owed to the applicant at the time of approval, up to a maximum of 12
months’ worth of benefits.

                                                         19
setting on initially allowed claims and re-collapsing the data to count claims by onset month and
state, we show in Appendix Table A1 that a one-point increase in unemployment in the month of
disability onset led to an increase in the number of initial allowances equal to 757 per month
(s.e.=449), which is not statistically different from our main estimate for initial allowances of
873 (s.e.=458) from Table 4 (and reproduced in Appendix Table A1 for ease of comparison).
Further, unemployment at onset and filing explain an identical proportion of the variation in
filing.
     Finally, we test the robustness of our main estimates to alternative specifications used in the
prior literature. As described above, our base specification regresses state-month application
counts on the number unemployed per state-month, with state fixed effects to account for fixed
differences across states in factors such as population size (and month fixed effects to account
for secular trends in applications). This count-on-count specification facilitates transparent
accounting of individual applications as they progress across different levels of review. It also
implicitly assumes that state population size affects applications additively. In this section, we
explore several specifications that let state population enter multiplicatively.
     Stapleton et al. (1998) regressed the log SSDI application rate in year t (estimated from
administrative data) on the log unemployment rate. One rationale for the log(rate)-log(rate)
specification (as opposed to our count-on-count or a rate-on-rate model) is that it is easy to
estimate percent changes as opposed to percentage-point changes. To implement this
specification, we first convert our application counts to application rates by dividing the counts
by state population, obtained from the Census Bureau (expressed in thousands). We then regress
the log application rate on the log of the unemployment rate, weighted by state population (as in
Stapleton et al., 1998). Because we use the same population denominator on both sides of the
equation, this specification is equivalent to estimating a log(count)-on-log(count) (because the
log(population) terms cancel out). From this specification, we obtain an elasticity of 0.20
(Appendix Table A2, column 2), implying a 0.20 percent increase in SSDI applications for every
1 percent increase in the unemployment rate, or a 20 percent increase in claims at the height of
the Great Recession, which doubled unemployment in most states. This elasticity is comparable
to the elasticity of 0.25 implied by our count-on-count specification, reproduced in column (1) of
Appendix Table A2.



                                                 20
    Our second alternative specification is the rate-on-rate specification, whereby we regress the
application rate per 1,000 workers (i.e., in the labor force) on the unemployment rate (this is
similar to that used by Cutler et al. 2012, except we use the labor force as the denominator on
both sides of the equation, whereas Cutler et al. scaled DI applications by the number of covered
workers. The rate-on-rate specification gives a somewhat lower elasticity than the other
specifications, 0.12, implying a 12 percent increase in applications at the peak of the recession.
One complication with this specification is that if SSDI application rates vary systematically
with population size, then the estimated elasticity is the coefficient on an interaction term, which
then must be interpreted in conjunction with its main effect. In our data, state application rates
are positively correlated with population size, suggesting that the elasticity from the rate-on-rate
model is not readily comparable with the elasticity from the other models. Finally, we include a
specification that regresses the log application count on the number unemployed per thousand (as
in Maestas, Mullen and Strand 2015). This estimated elasticity is 0.21, similar to the elasticity
from the other log specification and our baseline specification.


6. Characteristics of the Recession-Induced Applicants

    Our main results indicate that 416,454 disabled workers entered the SSDI program because
of the Great Recession, making up 8.9 percent of all new beneficiaries during 2008-2012. It is
important to understand the composition of these induced beneficiaries, particularly with respect
to the type and severity of their impairments. On the one hand, induced entrants might be
individuals who were medically eligible for SSDI but who otherwise had been working (perhaps
with employer accommodation). If they were laid off, they might immediately apply for SSDI
benefits, recognizing they would be likely to succeed (and perhaps also recognizing the difficulty
of finding a new employer willing to accommodate them). Such individuals would have
qualifying impairments that were easier to medically determine, and as a result these applicants
would be more likely to qualify on the initial review than on appeal, and to qualify because their
impairments meet or equal the listing of impairments (regardless of vocational factors). On the
other hand, the induced entrants might be people with functional impairments and diminished
long-run labor market opportunities. If they are laid off, these individuals might spend more time
searching for work before applying for SSDI, they would be more likely to succeed on appeal
than on initial review (perhaps after further case development), and more likely be allowed for

                                                 21
vocational reasons than because their impairments meet or equal the listings. Their impairments
would be harder to medically diagnose and verify.
     Several pieces of evidence point to the induced entrants being of the latter type. First, as we
documented in Table 4, the induced applicants were less likely to be allowed than the average
applicant during this time, which indicates they generally had impairments of lesser severity.
Second, as documented in Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2015), more time had elapsed between
alleged disability onset and time of filing for induced applicants than for the average applicant,
suggesting they were more likely to have spent time searching for work before applying for
SSDI benefits. The next body of evidence comes from Tables 5, 6, and 7 which show how claims
for disabilities of different types and severities were treated at different levels of the system.


6.1. By Reason for Allowance or Denial (an Indicator of Impairment Severity)
     When disability adjudicators decide a case, they must record the justification for their
decision, using the 5-step process described in Section 2. In particular, the process is designed to
distinguish applicants with non-severe or temporary impairments from applicants (step 2) with
the most severe, automatically-qualifying impairments (step 3). If an application is neither non-
severe or medically qualifying, the adjudicator then considers whether the applicant has the skills
to perform the occupations that their residual functional capacity would allow them to do (steps 4
and 5). In this section, we use this information to draw inferences about the severity of
disabilities in the recession-induced applicant pool and present our findings in Table 5. To obtain
the estimates in Table 5, we subset the initial claims filed in each month by the type of
determination they received, separately for the initial and appellate levels. We then regress the
number of each outcome type on state unemployment in the month of initial filing. This
disaggregation procedure yields a set of coefficients that add up to the coefficient for the
aggregated outcome (either initial claims or appellate claims), 27 and thus by dividing each




27
   For example, the reported coefficients in the first column of Table 5 add up to the coefficient on initial claims in
Table 4 (4,455), which is an estimate of the total number of induced initial claims per month per one-point increase
in unemployment. The coefficients in the second column of Table 5 add up to the total number of induced appellate
claims, which is 2,317 per month per one-point increase in unemployment. Note this is not the sum of the induced
reconsideration and hearing claims reported in Table 4, because in this section we use the term appellate claim to
refer to any reconsideration or hearing-level claim; that is, claims that proceed to both reconsideration and the
hearing level are counted only once.

                                                          22
disaggregated coefficient by the aggregate coefficient, we obtain the percent distribution of
induced claims across the determination categories.
    Table 5 shows that at the initial level (first column), allowances for meeting or equaling the
listing of impairments—the most severe kind of impairments—were largely unresponsive to the
increase in unemployment; they rose by a statistically insignificant 1.0 percent per one-point
increase in unemployment. On the other hand, initial allowances for medical-vocational reasons
rose by a statistically significant 2.6 percent. As a share of all induced claims, listing allowances
were just 4.7 percent (second column), compared to 15.6 percent of initial claims in the full
population (Table 2). Medical-vocational allowances made up 14.9 percent of all induced
applications as compared to 18.7 percent of the general applicant population. Thus, a smaller
share of recession-induced applicants qualified by meeting the listings compared to the general
applicant population.
    At the same time, initial denials for reason of non-severity spiked, by 7.1 percent for every
one-point increase in unemployment (Table 5, first column), making up 25.9 percent of all
induced claims. In the general applicant population, initial denials for non-severity made up only
11.9 percent of claims (Table 2). Perhaps most revealing, initial denials for being capable of
substantial gainful activity (either past or other work) also rose by 4.1 and 3.7 percent
respectively, together accounting for 50.1 percent of initial applications, compared to 32.3
percent in the general applicant population (Table 2).
    Although initial allowances for listing-level impairments did not increase in response to the
rise in unemployment, Table 5 shows that listing allowances did increase at the appellate level
(reconsideration and hearings combined)—by 3.9 percent per one-point increase in
unemployment (Table 5). Medical-vocational allowances at the appellate level also rose in
response to unemployment, by 3.6 percent per one-point increase in unemployment. As a share
of all induced claims that reached the appellate levels, 8.2 percent were allowed for meeting or
equaling the listing of impairments, and 33.8 percent were allowed on medical-vocational
grounds—this implies that nearly 79.3 percent of recession-induced allowances at the appellate
levels were for medical-vocational reasons, the same as in the general appellate population (79.5
percent). Appellate denials of all types also increased sharply, especially those based on
capability for past work or other work.



                                                 23
6.2. Subsequent Appellate Outcomes by Reason for Initial Denial
    The initial and appellate review systems use the same criteria and 5-step review process; yet
case outcomes often diverge substantially. This is perhaps most evidenced by the fact that a large
number of cases that are denied on initial review are eventually allowed on appeal, after an
administrative hearing before an ALJ. To investigate this, we turn to Table 6, which crosswalks
appellate outcomes by reason for initial denial. The first column of Table 6 (Panel A) reproduces
the total number of induced initial denials from Table 4 and their breakdown by reason for initial
denial from Table 5. The next four columns of Table 6 show how many induced denials of each
type were not appealed, or if appealed, how many were allowed, denied or dismissed. These
mutually exclusive subcategories in each row add up to the total number of induced denials in
column 1, and Panel B shows the subcategory estimates as a percent of the total number of
induced denials of a given type. For example, among the 3,582 initial denials rendered each
month, 1,265—or 35.3 percent—were not appealed. The percent not appealed was highest
among initial denials for non-medical reasons (56.3 percent), followed by initial denials for non-
severity (50.1 percent). This is not surprising, since the initial review outcome signals to
applicants whether they are likely to ever qualify. Still, among those initially denied for non-
medical reasons or non-severity, 11.6 percent and 12.9 percent, respectively, were allowed at the
appellate level. Finally, induced applicants who were initially denied for work capability were
most likely to appeal (76.2 percent of those capable of past work and 70.8 percent of those
capable of other work), and experienced higher allowance rates than the average induced initial
denial (27.5 percent). Some 38.4 percent of those denied for past-work capability were allowed
at the appellate level and 34.7 percent of those denied for other-work capability were allowed at
the appellate level.


6.3. By Type of Impairment
    Our final analysis tracks induced applications and their outcomes by type of impairment,
with the goal of understanding whether the recession-induced claims were more likely to come
from people with difficult-to-verify impairments and, if so, how these claims fared as they
moved through the adjudication system. The first column of Table 7 (Panel A) shows estimates
of the number of induced initial claims per one-point increase in unemployment by primary
diagnosis, while the second and third columns show the number of these that were allowed and

                                                 24
denied, respectively. The last four columns show the appellate outcomes that resulted for those
claims that were initially denied, by primary diagnosis. The coefficients in the first column of
Table 7 indicate that the Great Recession induced new claims in all impairment categories;
however, claims increased relatively more for musculoskeletal impairments (4.1 percent) and
mental impairments (3.7 percent), than for circulatory, neoplasm and all other diagnoses
combined. Because musculoskeletal and mental impairment claims are also the largest categories
of claims, the coefficients also imply that the induced claims came disproportionately from
applicants with difficult-to-verify medical problems. These coefficients imply that
musculoskeletal impairments made up 40.0 percent (1,785/4,455) of induced claims, compared
to 31.9 percent in the general claimant population (Table 2), while mental impairments were 22.3
percent (992/4,455) of induced claims, compared to 19.9 percent of the general population
(Table 2). Applicants with impairments in the other categories—circulatory diseases, neoplasms,
and other diagnoses combined—were less likely to be among the induced claimants than in the
general applicant population.
    The coefficients in the second and fifth columns of Table 7 report the effect of a one-point
increase in unemployment on initial allowances and appellate allowances, respectively. The
number of initial allowances for musculoskeletal impairments increased by 3.8 percent for every
one-point increase in unemployment, and appellate allowances for these impairments rose by a
similar percentage (4.0 percent). Interestingly, initial allowances for mental impairments were
not responsive to the unemployment rate, while appellate allowances for mental impairments
rose by 5.2 percent. These coefficients imply that musculoskeletal and mental impairments
together made up 58.7 percent ((463+459-52+222)/1,860) of all induced allowances, a greater
share than in the general population (51.8 percent, Table 1).
    Panel B of Table 7 uses the coefficients within each row of Panel A to compute the share of
induced claims that were initially allowed or denied by primary diagnosis. Panel C computes the
shares of induced initial denials that were either not appealed or, if appealed, were subsequently
allowed, denied or dismissed on appeal. We find that 25.9 percent of induced claims for
musculoskeletal impairments were initially allowed while 74.1 percent were initially denied
(Panel B). Among the initially denied, 71.8 percent (=100-28.8, Panel C) appealed and 34.7
percent were ultimately allowed on appeal (Panel C). Thus, the ultimate allowance rate for
induced musculoskeletal claims was 51.6 percent (0.259+(0.347*0.741))*100, Panels B and C).

                                                25
Among induced applicants with mental impairments, none were initially allowed. Among the
denied, 56.0 percent (100-44.0, Panel C) appealed and 21.3 percent (Panel C) of those were
ultimately allowed on appeal. The ultimate allowance rate for induced mental claims was only 12
percent ((0.560*.213))*100, Panel C). In contrast, most induced applicants with neoplasms—
typically easier-to-verify than musculoskeletal and mental impairment—were initially allowed
(73.7 percent, Panel B), nearly two-thirds of the initially denied neoplasm claims appealed (Panel
C), and 37.0 percent (Panel C) were allowed on appeal. The ultimate allowance rate for induced
neoplasm claims was 83.4 percent (.737 +(0.370*.263))*100, Panels B and C).
       In sum, there is little evidence to suggest that the induced applicants were medically
eligible workers prior to the Great Recession. Rather, they presented with less severe
impairments, were more likely to be allowed on appeal than on initial review, and when allowed,
they were more likely to be allowed for medical-vocational reasons than for having an
automatically-qualifying medical problem on the listing of impairments. Indeed, nearly two-
thirds of them were for difficulty-to-verify conditions such as musculoskeletal and mental
diagnoses (compared to just over half in the general population of applicants).


7. Implications for the SSDI Program
    In this section, we discuss the implications of our findings for the SSDI program. We focus
on how the Great Recession impacted three measures by which program performance and
financial sustainability are often evaluated: system allowance rates, administrative processing
costs, and benefit obligations.


7.1 The Effect of the Great Recession on Allowance Rates
    The Great Recession induced both allowances and denials at all administrative levels.
However, the induced claims were also more likely to result in denial at all levels. These effects
combine to affect the allowance rates at the initial and hearing levels. We illustrate the effect of
the Great Recession on the allowance rate with a simple simulation. First, we multiply the
estimated coefficients in Table 4 by the observed difference in the national unemployment rate
each month relative to October 2006, to simulate the numbers of claims and allowances that were
attributable to the Great Recession. Next, we subtract the number of induced claims from total
claims and the number of induced allowances from total allowances to simulate the number of

                                                 26
claims and allowances that would have been observed at each level if the unemployment rate had
remained at pre-recession levels over the entire period from 2007 to 2012. Finally, to obtain the
counterfactual allowance rate in the absence of the Great Recession we divide the estimated
number of non-induced allowances by the estimated number of non-induced claims.
     Figure 5 presents the results of the simulation, with Panel A showing the effect of the Great
Recession on the allowance rate at the initial level and Panel B showing the effect on the
allowance rate at the hearing level. In the figure, the solid lines represent the actual allowance
rate among all applications at the initial and hearings levels, respectively, and the dashed lines
represent the simulated allowance rate removing the induced applications. 28 As can be seen in
both panels of the figure, since unemployment did not accelerate until 2008, there were few
induced claimants and the actual and counterfactual allowance rates were similar before then.
However, during 2009, the unemployment rate peaked at 10.0 percent. This induced a flow of
claims with a below-average probability of allowance.
     Panel A shows that without the Great Recession and the accompanying induced claims, the
allowance rate at the initial level would have been around two to four percentage points higher,
reflecting the absence of the recession-induced applications from applicants with less severe
impairments. That said, the evolution of the allowance rate during this period—rising then
falling slightly and flattening—is unchanged with and without the induced applications. Panel B,
on the other hand, shows the Great Recession had a large effect on the allowance rate at the
hearing level. The actual allowance rate—including the induced claims—fell steadily over this
period, from around 80 percent for claims initially filed in 2007 to around 57 percent for claims
filed in 2013. By contrast, the simulated allowance rate without the induced claims predicts, in
the absence of the Great Recession, the allowance rate at the hearing level would have remained
near 80 percent for applications initially filed through the end of 2009, at which point it would
have started falling precipitously, beginning with the appellate hearings held for applications that
were initially filed near the start of 2010 (hearings that would have been held in 2011 or later,
given lengthy wait times for hearings during this period). Thus, the Great Recession cannot
explain the significant decline in the hearing-level allowance rate that began in 2011 (and is
evident when decisions are organized by decision date rather than by filing date as we do in


28
  Since we measure timing by initial filing, note that the allowance rates will not necessarily coincide with SSA
official statistics which tend to group applications by decision year (vs. filing year).

                                                         27
Figure 5 (Ray 2015)). Concurrent with this decline, SSA introduced focused reviews and new
training initiatives to improve the quality of judicial decision-making (Ray and Lubbers 2014).


7.2. The Effect of the Great Recession on Program Costs
     Our findings imply the Great Recession had a substantial impact on the administration and
financing of the SSDI program. According to tabulations provided by SSA to the Social Security
Advisory Board, 29 the unit cost of processing an initial claim is $1,187. Given our estimate that
997,475 induced claims were processed at the initial level, this implies the Great Recession
increased initial processing costs by a total of $1.184 billion.30 Some 447,128 of these claims
were then reviewed a second time by the DDS under a request for reconsideration; at a unit cost
of $585 per claim, this resulted in increased reconsideration costs of $261.4 million. Of the
nearly 1 million induced claims, 388,690 were appealed to the hearings level, where they were
heard by an administrative law judge. Given the average cost of a hearing is $3,653, this implies
increased processing costs at the hearing level of $1.42 billion. If denied cases were further
appealed to the Appeals Council and to federal court at the same rate as in the general applicant
population, then we estimate claims processing costs at these levels increased by $84.4 million
and $10.2 million, respectively. 31 In total, the Great Recession increased SSA’s claim processing
costs by $2.960 billion between 2008 and 2012. 32
     Nearly 42 percent of recession-induced applications or 416,454 people were ultimately
awarded benefits. If they were to receive benefits for only one year, then, assuming an average
annual SSDI benefit of $13,546 in 2010 and average Medicare expenditure of $11,897 in 2010,
this would imply additional benefit payments equal to $5.641 billion for SSDI alone, or $10.596
billion for SSDI and Medicare combined. 33 For context, SSDI benefit payments to all disabled
workers were $105.122 billion in 2010.34 But, most SSDI entrants receive benefits until they

29
   This information was provided to us by the Social Security Advisory Board via personal communication.
30
   We exclude the shifted claims from this calculation since they would have been processed anyway.
31
   The unit cost of processing claims at the Appeals Council and in federal court is $1,220 and $5,444, respectively
(same source for unit costs as referenced above).
32
   As noted above, we do not include the small fraction of applications denied at the hearing level that went on to
further review by the Appeals Council, and if denied there, to the federal courts.
33
   We use the average medical expenditure among all Medicare beneficiaries because the average expenditure for the
induced applicants is not known.
34
   Total payments made to disabled worker beneficiaries in 2010 taken from Table 20 of the Annual Statistical
Report on the Social Security Disability Insurance Program, 2010, accessed 1/25/18 from
https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/di_asr/2010/sect01c.html

                                                        28
convert to regular Social Security retirement benefits at full retirement age or they die. Since the
average age of the induced entrants was 53.1 (somewhat older than the average applicant during
this time, who was 47), the average induced entrant would receive benefits for a maximum of 13
years (from age 53 to 65). 35 Assuming a discount rate of 2 percent and an annual mortality rate
of 3.1 percent (following Autor and Duggan, 2006), we estimate the Great Recession increased
SSDI benefit obligations by $55.359 billion in present value, or $96.298 billion for SSDI and
Medicare benefits combined. 36 In addition, the Great Recession accelerated the awards of an
additional 164,192 awardees by 2 to 3 months. Including these additional benefit costs increases
total SSDI benefit obligations to a grand total of $55.730 billion, or $97.365 billion including
Medicare. 37
     As large as they are, these costs are an underestimate of the total effects of the Great
Recession on the disability insurance system. They do not account for the costs of issuing
technical denials to applicants who were not insured for SSDI benefits (such applicants are
denied by their local field office before they submit applications for medical review), the
additional costs of providing dependent benefits to eligible recipients, and the costs of providing
SSI and Medicaid benefits to impoverished beneficiaries who are dually entitled to SSDI and
SSI. 38


8. Conclusion
     The Great Recession led 1.4 million former workers to apply for SSDI benefits during 2008-
2012. Of these, nearly 1 million (72 percent) would not have applied if the recession had not
occurred, while the rest (28 percent) would have applied anyway, but at a later date. By the
recession’s peak, the system was receiving 16.5 percent more applications than usual, resulting



35
   We obtain the average age of induced entrants by estimating separate regression models for the number of final
allowances on unemployment for the following age groups: 18-39 (8 percent of induced allowances), 40-49 (10
percent), 50-61 (71 percent) and 62-64 (12 percent). We then multiply the midpoint of each age group by the age-
group’s share of induced allowances to estimate the average age among induced beneficiaries.
36
   We assume Medicare benefits begin one year after SSDI benefits payments begin to account for the Medicare
waiting period (which begins with disability onset date, not award date), and would have been received through age
64.
37
   This assumes the forward-shifted beneficiaries would draw cash benefits and/or Medicare for an additional 2
months as well.
38
   Other potential costs include higher benefit payments to the induced beneficiaries when they convert to Social
Security retirement benefits at full retirement age.

                                                        29
in substantial processing backlogs. Induced applicants (excluding the accelerated applicants)
accounted for 11.6 percent of all applications filed during 2008-2012.
    More than one-half million of the recession-induced applicants were awarded benefits. Over
400,000 were awards to people who otherwise would not have entered the SSDI program, while
the rest were awards to people who would have entered the program anyway in the near future.
The induced awardees were more likely to have been allowed on appeal than on initial review—
53 percent of the induced new beneficiaries were allowed on appeal (rather than on initial
review), compared to 37 percent of all new beneficiaries during 2008-2012. On net, the induced
awardees (excluding accelerated awardees) made up 8.9 percent of all new beneficiaries who
entered SSDI during 2008-2012.
    While some people with automatically-qualifying disabilities choose to work rather than
claim SSDI benefits, we find little evidence that the recession-induced applicants came from this
group. In fact, the induced applicants had less severe impairments and were more likely to have
transferable skills. They were either allowed for medical-vocational reasons (33 percent) or
denied (58 percent); relatively few were allowed for severe, listing-level impairments (9
percent). The mean allowance rate among induced applicants was 42 percent (accounting for
appeals), substantially lower than the average allowance rate of 54 percent for the system as a
whole. Perhaps not surprisingly, 58.7 percent of the induced applicants who were awarded
benefits had a musculoskeletal or mental impairment, a somewhat higher proportion than in the
general population of applicants.
    Importantly, we find the Great Recession does not account for the decline in the hearing-
level allowance rate that began in 2011, when SSA introduced focused reviews and new training
initiatives to improve the quality of judicial decision-making. Our estimates imply that absent the
effects of the Great Recession, the hearing-level allowance rate would have had a sharp decline
anyway, beginning with the appellate hearings held for applications that were initially filed in
2010, and that would have had hearings in 2011 or later.
    The impact of the Great Recession is economically significant. In terms of human capital,
over 400,000 workers were awarded benefits who would not otherwise have entered the
program. Because working above SGA after program entry is rare, this corresponds to a near-
permanent decline in productive capacity. In terms of the fiscal health of the U.S. disability
insurance system, both contemporaneous and future SSDI program costs increased significantly.

                                                30
Administrative claims processing costs rose by $2.960 billion dollars during 2008-2012, while
SSDI benefit obligations increased by $55.730 billion in present value, or by $97.365 billion
when the present value of Medicare benefits is included.




                                               31
References

Abel, Andrew B., Bernanke, Ben S. and Dean Croushore (2013). Macroeconomics (8th ed.).
        Pearson Addison Wesley.
Autor, David H., and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline
        in Unemployment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 157-206.
Autor, David H., and Mark G. Duggan. 2006. “The Growth in the Social Security Disability
        Rolls: A Fiscal Crisis Unfolding.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3), 71-96.
Bitler, Marianne and Hilary Hoynes, "The More Things Change, the More They Stay the Same?
        The Safety Net and Poverty in the Great Recession," Journal of Labor Economics 34, no.
        S1 (Part 2, January 2016): S403-S444.
Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel and Seth Sanders. 2002. “The Impact of Economic Conditions on
        Participation in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust.” American
        Economic Review, 92(1), 27-50.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, Local Area Unemployment Statistics. 2017. Alternative Measures of
        Labor Underutilization for States. Accessed at https://www.bls.gov/lau/stalt.htm on
        September 24, 2017.
Burkhauser, Richard V., and Mary Daly. 2011. “The Economic Status of People with
        Disabilities” in The Declining Work and Welfare of People with Disabilities: What Went
        Wrong and a Strategy for Change. AEI Press, pp 10-20.
Charles, Kerwin, Yiming Li, and Melvin Stephens, Jr. 2018. “Disability Benefit Take-Up and
        Local Labor Market Conditions.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(3), 416-423.
Coe, Norma B., and Matthew S. Rutledge. 2013. “How Does the Composition of Disability
        Insurance Applicants Change across Business Cycles?” Center for Retirement Research
        at Boston College Working Paper No. 2013-5.
Cutler, David M., Ellen Meara, and Seth Richards-Shubik. 2012. “Unemployment and
        Disability: Evidence from the Great Recession.” NBER Retirement Research Center
        Paper No. NB 12-12.
Davis, Steven and Till von Wachter. 2011. “Recessions and the Cost of Job Loss.” Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity, 43, 1-72.
Lindner, Stephan, Clark Burdick, and Javier Meseguer. 2017. Characteristics and Employment of
        Applicants for Social Security Disability Insurance over the Business Cycle. The BE
        Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 17(1).
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2013. "Does Disability Insurance
        Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of
        SSDI Receipt." The American Economic Review 103(5): 1797-1829.
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2015. "Disability Insurance and the
        Great Recession." American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 105(5): 177-82.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1993. "Earnings Losses of
        Displaced Workers." The American Economic Review (Sep. 1, 1993): 685-709.
Nichols, Austin, Lucie Schmidt, Purvi Sevak. 2017. “Economic Conditions and
        Supplemental Security Income Application.” Social Security Bulletin, 77(4):27-44.
Ray, Gerald K., and Jeffrey S. Lubbers. 2014. "A Government Success Story: How Data
        Analysis by the Social Security Appeals Council (with a Push from the Administrative
        Conference of the United States) Is Transforming Social Security Disability
        Adjudication." Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 83 (2014): 1575.

                                             32
Ray, Gerald. “How Data Analysis is Transforming Disability Adjudication at the Social Security
       Administration.” Presentation at MRRC Researcher Workshop, April 2015.
Rege, Mari, Kjetil Telle, and Mark Votruba. 2009. “The Effect of Plant Downsizing on
       Disability Pension Utilization.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(4),
       754-785.
Stapleton, David, Kevin Coleman, Kimberly Dietrich, and Gina Livermore. 1988. “Empirical
       Analyses of DI and SSI Application and Award Growth” in Growth in Disability
       Benefits: Explanations and Policy Implications, edited by Kalman Rupp and David
       Stapleton, 31-92. Kalamazoo, Michigan: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment
       Research.
Social Security Administration. 2016. Annual Statistical Report on the Social Security Disability
       Insurance Program, 2015; Table 3. Accessed at
       https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/di_asr/ on September 21, 2017.
Social Security Administration. 2016. Annual Statistical Report on the Social Security Disability
       Insurance Program, 2015; Table 60. Accessed at
       https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/di_asr/2015/sect04.html#table60 on
       September 23, 2017.
Song, Jae G., and Joyce Manchester. 2007. New Evidence on Earnings and Benefit Claims
       Following Changes in the Retirement Earnings Test in 2000. Journal of Public
       Economics, 91(3), 669-700.
Von Wachter, Till, Jae G. Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2009. “Long-term Earnings Losses Due
       to Mass-Layoffs During the 1982 Recession: An Analysis Using Longitudinal
       Administrative Data from 1974 to 2004. Unpublished Manuscript.




                                               33
Figure 3. Monthly Flow of SSDI Claims Filed in 2006-2012

                                                Non-prototype states                                     Prototype states

                                                          #             %                                        #             %
                                        Claims          103,557        100.0%                  Claims           32,388        100.0%
Initial/DDS Level                       Allowed          34,788         33.6%                  Allowed          11,840         36.6%
                                        Denied           68,769         66.4%                  Denied           20,548         63.4%

                                                   Appeal rate:         54.7%                             Appeal rate:          52.6%

                                                           #            %
                                        Claims            37,605       100.0%
Reconsideration Level                   Allowed            5,558        14.8%
                                        Denied            32,716        87.0%

                                                   Appeal rate:         81.3%

                                                                                      #            %
                                                                    Claims           37,414       100.0%
Hearing Level                                                       Allowed          21,906        58.6%
                                                                    Denied           10,132        27.1%
                                                                    Dismissed         5,376        14.4%


Notes: We do not include as appeals claims that were initially allowed but subsequently appealed. There are 300 claims per month
of this type (for a total of 22,460 applications during the sample period). Also, in this figure, we do not include as reconsiderations
claims that were filed in prototype states but received a reconsideration in a non-prototype state. Prototype states are Alabama,
Alaska, California (LA North and LA West Only), Colorado, Louisiana, Michigan, Missouri, New Hampshire, New York, and
Pennsylvania.
Figure 4: Dynamic Effects of Unemployment on SSDI Applications: Estimated Lag Pattern by
Polynomial Degree

 5,000


 4,000


 3,000


 2,000


 1,000



          0    1    2    3    4       5   6   7       8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15

-1,000
                                  2       3       4       5        6


Notes: Number of lags for each polynomial determined by minimum AIC/BIC.
Polynomial of degree 4 is the global minimum.
                                             Figure 5. Counterfactual Allowance Rates in Absence of Great Recession
                                             A. Initial Level
                                                  50
A llo w a n c e R a te , P e rc e n ta g e


                                                  45
                                                  40
                                                  35
                                                  30
                                                  25




                                                         2007     2008       2009         2010      2011        2012
                                                                                    Filing Date

                                                                Medical Allowance Rate            Rate without Induced Claims


                                             B. Hearing Level
                                                  80
A llo w a n c e R a te , P e rc e n ta g e


                                                  75
                                                  70
                                                  65
                                                  60
                                                  55




                                                         2007     2008       2009         2010      2011        2012
                                                                                    Filing Date

                                                                Medical Allowance Rate            Rate without Induced Claims
Table 1. Summary Statistics for SSDI
Applications Filed 2006-2012
Characteristic                      Statistic

Age (years)                            46.6 (11.4)
Female (%)                                48.1
Concurrent claim (%)                      52.2
Prototype state (%)                       23.8

Primary diagnosis category (%)
   Musculoskeletal                       31.9
   Mental                                19.9
   Circulatory                            9.3
   Neoplasms                              6.6
   Other categories                      32.3
   Total                                 100.0

Initial allowance (%)                     34.3
Final allowance (%)                       54.3

Claims                                10,195,864
Claims per month                       135,945
Notes: Standard deviation in parentheses. Sample is
all SSDI applications filed from October 2006 through
December 2012.
Table 2. Percent Distribution of SSDI Applications across Decision Outcomes,
by Administrative Level
                                                          Recon-
                                         Initial        sideration        Hearing
Allowed
    Meets or equals listings (%)          15.6              5.8             7.2
    Medical-vocational (%)                18.7              7.9             49.6
    Other (%)                                                               1.8
Denied
    Non-medical (%)                       7.5              3.3              1.1
    Not severe (%)                        11.9             13.1             1.3
    Short duration (%)                    4.0              4.0              0.0
    Capable of past work (%)              18.4             27.5             8.2
    Capable of other work (%)             23.9             38.3             16.4
Dismissed                                 0.0              0.0              14.4

Total (Column %)                         100.0            100.0            100.0

N                                     10,195,864        2,852,831        2,806,061
Notes: Sample is all SSDI applications filed from October 2006 through December 2012.
Table 3. Effect of Unemployment Rate on Monthly SSDI Claims, Base Model vs. Distributed Lag Specification
                                      Number of applications                             Number of allowances, all levels

                                                    Distributed lag model:                                  Distributed lag model:
                              Base model            AIC/BIC optimizing lag           Base model             AIC/BIC optimizing lag
                                  (1)                         (2)                        (3)                          (4)

Contemporaneous               4,455 *** (978)            3,642    *** (345)          1,860 ***    (555)          2,195 *** (286)
L1                                                       1,319    *** (101)                                        423 *   (245)
L2                                                          31        (184)                                       -415 *   (246)
L3                                                        -528    *** (184)                                       -318     (276)
L4                                                        -615    *** (133)
L5                                                        -444    *** (106)
L6                                                        -180        (129)
L7                                                          57        (144)
L8                                                         196        (129)
L9                                                         210    ** (105)
L10                                                        119        (131)
L11                                                         -8        (183)
L12                                                        -60        (184)
L13                                                        126         (96)
L14                                                        755    *** (329)

Total Effect                 4,455 *** (978)             4,619 ***     (96)          1,860 ***    (555)          1,885 ***    (50)
Mean DV                    135,945                    135,945                       73,751                     73,751
Pct. Change                     3.3                        3.4                         2.5                         2.6
Elasticity                    0.25                       0.26                         0.19                       0.19

AIC                         54,534                      54,475                      49,802                     49,761
BIC                         54,540                      54,512                      49,808                     49,786
R-squared                    0.987                           --                      0.987                          --
N                            3,825                       3,825                       3,825                      3,825
Notes: standard errors in parentheses. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. *
Significant at the 10 percent level. In all models, N=3825 state-month observations of the number of SSDI claims filed.
Estimates are the coefficient on the number unemployed multiplied by the number of workers equivalent to one percent of
the national labor force, and thus indicates the number of additional applications of a given outcome type induced by a one-
point increase in the unemployment rate.
Table 4. Effect of Unemployment Rate on Monthly SSDI Claims, Allowances and Denials by
Administrative Level
                                                                  Appellate

                                      Initial         Reconsideration           Hearing              All Levels
                                        (1)                 (2)                   (3)                    (4)
Claims          Coef.                 4,455 ***              1,997 ***            1,736 ***
                SE                    (978)                  (386)                (314)
                Mean DV             135,945                 38,038               37,414
                Pct. Change              3.3                    5.3                  4.6
                Elasticity             0.25                   0.40                 0.35
Allowances Coef.                         873 *                  259 ***             728 ***              1,860 ***
                SE                     (458)                   (22)               (101)                  (555)
                Mean DV               46,627                  5,217              21,906                 73,751
                Pct. Change               1.9                    5.0                 3.3                    2.5
                Elasticity              0.14                   0.38                0.25                   0.19
Denials         Coef.                  3,582 ***             1,738 ***              733 ***              2,596 ***
                SE                     (545)                 (371)                (175)                  (446)
                Mean DV               89,318                32,821               10,132                 62,194
                Pct. Change               4.0                   5.3                  7.2                    4.2
                Elasticity              0.31                  0.40                 0.55                   0.32
Dismissals      Coef.                                                                275 ***
                SE                                                                  (61)
                Mean DV                                                            5,376
                Pct. Change                                                           5.1
                Elasticity                                                          0.39
Allowance Rate among
Induced Claims (%)                    19.6%                 12.9%                41.9%                 41.8%
Claims as % of Induced
Initial Denials                          --                72.4%†                48.5%                    --

Notes: *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent
level. Each group of figures presents regression estimates for a different outcome. In all models, N=3825 state-
month observations of the number of SSDI claims filed that resulted in a given outcome. Coef. refers to the
coefficient on the number unemployed multiplied by the number of workers equivalent to one percent of the
national labor force, and thus indicates the number of additional applications of a given outcome type induced by
a one-point increase in the unemployment rate. Mean DV, the mean of each dependent variable, gives the
average monthly claims of a given outcome type. Percent change is the Coef./Mean DV, or the percent change
in the outcome. †Induced reconsideration claims computed as % of initial denials in non-prototype states
Table 5. Effect of Unemployment Rate on Claims by Reason for Determination and Administrative Level
                                                    Initial Level                      Appellate
                                          Effect of                        Effect of
                                          Unemp.             % of Induced  Unemp.            % of Induced
                                            Rate            Initial Claims   Rate           Appell. Claims
Allowances
  Meets or equals listings    Coef.             208               4.7%            191 ***        8.2%
                              SE              (130)                              (20)
                              Mean DV        21,231                            4,893
                              Pct. Change        1.0                               3.9
                              Elasticity       0.07                             0.30

 Medical-vocational                    Coef.               666 **            14.9%                    782 ***            33.8%
                                       Std. Err.         (330)                                       (93)
                                       Mean DV          25,396                                     21,571
                                       Pct. Change          2.6                                        3.6
                                       Elasticity         0.20                                       0.28

 Other Allowances                      Coef.              --                    --                       13 ***          0.6%
                                       Std. Err.          --                    --                      (4)
                                       Mean DV            --                    --                     659
                                       Pct. Change        --                    --                      2.0
                                       Elasticity                                                     0.15
Denials
 Non-Medical                           Coef.               242 ***            5.4%                       35 ***          1.5%
                                       Std. Err.          (84)                                          (8)
                                       Mean DV          10,248                                         879
                                       Pct. Change          2.4                                         4.0
                                       Elasticity         0.18                                        0.30

 Not Severe                            Coef.             1,153 ***           25.9%                     164 ***           7.1%
                                       Std. Err.         (111)                                        (17)
                                       Mean DV          16,152                                       1,967
                                       Pct. Change          7.1                                         8.3
                                       Elasticity         0.54                                        0.63

 Short Duration                        Coef.                 -42             -0.9%                      -9               -0.4%
                                       Std. Err.           (27)                                        (7)
                                       Mean DV            5,424                                       310
                                       Pct. Change          -0.8                                      -2.8
                                       Elasticity         -0.06                                      -0.22

 Capable of Past Work                  Coef.             1,018 ***           22.9%                     320 ***           13.8%
                                       Std. Err.         (228)                                        (65)
                                       Mean DV          25,063                                       4,979
                                       Pct. Change          4.1                                         6.4
                                       Elasticity         0.31                                        0.49

 Capable of Other Work                 Coef.             1,210 ***           27.2%                     546 ***           23.6%
                                       Std. Err.         (136)                                       (140)
                                       Mean DV          32,430                                       8,586
                                       Pct. Change          3.7                                         6.4
                                       Elasticity         0.28                                        0.48

Dismissed                              Coef.              --                    --                     275 ***           11.9%
                                       Std. Err.          --                    --                    (61)
                                       Mean DV            --                    --                   5,376
                                       Pct. Change        --                    --                      5.1
                                       Elasticity                                                       0.4
Notes: *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level. Appellate
refers to reconsideration and hearings claims combined. Each group of figures presents regression estimates for a different
outcome. In all models, N=3825 state-month observations of the number of SSDI claims filed that resulted in a given outcome.
Coef. refers to the coefficient on the number unemployed multiplied by the number of workers equivalent to one percent of the
national labor force, and thus indicates the number of additional applications of a give outcome type induced by a one-point
increase in the unemployment rate. Mean DV, the mean of each dependent variable, gives the average monthly claims of a given
outcome type. Percent change is the Coef./Mean DV, or the percent change in the outcome.
Table 6. Effect of Unemployment Rate on Appellate Outcomes, by Reason for Initial Denial
                                                                Appellate Outcome among Initial Denials
                                        Initial Denials No appeal       Allowed          Denied       Dismissed
A. Effect of Unemployment Rate
All Induced Denials         Coef.           3,582 ***    1,265 ***          986 ***      1,056 ***      274.6 ***
                                   SE                (545)              (176)               (108)              (226)                (61)
                                   Mean DV          89,318             40,096              27,124             16,722               5,376
                                   Pct. Change          4.0                3.2                 3.6                6.3                 5.1
By Reason for Initial Denial
 Non-Medical Reason                Coef.               242 ***             136 ***              28                  43 ***              34 ***
                                   Std. Err.          (84)                (44)               (18)                (16)                (12)
                                   Mean DV          10,248               7,469              1,238               1,041                 499
                                   Pct. Change          2.4                 1.8                2.3                 4.2                 6.9
 Not Severe                        Coef.             1,153 ***             578 ***            149 ***             304 ***            123 ***
                                   Std. Err.         (111)                (48)               (10)                (36)               (21)
                                   Mean DV          16,152               9,065              2,360               3,406              1,321
                                   Pct. Change          7.1                 6.4                6.3                 8.9                9.3
 Short Duration                    Coef.                 -42                -45 ***             -1                    5                -1
                                   Std. Err.           (27)                  (8)             (10)                 (11)                (2)
                                   Mean DV            5,424              2,405              1,992                  778               249
                                   Pct. Change          -0.8               -1.9               -0.1                  0.7              -0.3
 Capable of Past Work              Coef.             1,018 ***             243 ***            391 ***             333 ***              52 ***
                                   Std. Err.         (228)                (72)               (51)               (100)               (18)
                                   Mean DV          25,063               9,455              9,539               4,777              1,292
                                   Pct. Change          4.1                 2.6                4.1                 7.0                4.0
 Capable of Other Work             Coef.             1,210 ***            353 ***             420 ***             371 ***              67 ***
                                   Std. Err.         (136)               (36)                (32)                (70)               (24)
                                   Mean DV          32,430             11,702              11,994               6,719              2,016
                                   Pct. Change          3.7                3.0                 3.5                 5.5                3.3

B. Appellate Outcome as Percent of Induced Initial Denials
All Induced Denials                      100.0             35.3                            27.5               29.5                7.7
By Reason for Initial Denial
 Non-Medical Reason                      100.0             56.3                            11.6               17.9               14.2
 Not Severe                              100.0             50.1                            12.9               26.3               10.6
 Short Duration                          100.0              --                              --                 --                 --
 Capable of Past Work                    100.0             23.8                            38.4               32.7               5.1
 Capable of Other Work                   100.0             29.2                            34.7               30.6               5.5
Notes: *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level. Each group of cells
presents results from separate OLS estimations of Equation (1). In all regressions, N=3825 state-month observations on the number of
SSDI claims filed that resulted in a given outcome. Coef. is the coefficient on the number unemployed multiplied by the number of workers
equivalent to one percent of the national labor force, and thus indicates the number of additional applications of a give outcome type
induced by a one-point increase in the unemployment rate. Mean DV, the mean of each dependent variable, gives the average monthly
claims of a given outcome type. Percent change is the Coef./Mean DV, or the percent change in the outcome.
Table 7. Effects of Unemployment Rate on Initial Claims, Denials, Appellate Claims, and Outcomes on Appeal, by Primary Diagnosis
                                                                                                   Among Initial Denials

                                                     Initial
                                 Initial Claims   Allowances    Initial Denials   No Appeal      Allowance        Denial           Dismissal
                                      (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)               (7)
A. Effect of Unemployment Rate

Musculoskeletal Coef.               1,785 **         463 **        1,322 ***         381 ***        459 ***         397 ***            86 ***
                 SE                 (345)          (181)           (171)            (41)           (48)            (76)              (21)
                 Mean DV           43,423         12,228          31,196          11,731         11,515           6,149             1,800
                 Pct. Change           4.1            3.8             4.2             3.2            4.0             6.5               4.8
Mental           Coef.                992 ***          -52         1,044 ***         459 ***        222 ***         282 ***            81 ***
                 SE                 (241)            (99)          (147)            (60)           (28)            (54)              (15)
                 Mean DV           27,059           8,706         18,353           8,960          4,307           3,758             1,328
                 Pct. Change           3.7            -0.6            5.7             5.1            5.2             7.5               6.1
Circulatory      Coef.                352 **          124 *          227 ***           78 ***         69 ***          68 ***            13 *
                 SE                 (132)            (62)           (73)            (24)           (19)            (26)                (7)
                 Mean DV           12,592           5,578          7,014           2,955          2,530           1,158               371
                 Pct. Change           2.8             2.2            3.2             2.6            2.7             5.9               3.5
Neoplasms        Coef.                184 ***         136 ***          49 ***          17 ***         18 ***          12 ***            2 **
                 SE                  (22)            (25)             (7)             (5)            (3)             (2)              (1)
                 Mean DV            9,011           7,075          1,936             926            680             250                80
                 Pct. Change           2.0             1.9           2.5              1.8            2.6             4.9              2.0
Other            Coef.              1,142 ***        203 **          940 ***         331 ***        218 ***         297 ***            94 ***
                 SE                 (256)          (100)           (168)            (63)           (22)            (72)              (21)
                 Mean DV           43,859         13,041          30,819          15,524          8,091           5,406             1,798
                 Pct. Change           2.6            1.6             3.0             2.1            2.7             5.5               5.2

B. Primary Diagnosis Percent of Induced Claims
Musculoskeletal                      100.0           25.9           74.1
Mental                               100.0           -5.3          105.2
Circulatory                          100.0           35.3           64.7
Neoplasms                            100.0           73.7           26.3
Other                                100.0           17.8           82.3

C. Primary Diagnosis Percent of Induced Initial Denials
Musculoskeletal                                                    100.0           28.8             34.7           30.0            6.5
Mental                                                             100.0           44.0             21.3           27.0            7.8
Circulatory                                                        100.0           34.3             30.3           29.8            5.6
Neoplasms                                                          100.0           34.4             37.0           25.2            3.3
Other                                                              100.0           35.2             23.2           31.6          10.0
Notes: *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level. Each group of
figures presents regression estimates for a different outcome. In all models, N=3825 state-month observations of the number of
SSDI claims filed that resulted in a given outcome. Coef. refers to the coefficient on the number unemployed multiplied by the
number of workers equivalent to one percent of the national labor force, and thus indicates the number of additional applications of
a give outcome type induced by a one-point increase in the unemployment rate. Mean DV, the mean of each dependent variable,
gives the average monthly claims of a given outcome type. Percent change is the Coef./Mean DV, or the percent change in the
outcome.
Table A1. Effects of Unemployment Rate at the Time of Filing and
the Time of Onset, Respectively, on Initial Allowances
                                   Filing          Onset
Coef.                                873 *           757 *
SE                                (458)            (449)
Mean DV                          46,627           46,755
Pct. Change                           1.9             1.6
Elasticity                          0.14            0.12

R-squared                        0.982            0.982
n                                3,825              3,825
Notes: *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant
at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
In all models, N=3825 state-month observations of the
number of SSDI claims filed. Coef. refers to the coefficient
on the number unemployed multiplied by the number of
workers equivalent to one percent of the national labor
force, and thus indicates the number of additional
applications of a given outcome type induced by a one-point
increase in the unemployment rate. Mean DV, the mean of
each dependent variable, gives the average monthly claims
of a given outcome type. Percent change is the Coef./Mean
DV, or the percent change in the outcome.
Table A2. Effect of Unemployment Rate on Monthly SSDI Claims, by Specification


                                   Count-count     Log(rate)-log(rate)     Rate-rate      Log(count)-rate
                                       (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)

Claims             Coef.              4,455 ***           0.195 ***         0.0016 ***        0.0153 **
                   SE                   978              0.0354          0.000475            0.00581
                   Mean DV          135,945              -2.441             0.0933              8.293
                   Pct. Change           3.3                   --                 --               1.5
                   Elasticity          0.25                 0.20               0.12              0.21

Weighted by state population?         No                Yes                 No                  Yes
R-squared                            0.987             0.976              0.956               0.997
n                                    3,825             3,825              3,825               3,825
Notes: *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the
10 percent level. In all models, N=3825 state-month observations of the number of SSDI claims filed.
Coef. refers to the coefficient on the number unemployed multiplied by the number of workers
equivalent to one percent of the national labor force, and thus indicates the number of additional
applications of a given outcome type induced by a one-point increase in the unemployment rate. Mean
DV, the mean of each dependent variable, gives the average monthly claims of a given outcome type.
Percent change is the Coef./Mean DV, or the percent change in the outcome.
