NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES REMEDIAL EDUCATION AT LATE CHILDHOOD PAY OFF AFTER ALL?
LONG-RUN CONSEQUENCES FOR UNIVERSITY SCHOOLING,
LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES AND INTER-GENERATIONAL MOBILITY

Victor Lavy
Assaf Kott
Genia Rachkovski
Working Paper 25332
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25332

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

Special thanks go to the Social Security Administration of Israel for use of their secure research
lab and for help with data in the lab. We benefitted from comments and suggestions of
participants at seminars and conferences. Lavy thanks the European Research Council for
financial support, through ERC Advanced Grant 323439. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Victor Lavy, Assaf Kott, and Genia Rachkovski. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Remedial Education at Late Childhood Pay Off After All? Long-Run Consequences
for University Schooling, Labor Market Outcomes and Inter-Generational Mobility
Victor Lavy, Assaf Kott, and Genia Rachkovski
NBER Working Paper No. 25332
December 2018
JEL No. I28,J24
ABSTRACT
We analyze in this paper the long term effect of a high school remedial education program,
almost two decades after its implementation. We combine high school records with National
Social Security administrative data to examine longer-term outcomes when students were in their
early 30s. Our evidence suggest that treated students experienced a 10 percentage points increase
in completed years of college schooling, an increase in annual earnings of 4 percentage points, an
increase of 1.5 percentage points in months employed, and a significant increase in
intergenerational income mobility. These gains are reflecting mainly improvement in outcomes of
students from below median income families. Therefore, we conclude that remedial education
program that targeted underachieving students in their last year of high school had gains that went
much beyond the short term significant improvements in high school matriculation exams. A cost
benefit analysis of the program suggests that the government will recover its cost within 7-8
years, implying a very high rate of return to this remedial education program.
Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
and Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and also NBER
v.lavy@warwick.ac.uk
Assaf Kott
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
assafkott@gmail.com

Genia Rachkovski
Northwestern University
633 Clark St.
Evanston, IL 60208
geniar9@gmail.com

Introduction
Remedial education programs have become a popular instrument to increase high-school
matriculation and to prepare weak students for college level course work (Calcagno and Long, 2008). So
far research on the casual effect of remedial programs and on its cost-effectiveness focused on short-term
outcomes, mainly on test scores and high school completion. In this paper, we study the long-term effects
of a remedial education program targeted for underperforming high school students, implemented in Israel
in 1999-2003. Lavy and Schlosser (2005) show that this program had a large positive short term impact on
treated students, causing a 13 percentage points increase in their probability of achieving a matriculation
diploma at end of high school, equivalent to a 22 percent increase relative to counterfactual. Sixteen years
after the program was first implemented, we set out to explore the program's effect on adulthood outcomes.
Specifically, on post-secondary schooling, labor-market and personal status outcomes. The gradual
implementation of the program allows us to use a propensity score matching design in which participants
in the program are matched with non-participants from schools that adopted the program two years later.
We observe students' outcomes every year from high school graduation (2000-2001), until age 33 (in 2015).
Thus, we can estimate the treatment effects for every year in the period and trace the dynamic evolution of
the program effects.
This paper contributes to the ongoing debate over the relative merit of early versus late childhood
intervention with the unique perspective of investigating the effect on adulthood outcomes. By looking at
how remedial education affects adulthood outcomes, this article addresses the question of whether
investments in the later stages of a child’s development have sustained long-term positive payoffs. Recent
evidence in support of early childhood interventions is documented in Currie (2001), Currie and Thomas
(2001), Krueger and Whitmore (2001), and Garces, Thomas, and Currie (2002). Carneiro and Heckman
(2003) suggest that there is a consensus among practitioners in the ﬁeld that early childhood interventions
are preferred, mainly because it is much more difﬁcult to improve an individual’s cognitive and noncognitive abilities later in life. The evidence on high school interventions is mostly based on randomized
trials in the United States, where an array of service-oriented dropout-prevention programs for American
1

teens has failed to increase graduation rates (Dynarski and Gleason 1998). Our evidence in this paper, in
contrast, shows positive returns at adulthood for an intervention implemented at a relatively late stage of
schooling. Our research is also related to the recent debate on the effects of school inputs and expenditures
on student success and achievement. For a discussion of this issue, see Carneiro and Heckman (2003). The
evidence we provide in this article concerns a relatively neglected form of intervention, that of augmenting
instruction time for targeted students rather than for an entire class.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to link participation in an educational remedial program in
high-school to achievements in adulthood. Recent studies have mainly focused on the short-term effect of
remediation programs on academic outcomes. A considerable amount of work has centered on remediation
programs that were carried in elementary or high schools. On the other hand, there are some studies that
examine remediation programs for college students. Both strands of the literature focused on the short-term
effects of these programs. Banerjee, Cole, Duflo, & Linden (2007) have studied a remedial program in India
in which students at grade 3 or 4 received targeted instruction from an informal teacher and find that it was
successful in the short run with an increase of 0.14 and 0.28 standard deviations in average test scores
during the first and second year, respectively. Banerjee et al. (2010) show that a remedial education program
in NGO’s schools, based on carefully monitored but lightly trained community volunteers in India
significantly improved the reading ability of children who attended the program. Banerjee et al. (2016)
evaluate a similar scale-up randomized experiment of targeted remedial education in government schools
in four Indian States and find gains in language of 0.15-0.70 standard deviations. Battistin and Schizzerotto
(2012) have assessed an upper secondary remedial education summer school reform in Italy in which
underperforming students had to take remedial courses over the summer. They find heterogeneous
treatment effect, with mildly positive effects on performance for students enrolled in the academic track,
and negative effects for students in technical and vocational oriented schools. Angrist, Lang, and
Oreopoulos (2009) find that a college program combining academic support service with financial
incentives had a positive effect on study skills of women with no effect on men. Martorell and McFarlin
(2011) study the effect of a college remediation program and find that the program had little effect on
2

academic and job-market outcomes. Scrivener et al. (2015) examines the effect of the City University of
New York's Accelerated Study in Associate Program. This program required students to attend college full
time and encourages them to take developmental courses. Their findings suggest that the program had a
positive effect on participants' academic outcomes over the course of three-year studies.
By combining high school records with National Social Security administrative data we supplement
to this literature an examination of the effects on longer-term outcomes (when students were in their early
30s) such as post-secondary schooling attainment, marriage and fertility, employment and earnings. Treated
students experienced economically meaningful gains in terms of post-secondary schooling attainment. Postsecondary ever enrollment of treated students increased by 13.6 percentage points and completed years of
education increased by 10 percentage points. These gains were mainly driven by gains in academic and
teachers’ colleges, a lower quality tier of academic institutions in Israel while there was no significant
change in University schooling. Moreover, we find an increase in annual earnings of 4 percentage points
and an increase of 1.5 percentage points in months employed though these estimates are less precisely
estimated. We find heterogeneous treatment effects with the gains in post-secondary education and in
earnings among the treated group stemming mostly from the individuals below median family income.
Finally, we find a significant increase in income mobility among the treated group as compared to the
control and positive effects on marriage and child birth.
The paper proceeds as follows, in section 2 we describe the remedial education program, in section
3 we present the data and in section 4 we present the identification strategy and the econometric model. In
section 5 we present the results on the variety of long-term outcomes discussed above and address
implications on intergenerational mobility, in section 6 we conclude.
1. Background and the Bagrut 2000 Program
The analysis of the short term effect presented in Lavy and Schlosser (2005) indicated that the
remedial education program led to 3-4 percentage point increase in the schools’ average matriculation rate
and to an increase of 12 percentage points in participating students probability of earning matriculation
3

certificate. The latter implies a 19 percent improvement. We first summarize below the main features of the
remedial education program and then examine whether these gains were translated into economically
meaningful improvements in adulthood.
Israeli post-primary education consists of junior high school (grades 7–9) and high school (grades
10–12). High school students are enrolled either in an academic track leading to a matriculation certificate
(Bagrut in Hebrew) or in an alternative track leading only to a high school diploma. The Bagrut is completed
by passing a series of national exams in core and elective subjects beginning in tenth grade, with more tests
taken in eleventh grade and most taken in twelfth grade. Students choose to be tested at various levels of
proficiency, with each test awarding from one to five credit units per subject, depending on difficulty. Some
subjects are mandatory, and for many the most basic level is three credits. A minimum of 20 credits is
required to qualify for a matriculation certificate. About 52% of high school graduates and 46% of members
of the relevant age cohort received matriculation certificates in 2002. The Israel Ministry of Education has
singled out as its top priority the need to raise the matriculation rate, especially among disadvantaged
students and students in peripheral communities (Ministry of Education, Culture, and Sport 2001). The
ministry instituted several programs toward this goal: achievement awards for high school students (Angrist
and Lavy 2009), school incentives (Lavy 2002), teacher incentives (Lavy 2009), and the large-scale
remedial education program investigated here. These initiatives provide an opportunity to gauge the
effectiveness of interventions in high school. Moreover, since all the interventions were implemented
during the same period and share similar goals, their effectiveness may be compared. Whereas the first
three interventions cited above were aimed at improving the incentives for teachers and students, the
intervention analyzed in this study is based on the concept of injecting added school resources in the form
of extra instructional hours for underperforming students. The Bagrut 2000 program targets low-achieving
high schools. Table A1 in the appendix presents the program timeline and Table A2 presents the number
of schools and of students enrolled in the program in 2001. In its first phase, which began in October 1999,
it included 10 schools. During that academic year, nine additional schools were added to the program. In
the following year, there were 42 participating schools. The program continued to expand; in 2002, it
4

included 130 schools. The gradual implementation was due mainly to budget constraints. Schools were
enrolled into the program in no particular order, although the schools participating in the first year include
a higher proportion of disadvantaged students and have lower tests scores and matriculation rates. Table
A1 presents the program timeline and the dates of the matriculation examinations that constitute the basis
for the pre- and post-program cohorts used in the evaluation.
The intervention included individualized instruction in small study groups of up to five students
for tenth, eleventh, and twelfth graders. The aims of the intervention were (1) to design individualized
instruction based on students’ needs; (2) to increase the matriculation rate; (3) to enhance the scholastic and
cognitive abilities, self-image, and leadership aptitudes of underperforming students. Participants were
chosen by their teachers based on the likelihood of their passing the matriculation exams. Although no
single quantifiable measure was used to apply this guideline, teachers were instructed to select students
who had up to three potentially failing subjects. The additional tutoring was focused on these subjects; the
remedial classes were held during after-school hours and were taught by the classroom teachers.
2. The Data
In this study we use data from administrative files for students who studied in high schools that
implemented the remedial education program between 1999 and 2001. The students in the sample
completed high school in 2001, and in 2015 they are adults, age 33. We use several panel datasets available
from Israel’s National Insurance Institute (NII). The NII is responsible for social security and mandatory
health insurance in Israel. NII allows restricted access to this data in their protected research lab. The
underlying data sources include: (1) the population registry data, which contains information on marital
status, number of children and their birth dates; (2) NII records of postsecondary ever enrollment from 2000
through 2013 based on annual reports submitted to NII by all post-secondary education institutions, from
which we calculated the number of years of post-secondary schooling1; (3) Israel Tax Authority information

The NII, which is responsible for the mandatory health insurance tax in Israel, tracks postsecondary enrollment
because students pay a lower health insurance tax rate. Postsecondary schools are therefore required to send a list of
1

5

on income and earnings of employees and self-employed individuals for 2000-2015, for students and their
parents; (4) NII records on post-secondary schooling until 2013, marriage and fertility data until 2016. The
NII linked this data set to the students’ background data that was used in Lavy and Schlosser (2005) to
study the effect of the remedial education program on high school academic outcomes. This information
comes from administrative records of the Ministry of Education on the universe of Israeli primary schools
during the 1997-2002 school years. In addition to an individual identifier, and a school and class identifier,
it also included the following family-background variables: parental schooling, number of siblings, country
of birth, date of immigration if born outside of Israel, ethnicity and a variety of high school achievement
measures. This file also included a treatment indicator and cohort of study. We had restricted access to this
data in the NII research lab at the NII headquarters in Jerusalem.

b. Post-high school outcomes
In these data, we observe two sets of post-secondary outcomes for each of the students in our
sample. First, we observe post-secondary schooling attainment, including the type of post-secondary
schooling institution attended, if any, and the number of years of schooling completed in each type of
institution. The post-high school outcome variables of interest are indicators of ever having enrolled in a
university or in an academic college, and the number of years of schooling completed in these two types of
academic institutions. Even after accounting for compulsory military service, we expect that most students
who enrolled in post-high school education, including those who continued schooling beyond
undergraduate studies, to have graduated by age 30.
Second, we observe year-by-year labor market outcomes from high school graduation to 2015,
including employment status, information on unemployment benefits and annual earnings. Individual
earnings data come from the Israel Tax Authority (ITA). Filing tax forms in Israel is compulsory only for

enrolled students to the NII every year. For the purposes of our project, the NII Research and Planning Division
constructed an extract containing the 2001–2013 enrollment status of students in our study.

6

individuals with non-zero self-employment earnings but ITA has information on annual gross earnings from
salaried and non-salaried employment and they transfer this information annually to NII, including number
of months of work in a given year. Using this data, NII produces an annual series of total annual earnings
from salaried and self-employment. Following NII practice, individuals with positive (non-zero) number
of months worked and zero or missing value for earnings are assigned zero earnings. We were allowed
restricted access to this data in the NII protected lab in Jerusalem.
Definitions of Outcomes in Adulthood: In this subsection, we describe the outcomes in adulthood for
students in the sample.
Education. University schooling: is an indicator for being enrolled for at least one year in university
schooling and years of university schooling is the number of years of attendance during the period 20002013. Academic college schooling: is an indicator for being enrolled for at least one year in any academic
college and years of college schooling is the number of years of attendance. We code in a similar way the
two respective outcomes for the other types of post-secondary schooling, in particular teachers colleges,
vocational non-academic colleges, and other non-academic institutions
Labor Market Outcome. Earnings: Individual earnings data comes from the Israel Tax Authority (ITA).
Only individuals with non-zero self-employment earnings are required to file tax returns in Israel, but the
ITA has information on annual gross earnings from salaried and non-salaried employment, and they transfer
this information, including the number of months of work in a given year, annually to the NII. The NII
produces an annual series of total annual earnings from salaries and self-employment and we used this
variable for 2000-2015. Following NII practice, individuals with a positive (non-zero) number of months
of work and zero or missing value for earnings are assigned zero earnings. Three percent of individuals
have such zero earnings in 2015 in our basic sample. To account for earnings data-outliers we dropped from
the sample all observations that are six or more standard deviations away from the mean. Very few
observations are dropped from the sample in each of the years and the results are not qualitatively affected
by this sample selection procedure. The same earnings data is also available for the parents of the students
7

in our sample, for the years 2000-2002 and 2008-2012. We compute the average earnings of each parent
and of the household for 2000-2002 and use it as an additional control in a robustness check of the evidence
presented in this paper. These data were not available for the analysis of the effect of the program on shortterm outcomes. Employment: An indicator with value 1 for individuals with non-zero number months of
work in a given year, 0 otherwise. Months worked: The total number of months an individual worked in a
calendric year.
Personal Status Outcomes: The data on marital status and having children is available for 2016. Marriage:
is an indicator for ever being married and we also define as outcome Age at First Marriage. Children: is an
indicator for having at least one child and we also define as an outcome Age at Birth of First Child. Number
of Children: is the number of children until 2016.
3. Identification and Estimation
The average school level effect of the program may be broken down into two parts: the effect on
the participants and the effect on the participants’ peers through externalities and spillover.2 At the school
level the natural comparison group are the schools that enrolled in the program in the following year. At
the student level we do not have a natural comparison group for the treated students and therefore we resort
to a model where selection is based on observables but the control group students are selected from the
schools that enrolled in the following year. The central identifying assumption in this case is that treatment
status is independent of potential achievements conditioned on being from a later enrolled school and on
student’s observable covariates and lagged achievements. Although this assumption is hardly satisﬁed in
most non-experimental studies, choosing students from schools who enroll into the program a year later
and the availability of a wealth of data on student characteristics and student achievement on matriculation

Students in treated schools who were not in the program could have been affected in various ways. For example, the
program may have freed some of the classroom teacher’s time, which could then be directed to untreated students.
Another possibility is that the improved learning of program participants reduced the frequency of disruptions during
regular class sessions. On the other hand, negative externalities may have ensued if the close relationship between
teachers and treated students that developed during treatment resulted in attention in regular classes being diverted
from nonparticipants to participants.
2

8

exams taken before the program was implemented make this a credible approach in our case.3 As Smith
and Todd (2005) note, a critical condition for reducing selection bias is to have data containing a rich set
of variables that affect both program participation and student achievement.
A comparison group was selected from among the students in the comparison schools. We avoided
choosing students from treated schools because, ﬁrst, they might have been exposed to treatment through
potential externalities of the program and second, they might be different from program participants in
observable and unobservable characteristics, as hinted by the fact that they were not chosen for the program.
As a benchmark we ﬁrst estimated OLS regressions in which we controlled for the following student and
school covariates: gender, ethnic origin, parents’ education, number of siblings, immigration status, number
of matriculation credits earned in grades 10 and 11, average weighted score on these credits, school size,
its square, twelfth-grade ever enrollment, religious status of school, parental earnings, and school
matriculation rate in 1999. Although this method controls for a large set of covariates and preprogram
achievements, we might have been comparing dissimilar populations, since the achievements for treated
students would be contrasted with the achievements for the whole sample of students from comparison
schools.4 An alternative approach is to implement a nonparametric matching method, as in Angrist (1998).
This would assure that the subsets of students that form the treated and comparison groups have similar
distributions of covariates. It also reduces the need to rely on model extrapolations and functional form.
However, this procedure has a major problem in that as the number of covariates increases, the probability
that both treated and comparison students will have the same set of covariates approaches zero. Rosenbaum
and Rubin (1983) proposed an alternative approach that circumvents the curse of dimensionality. They

The claim that the program itself may have changed the students’ behavior and achievement on the examinations
taken before participation in the program is not a concern in this case for two reasons: ﬁrst, for most schools, it was
the ﬁrst year of implementation of the program, making it highly unlikely that the students were aware of the program
before they were given the opportunity to participate. Second, the preprogram achievements are based on the
matriculation examinations, which have a strong inﬂuence on opportunities for higher education and jobs. Thus, it
does not stand to reason that students would risk future opportunities and underperform on these exams in order to be
admitted to the program.
4
Because some of the covariates are non-discrete, OLS estimates will be based on the whole sample even if for some
values of the covariates there are only treated or comparison students.
3

9

provide a proof that states that if treatment assignment can be ignored given x, then it can be ignored given
any balancing score that is a function of x, in particular the propensity score. We provide more details below
on the propensity matching method that we implement in this paper.
4.1 Empirical Model
We first specify the following linear regression model which we estimate using Ordinary Least Squares:

Yi   i   ' X i    Ti   i

(1)

Where Yi is the long term outcome (years of post-secondary education, earnings, etc.) of student I, X i is
a vector of student and school characteristics, Ti is a dummy variable indicating the treatment status of the
student and  i is the error term , which we cluster at the school level which is the unit of treatment. We
first estimated equation (1) as an OLS regression and in a second step estimated it as a Weighed Ordinary
Least Squares regression which is a mixed propensity score matching and OLS regression.5 We use the
following two steps algorithm:
1. Estimating the propensity score using a Probit specification

p1 ( X i )  Pr(Ti  1| X i )
p0 ( X i )  Pr(Ti  0 | X i )
2. Matching treated individuals to the comparison groups using both the nearest neighbor and Kernel
matching algorithms with replacement and on common support
a. Nearest neighbor matching was preformed using 3 neighbors matched on the log of the odds ratio.
b. Kernel matching was performed using the Biweight kernel function and a 0.06 bandwidth.
3. Weights were allocated to individuals in the comparison group according to the matching algorithm and
normalized:
a. Nearest neighbor:

P1 ( X j )

 1{Log ( P ( X

j|T j 0

5

0

j

)

)  Log (

P1 ( X i )
P(X )
P(X )
)  Log ( 1 l )  Log ( 1 i )}  m
P0 ( X i )
P0 ( X l )
P0 ( X i )

The entire procedure was performed in Stata using the psmatch2 function, Leuven and Sianesi(2003)

10

Wi  1{m  3}
b. Kernel matching:

Wj 

p ( X )  p1 ( X i ) 2 2
15
(1  ( 1 j
) )
16
0.06

Where i is the treated individual to be matched.
4. Using the same controlled regression as in the simple OLS and applying the weights calculated in (every
treated individual receives

Wi  1 ) (3)

Yi   i   ' X i    Ti   i
This combination of the methods of propensity score matching weighting and regression allows for
enhanced robustness to misspecification, as long as the parametric model for either the propensity score or
the regression functions is specified correctly, the resulting estimator for the average treatment effect is
consistent. A notion discussed and termed as ‘double robustness’ in Robins and Ritov (1997) and Imbens
(2004).6
The propensity score was estimated on the basis of all the aforementioned student covariates, including
preprogram achievements, and school characteristics. We tried various speciﬁcations in which we omitted
one of the preprogram achievements from the propensity score equation and checked whether the matched
sample was balanced for this covariate. The similar achievement of treated and comparison students in
preprogram data omitted from the propensity score equation reinforces the credibility of the assumption
that treated and comparison students would have done similarly afterward, too, if the treated students had
not been treated. The standard errors of the estimates of the program effects were computed using twostage bootstrap methods that preserve the clustered structure of the data. In the ﬁrst stage, we sampled
schools with replacement; in the second stage we sampled students with in schools. For each generated
sample, we estimated a propensity score function, and we then applied matching procedures to generate the
estimates. The standard errors were derived from the results obtained in these replications. For the

6

See Abadie and Imbens (2002) for details regarding the use of OLS with the matching procedure weighting.

11

theoretical context, see Davison and Hinkley (1997); for an application of this procedure, see Subramanian
and Deaton (1996).
A point to emphasize is that the matching of the propensity score is not meant to emulate the selection
process used in the program; it is based mainly on the same central assumption of selection on observables
that underlies the linear regression. The main purpose of propensity score matching is to restrict the nonexperimental comparison group to a sample that has the same distribution of covariates as the treated
students. For example, Table 1 compares the characteristics of treated and comparison students matched by
nearest neighbor matching.7 A total of 1,168 students from comparison schools were matched with 1,789
treated students. We were able to ﬁnd a match for every treated student. The matched comparison students
were selected from all comparison schools, reinforcing the argument that treated and comparison schools
have similar characteristics. The comparison of treated and matched students shows no signiﬁcant
differences between the two groups in any of the student or school covariates.
To identify the program effects on non-treated students, we applied the same methodology described
for treated students. Non-treated students in treated schools are compared to students from comparison
schools, using linear regressions and alternative matching methods.

4.2 Descriptive Statistics
The ﬁrst year of the study (1999–2000) was a pilot in which only twelfth-grade students from a few
schools participated. Therefore, the evaluation focuses on the ﬁrst year of full implementation, 2000–2001.
Thus, 1998–99 is considered a pretreatment year. Appendix Table A2 (reproduced from Lavy and Schlosser
2005) presents the treated population, 1,789 students which accounted for 28% of all 12th grade students in
the treated schools. However, this rate varied across schools, from 11% to 79%, as a result of a rule that
allowed each school to include up to 100 students in the program irrespective of school size. Although this

We ﬁrst limited the sample to those treated and control students having propensity scores in the region of common
support. Each treated student was matched with a student from comparison schools that had the nearest propensity
score. Some comparison students were matched to more than one treated student. Nevertheless, most comparison
students were used a maximum of two times.
7

12

rule was not strictly enforced, it led to a negative correlation between the proportion enrolled in the program
and school size (see appendix Figure A1, reproduced from Figure 2 in Lavy and Schlosser 2005). Appendix
Figure A2 (reproduced from Figure 4 Lavy and Schlosser 2005) show the relationship between the
preprogram school matriculation rate and the program participation rate. Clearly the ﬁgure shows that there
was no correlation between the program participation rate and the preprogram school matriculation rate.
Schools and students were not chosen randomly to participate in the program. However, the gradual
implementation of the program offers a natural comparison group that includes schools that enrolled in the
program at a later year (2001–02). Therefore, we base the identiﬁcation strategy on a comparison of treated
and untreated students from early and late enrolled schools into the program. The mean characteristics of
the schools that enrolled later strongly resemble those of the schools that enrolled ﬁrst. Since this similarity
is found both for the pretreatment cohort of seniors and for the treated cohort, it provides support for our
claim that, during the ﬁrst few years of the program, schools were enrolled in no particular order. Appendix
Table A3 (appeared as Table 2 in Lavy and Schlosser 2005) presents descriptive statistics and balancing
tests based on data for the 1999 graduating cohort among two groups of schools: schools that were treated
in the ﬁrst year of the program (col. 1) and schools to be enrolled in the second year (col. 2). The table
shows only a few minor differences between treated and comparison schools. These differences are
presented in column 3 and in parenthesis we present the differences standard errors. Table 1 presents an
equivalent analysis to table A3 but is based on the 2001 graduating cohort. We discuss these results in more
detail in the next section and we only highlight here the same similarity between treated and comparison
schools that we observed based on the pre-treatment baseline sample of the 1999 cohort. For the 2001
graduating cohort of Table 1, it is also worth emphasizing the lack of signiﬁcant differences in terms of
lagged achievements (number of credits earned before twelfth grade and average score), which suggests
that students from treated and comparison schools had similar achievements before the program started. On
the other hand, the comparison of the treated schools with all other high schools in the country (i.e., those
that are neither treated nor comparison schools) reveals a very different pattern. Results not shown in the
paper clearly reveal that the two groups are signiﬁcantly different in almost all student characteristics.
13

Student achievements during the pretreatment period were also considerably higher in this sample of other
schools than in treated schools.
4.3 Propensity Score and Treated-Comparison Group Comparison
Table 1, columns 1-2, presents detailed summary descriptive statistics for the variables that we use
in the propensity score estimation, by treated students and their matched counterparts which we use as a
comparison group. In column 3 we present the respective mean differences and in parenthesis the
differences standard errors. Panel A presents evidence for student’s demographic characteristics. Mean
mother and father years of schooling are perfectly balanced, the differences being very small (-0.18 and 0.12) and not statistically different from zero. This pattern of close similarity between the two groups is
also evident for the number of siblings, immigration status, and gender. In panel B we report this sort of
balancing tests for parental average annual earnings in 2000-2002 and their ethnic origin. Father average
annual earnings in this period is 101,363 NIS in the treated group and 98,340 NIS in the comparison group,
the difference of 3,022 NIS is small and not statistically different from zero. Similar evidence is seen for
mother’s annual earnings, and there are no significant differences in parental ethnic origin as well. We note
that data on parental earnings were not available when we studied the effect of the program on short term
outcomes and therefore the treatment-control group balancing evidence is additional support for the close
similarity between the treatment group and the chosen control group.
In panel C we present evidence on lagged academic outcomes, the average score in matriculation
exams taken prior to 12th grade and number of credits gained through these exams. These two outcomes are
perfectly balanced. For example, the difference between the two groups in lagged average test scores is
0.84 is about one percent of the treatment group mean and is not statistically different from zero. Panel D
includes means of two school characteristics which we include in the propensity score regression, ever
enrollment in 12th grade and ever enrollment in 10th through 12th grades. The first of the two is better
balanced with a very small treat-comparison group difference, but in both measures the difference is not
statistically different from zero.
14

4.4 Extensions of Estimation Effect of Remedial Education on High School Outcomes
In this section we present estimates of the program on end of high school matriculation diploma
status. The first row of Table 2 presents estimates based on a specification that includes family earnings as
an additional control variable in the Bagrut outcome regression. As noted above, the family income variable
was not available at the time when Lavy and Schlosser (2005) studied the effect of the program on the
Bagrut rate. We note, however, that adding these family income variables as controls leaves the results
unchanged. In columns 1-3 we present the treatment effect estimates on program participants and in
columns 4-6 we present the (placebo) effect of the program on non-participants from schools that
participated in the program. Columns 1 and 4 present OLS estimates, columns 2 and 5 present nearest
neighbor matching estimates and columns 3 and 6 present kernel matching estimates. In addition to
evidence based on the full sample of participants and non-participants, we also add evidence based on
stratifying the sample family income measured by median parental income in the years 2002-2002.
Evidence by this sample division were not reported in Lavy and Schlosser (2005) and therefore they are
new evidence presented in this paper.
Several broad conclusions can be drawn from the evidence presented in Table 2. First, using family
income in the propensity score regression does not change the result that the program increased the
matriculation rate of participants by 13 percentage points. Similarly, the zero effect on non-participants is
unchanged as a result of this addition. Secondly, remedial education led to an increase in matriculation rates
of the two sub groups defined by family income but the strongest estimated effect is on the below median
family income students. The program effect on Bagrut rate of this group (panel B) increased by 20
percentage points, about 30 percent increase relative to the ex-post mean of 65 percent of the treated group.
The effect on students with family income above the mean is significantly lower, as it is only 5-6 percentage
points relative to an ex-post mean of 71 percent. It could be that students with above median family income
could afford private tutoring, a very common practice towards the high stake matriculation exams, reducing

15

the effectiveness of additional remedial instruction in school, while those below median could not afford
such private tutoring.

4. Effect of Remedial Education on Long Term Outcomes
5.1 Post-Secondary Schooling
We first examine the effect of the remedial education program on post-secondary schooling
attainment. Table 3 presents the treatment effect on ever enrollment and on completed years of schooling
on any type of post-secondary education. In each panel we also present the means of outcome variables for
the treated group. We report estimates based on an OLS regressions and on the two different methods of
propensity score matching, nearest neighbor and kernel. All regressions include the original covariates used
in Lavy and Schlosser (2005) and in addition also average family income in the years 2000-2002. Estimates
without this additional control are very similar and therefore we report only the estimates with this control
included. We present estimates of treatment effect on program participants (columns 1-3) for 2013, twelve
years since high school graduation. Similarly, for non-participants, in columns 4-6.
The point estimates in the different columns of Table 3 are consistently similar across the three
methods of estimation. The OLS and the two propensity score matching methods yield positive treatment
effects on ever enrollment and on years of post-secondary schooling. For example, based on kernel
matching, ever enrollment in post-secondary schooling in 2013 is up by a statistically significant 7.6
percentage points (SE=1.9) and the estimates based on the other two methods are 7.2 percent (OLS) and
8.1 percent (nearest neighbor). The effect on completed years of schooling based on kernel matching is
positive and precisely measured, an effect of 0.227 years (se=0.089).
We also use the same three estimation strategies based on a sample of non-participant students and
their matched comparison group and obtain very different results that suggest zero and statistically
insignificant effects of the programs on non-participant students in schools that participated in the program.
These estimates which are presented in Table 3 columns 4-6 can be viewed as placebo treatment effects
16

though we can also see them as suggesting zero spillover effects within schools. The kernel matching
estimate of the effect on post-secondary school ever enrollment in 2013 is -0.007 (se=0.017) and
importantly it is statistically different than the estimated effect on the treated. The kernel matching estimate
of the effect on years of post-secondary schooling is 0.064 (se=0.074) and it is also statistically different
then the respective treatment effect on the treated presented in column 3. Both of these placebo estimates
also assure that our estimates are not driven by any school level confounders.
The overall effect on post-secondary schooling can be derived from different effects on the various
types of post-secondary education institutions. Since the program was targeted to relatively under achieving
students we expect to find some effect also through schools that do not confers academic degrees such as
vocational and other non-academic colleges. Table 4 presents estimations of the treatment effect on
completed years of schooling by various types of post-secondary education. The first type, shown in panel
B, includes the seven research universities in Israel that confer BA, MA and PhD degrees. The second subsector is made up of more than 50 academic colleges that mostly confer a BA degree and predominantly
offer social sciences, business and law degrees. The remainder sub-sectors are: teachers' academic colleges,
vocational non-academic colleges, and other non-academic institutions. Table 4 suggests that the positive
effect on post-secondary education is mainly due to increased enrollment and years of schooling in nonuniversity post-secondary schooling. The effect is largest and most significant on attainment in academiccolleges. These institutions in Israel are similar to 4-years community colleges in the US. The effect on
completed years of academic college is positive and significant under all three methods. Completed years
of academic college education increased by about a fifth of a year and this change is precisely measured (t
statistic over 4). Relative to an ex-post mean of 1.249 for the treated group in 2013 these results suggest an
effect of approximately 20% increase. The respective effect on schooling in teachers, vocational and other
institutions are also positive but small and not precisely measured.
The fact that the effects are concentrated on the lower end of the quality of academic education in
Israel is perhaps expected since participants in the remedial education program are at the margin of passing
the matriculation exams and obtaining a bagrut diploma and therefore they are also likely marginal in
17

admission to post-secondary institutions, especially at one of the seven research universities where
admission criterions are much higher. Furthermore, it is interesting to note that the evidence presented in
Table 4 suggest a decline in years of university education of about 0.085 of a year of schooling. This implies
that the program led to some change in the composition of post-secondary schooling, away from the higher
quality university schooling into other, somewhat less lucrative, post-secondary institutions. Several
possible explanations for this result. First, students that improve their average matriculation score can now
choose more desired fields of study but in colleges and not in universities, for example law and business
administration, and they might prefer it over a field of study at a university that they would have chosen
otherwise, for example in humanities or social science. Second, this could be a consequence of peer effect,
for example the students who are affected by the program and as a result get to attend post-secondary
schooling, perhaps ‘pool’ their friends to attend academic colleges instead of universities that they would
have attended otherwise.
In Figures 1-6, we measure the treatment effect for each year since high school graduation and trace
the dynamic pattern for each of the university and college schooling outcomes. To do so, we run a separate
regression for each of the outcomes and for each of the years since high school graduation. We then plot
the coefficients of these regressions around a 90% confidence interval. Note that both the ever-enrolled
variable and the years of schooling are cumulative variables. Hence, we expected the effects to be either
flat or increasing over time.
We find that the effect on academic colleges ever enrollment rate is flat after six years. This pattern
likely reflects the fact that students who do not enroll in post-secondary schooling in the first six years are
unlikely to return to school later in life. In contrast, the effect on years of schooling accumulates over time.
Although most of the increase happens in the first six years, the effect seems to be increasing even after 12
years since graduation. The fact that the increase keeps accumulating even 12 years after high school
graduation suggests that measuring outcomes too close to high-school graduation might underestimate the
long-term effects.

18

The substitution over time from university into academic colleges can be seen graphically in
Figures 4 and 5. The divergence starts early on, suggesting differences in the initial choice of academic
institutions and it accumulate over time as students spend time in these institutions. By year 12 after high
school graduation, treated students had accumulated on average 0.2 extra years of academic college
education and 0.085 less years of university education than the control group.
As noted earlier, the remedial education program led also to a positive treatment effect on postsecondary schooling in other forms of post-secondary schooling. These gains follow the same dynamic
pattern and timing as the gains in academic college education, reaching a pick in the increase in completed
years in teachers’ colleges increased by 0.06 at year 11-12 after high school graduation and an increase in
non-academic schooling and vocational years of schooling of 0.025 each earlier on.
Heterogeneity of Effect of Remedial Education by Socio-Economic Background of Students: The full
sample results might be masking heterogeneous effects by economic background of students. Such
heterogeneity in treatment effect is relevant in this context for understanding the policy implications of our
findings, in particular for considerations of targeting the remedial education treatment to sub-populations
that can mostly benefit from it. In section 4.4 we reported much larger effect on the matriculation rate of
students from families with below median family income and below we present results on the effect on
post-secondary schooling again by stratifying the sample by family income. As noted earlier, we use
average parental income in 2000-2002 as the measure of family income. In columns 4-5 of Table 4 we
report estimates based on samples stratified by family income. Students with below median family income
experienced an increase of 0.3 years in total post-secondary education, compared to their matched control
group. This effect is coming from marginally significant increases of 0.17 and 0.09 years of education in
academic college and teachers’ colleges respectively. In the subgroup with above median family income
we observe a gain of 0.2 years in academic college education and a decrease of 0.16 in university years of
education, both are precisely measured and therefore no gain for this group’s overall post-secondary
schooling attainment.
19

5.2 Effect on Employment and Earnings
We start with a graphical presentation of the dynamic impact of the remedial education program
on labor market outcomes: Earnings, Employment and Months worked. For each outcome we present
estimates from the two different methods of propensity score matching which we use. The labor market
outcomes' data are available until 2015.
Figures 7 and 7A present the estimated effect on employment based on the nearest neighbor and
kernel matching propensity score, respectively. The estimates for the first three years are not meaningful
because most of the students in our sample were still in military service. In the fourth year after high school
graduation, about 90 percent of the individuals in the sample were employed (according to our definition
of employment, which is employed at least for one month during the year and had positive earnings). For
almost all years the estimates are not precisely measured with the exception of 2006, 2010 and 2015 where
the estimates are positive, 2%, 2.3% and 1.7% respectively, and they are statistically significant. These
imprecise and inconclusive employment dynamics imply that they do not play an important role in
determining the effect of the remedial education program on earnings. We gain further insight about the
employment effect of the program by estimating its effect on the total number of months worked in a year.
These estimates are presented in Figures 8 and 8A and they are positive and significant throughout most of
the period. Ignoring the first three years, the estimates for 2006 to 2012 are between 0.2 and 0.3 of a month.
In 2013-2015 the estimates are smaller and no longer statistically different from zero. The small or zero
effect on annual employment status is probably due to a ceiling effect given the high employment rate in
Israel and in our sample as well throughout this period. The positive effect of the program on months of
work suggest that the program increased the likelihood of keeping a job once employed. However, our data
does not allow to test this hypothesis.
We next turn to the time series of estimated effects on annual earnings, which are presented in
Figures 9 and 9A. These treatment estimates are positive throughout the period. They increase over time
monotonically with the exception of 2009 and 2013. Similarly, average annual earnings in the sample also
20

increase monotonically until the end of the period, from NIS 33,000 (about $8,000) in 2005 to just below
NIS 90,000 in 2015. The estimated treatment effects in 2012 and in 2015 (nearest neighbor and kernel) are
significantly different from zero at the 10 percent level and are around 3,400 to 4,000 NIS. In the rest of
the period the treatment effect on earnings is positive and of similar magnitude but it is less precisely
measured. To improve estimation efficiency, especially given that earnings data are noisier than other
outcomes, we run regressions with stacked data for several years at the later part of the study period. We
present these results in Table 5, using panel data for the four last available years. The estimated effect on
average annual earnings during this four-year period are as follows: the kernel earnings effect estimate is
NIS 2,812 with a standard error of 1,750; the nearest neighbor earnings effect estimate is NIS 3,656 with a
standard error of 1,908. The two estimates are not statistically different and are not precisely estimated
though the former is almost significant at 10 percent level of significant.
Another way of examining how significant are the gains in earnings is to focus on earnings’
percentile rank as an outcome because this is a more stable and less noisy than absolute earnings. It might
also capture more reliably the permanent long term effect in the labor market. For example, recent papers
in the intergenerational mobility literature have shown that movements across ranks in the income
distribution are uncorrelated with parental income conditional on rank at age 30 while movements in log
earnings are correlated with parental income conditional on log income at age 30 — in particular, rich
offspring have higher earnings growth, so that age 30 measurements are biased predictors of later-life
earnings. However, the rank forecasts appear to be less biased. For example, Nybom and Stuhler (2016)
show with data from Sweden that the relationship between a child’s income rank and their parental income
rank stabilizes by about age 30; in contrast, the relationship in log earnings is less stable. Chetty et al (2014)
find a similar pattern in the US tax data, reporting that percentile rank predict well where children of
different economic backgrounds will fall in the income distribution later in life. Using log earnings instead
leads to inferior predictions because of the growth path expansions at the top of the income distribution.
Panel D of Table 5 presents estimates of the effect of the remedial program on percentile rank of earnings,

21

where the rank is computed separately for each cohort. The estimates are fully consistent with the estimated
effects on earnings that are presented in Panel C, being positive but much more precisely estimated. The
program increased the rank in the earning distribution by 2.12 percentiles (nearest neighbor estimate) or by
1.8 percentiles based on the kernel matching.
Turning to the effect on other labor market outcomes, the effect on months of work is positive and
marginally significant and the effect on employment status is also positive though not precisely measured.
The positive effect on these two employment outcomes suggest that increased employment in the extensive
and intensive margin contribute to the increase in earnings and so the latter is not solely due to the increase
in schooling attainment.
In columns 4-6 we present the effect on non-participants’ peers in treated schools. The estimated
effects on the three labor market outcomes of non-participants are smaller than the treatment effect on the
treated and are imprecisely measured.
Effect on Labor Outcomes by Socio-Economic Background: The above evidence on the effect of
remedial education raise the important question of which segments in the treated population benefited most
from this life cycle effect on earnings and relative rank in the income distribution. In particular, from a
policy perspective, it is important to know if the remedial education program was able to move up the
income and rank of the students who come for the lower socio-economic segment of the studied population,
namely those with below median family income. It is also important to examine if the effect on labor market
outcomes by family income square with the effect on post-secondary schooling. In Table 6, we present
results for the effect of remedial education on labor market outcomes based on two sub-samples, students
above and below median family income. The results are similarly polar to the estimates we obtained for the
effect of remedial education on post-secondary schooling. The sample of students with below median
family income experienced statistically significant increase in earnings and in percentile rank with less
precise positive effects on employment and months worked. The above-median family income group on
the other hand shows no observable gains from the program in any of the four labor market outcomes. In
22

panel E of Table 6 we present estimates of program effect on two unemployment related outcomes: whether
an individual experienced a spell of unemployment in a given year (panel E) and the amount of
unemployment annual benefits received (panel F). The mean unemployment rate in the sample of
individuals with below median income is 11.1 percent and in the sample of above median family income it
is 8.7 percent. The estimates for the two outcomes in both sub-samples are small and not significantly
different from zero.
Considering all evidence presented based on samples by family income, these results suggest that
remedial education was very effective for high school students who are below median socio-economic
status in the sample. This group post-secondary schooling attainment improved significantly and so did
their labor market outcomes, in particular employment and earnings. We note that in the context of the
remedial program these students might have been those with high likelihood of failing 2-3 exams while
students in the high income group had difficulties in only 1-2 matriculation subjects.

5.3 Effect on Inter-Generational Mobility
To shed further light on the effect of the program on earnings, in Table 7 we present estimates of
its effect on intergenerational earnings mobility. A significant gain in earnings among treated children
should ‘loosen’ the link between child and parent income, therefore enhancing intergenerational income
mobility. The estimates we present in this table are from a regression of children earnings on parental
earnings. Children’s earnings are measured by the earnings average in 2013-2015 years since treatment and
parental earnings are measured as the average family earnings in 2000-2002, while their treated children
were in high school. We estimate the intergenerational income regressions separately for four different
groups. We first compare the results obtained from the sample of the program participants to those in the
matched control group. Secondly, we replicate this analysis for the samples of non-participants in treated
schools and their control group. We then compare within each pair of samples the estimated
intergenerational coefficients and use F tests to test whether they are significantly different. We prefer this
23

approach over estimating the child-parents’ income relationship while pooling the pair of samples and
allowing the income mobility parameter to vary by group. This approach allows all parameters to be
different for the two groups within each pair and it permits the program effect on intergenerational mobility
to be more transparent.
In columns 1-3 we present estimates for sample of program participants and the control group from
other schools (those who entered the program a year later) and in columns 4-6 we present estimates based
on the sample of the non-participants in treated schools and their control group from other schools. Based
on each sample we estimate three different regressions: in the first we use as variables the log of actual
earnings of children and parents. Therefore, observations with zero child or parental earnings are dropped
from the sample in this regression. In the second row we present a regression with the same specification
but the variables used are residuals from regressions that control for age parents. Note that all children are
of the same age so there is no need to control for their age. In the second specification the variables we use
are percentile rank of children and family earnings. Here again we report results first by using actual rank
and secondly using parental age-residual rank. We note that the advantage of the rank-rank regressions is
that we do not drop from the sample observations with zero earnings.
A consistent pattern emerges in comparing the respective estimates that we obtain from each pair
of samples. First, we note that all the four estimates that are derived based on program’s participants
(column 1) are much smaller than the estimates obtained from the control group sample (column 2). The
regression estimate of log parental earnings on long term child earnings, noted in this literature as the
elasticity of intergenerational mobility, is 0.048 in the treated group, less than half of the respective estimate
(0.114) in the matched control group and the two are significantly different than each other as shown by
the P value of F-test of difference of these two estimates (presented in column 3). The implied difference
represents a sharp increase in intergenerational mobility. The regression’s estimates when using ageresidual variables reported in the second row are identical to the estimates presented in the first row.

24

A similar pattern is seen in the intergenerational relationship based on percentile rank (third row of
the table), 0.066 in the treated group and 0.130 in the control group, and a P value for the difference between
these two estimates of 0.073. We note that the rank-rank regression includes the full sample without
dropping observations with zero earnings.
In sharp contrast with the estimates presented in column 1-3, the pairwise comparison among nonparticipants yields identical intergenerational mobility estimates. The two log earnings regression
parameters in the first row columns 4-5 are 0.102 and 0.106 (P value for difference of these parameters =
0.875). When controlling for parental age the two estimates are even more similar, 0.106 and 0.108 and the
P value for their difference is 0.923. The two percentile rank regression parameters are 0.139 and 0.140 (P
value for difference of these parameters = 0.957).
In summary, the remedial education program reduced sharply the link between child and parents’
income and allowed the treated children to get on a steeper trajectory of income dynamics relative to their
parents. This evidence strengthens further our claim that the remedial education program led to positive
effect on earnings of participants. Even though the direct estimates on earnings are not too precise, the
statistically positive effect of the program on rank of participants in the earning distribution and the negative
effect of the program on the intergenerational earnings elasticity form convincing evidence that the gains
in the bagrut outcome which led to significant gains in post-secondary schooling, led to an increase in
earnings at adulthood.
5.4 Effect on Marriage and Fertility
Marriage and fertility outcomes of treated individuals can be affected by their schooling and labor
market outcomes through assortative matching in the marriage market. In table 8 we report results regarding
the program’s effect on several marriage and fertility outcomes. The marriage and fertility data is available
up to the end of 2016. Seventy-two percent of the treated sample are married by 2016. Results presented in
panel A, columns 1-3, show an increase in the likelihood of being married by the end of 2016 in the treated

25

group, an effect ranging between 4.3 and 4.7 percent which is precisely measured in all three methods.
Estimates presented in panels B and C show positive effects of the treatment on the likelihood of having
children and on the number of children, these effects are marginally significant. Panels D and E show a
decrease in the age of marriage and the age of birth of the first child among the treated group, though both
are not precisely measured.
In table 8 columns 4-5 we present results, from stratified samples based on family income, of the
effects of the program on the personal status outcomes of marriage and fertility. These estimates are fully
consistent with the respective evidence of the effect on labor market outcomes which are presented in Table
6. In the sample of students with family income above the median, we find an increase in the number of
children and decreases in the age of marriage and age of first birth (0.091, -0.45, - 0.516, respectively),
though these effects are only marginally significant. For the sample of students with below median family
income we find a significant increase in the likelihood of being married, an increase of 7.2%, without any
precisely measured effects on the other personal status indicators.

5. Conclusions
Remedial interventions in high school are under scrutiny in most OECD countries. For example, in
the US the focus is on the cost and place of remediation policies within the higher education system, given
the growing demand for skilled labor (Bettinger and Long 2009, Bettinger and Baker 2011). In England
this debate has gained particular relevance recently given the policy changes that require students who do
not get at least a grade C in English or math in GCSE (mid high school high stake exams) to repeat exams
in these subjects. However, remediation policies are often costly and their efficiency in boosting student
performance has been questioned (Schwartz 2012, Van Effenterre 2017), especially given the limited
evidence on the longer term outcomes. Banerjee et al (2007), Banerjee et al (2010) and Banerjee et al (2016)
discuss remedial education programs and their effectiveness in developing countries, finding evidence that
suggest that targeted remedial interventions can address effectively children’s learning gaps. In this paper
26

we study a successful remedial education program that improved short term outcomes of under achieving
high school students and examine whether these gains are long lasting and whether the intervention has a
high internal rate of return. We consider several long run outcomes, including continuation to higher
education and subsequent labor market earnings.
The gradual implementation of the program allows us to use a propensity score matching design in
which participants in the program are matched with non-participants from schools that adopted the program
two years later. We combine high school records with National Social Security administrative data to
examine longer-term outcomes when students were in their early 30s. Our evidence suggest that treated
students experienced economically meaningful gains as post-secondary schooling enrollment which
increased by 13.6 percentage points and in completed years of education which increased by 10 percentage
points. These gains were driven by gains in lower quality tier of academic institutions in Israel, mainly
academic and teachers’ colleges, with no significant change in university schooling. Annual earnings of
treated participants increased by 4 percentage points, partly explained by an increase of 1.5 percentage
points in months employed and the rest accounted by higher education. The gain in income is also shown
in an increase in income mobility among the treated group as compared to the control group. We find
significant heterogeneity in these treatment effects, with most of the gains occurring to students from
families with below median family income.
The average cost of the program was $1,100 per participant. Average monthly earnings of
participants around age 30 was about $750. Assuming that participants pay about 20 per cent income tax
rate on these earnings suggest that the government will recover its cost within 7-8 years, implying a very
high rate of return to this remedial education program. Naturally this return depends on how permanent is
the effect on earnings. First, we note that we measure the effect on earnings at about age 30-31, when
individuals had already completed their post-secondary schooling. Second, based on a sample of older
cohorts, we find that earnings at age 30-35 is a strong predictor of earnings at an older age. Third, we
estimated also a significant effect on percentile rank of individuals in the distribution of their cohort, a
27

measure believed to be a more stable predictor of later life earnings (Nybom and Stuhler 2016, Chetty et al
2015). A note of caution is warranted however as this cost-benefit comparison is not taking into account
possible general equilibrium consideration that might reduce the rate of return to schooling when remedial
education is expanded at scale.

7. References
Abadie, A., and G. Imbens, “Simple and Bias-Corrected Matching Estimators for Average
Treatment Effects,” NBER technical working paper no. 283 (2002).
Angrist, J. D., & Lavy, V. (2009). "The Effect of High Stakes High School Achievement
Awards: Evidence from a School-Centered Randomized Trial," American Economic Review. Vol.
99, No. 4, September 2009: 1384-1414.
Angrist, J., Lang, D., & Oreopoulos, P. (2009). "Incentives and Services for College
Achievement : Evidence from a Randomized Trial Incentives and Services for College Achievement :
Evidence from a Randomized Trial." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1), 136–163.
Banerjee, A.V., Cole, S., Duflo, E., and L. Linden. (2007). Remedying Education: Evidence
from Two Randomized Experiments in India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3):1235– 1264.
Banerjee, A.V., Banerji, R., Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., and S. Khemani. (2010). "Pitfalls
of Participatory Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Education in India."
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(1):1–30.
Banerjee, A., Cole, S., Duflo, E., and Linden, L. (2007). "Remedying Education: Evidence
from Two Randomized Experiments in India." Quarterly Journal of Economics, (August), 1235–1264.

28

Banerjee Abhijit, Rukmini Banerji, James Berry, Esther Duflo, Harini Kannan, Shobhini Mukerji,
Marc Shotland, and Michael Walton. "Mainstreaming an Effective Intervention: Evidence from
Randomized Evaluations of “Teaching at the Right Level” in India", August 2016.
Battistin, E., & Schizzerotto, A. (2012). "Threat of Grade Retention, Remedial Education and
Student Achievement: Evidence from Upper Secondary Schools in Italy," (7086). Retrieved from
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2196751.
Bettinger, E. P., and B. T. Long (2009): “Addressing the Needs of Underprepared Students in
Higher Education Does College Remediation Work?” Journal of Human resources, 44(3), 736–771.
Bettinger, E., and R. Baker (2011): “The Effects of Student Coaching in College: An Evaluation of
a Randomized Experiment in Student Mentoring,” Working Paper 16881, NBER.
Calcagno, J. C., & Long, B. T. (2008). "The Impact of Postsecondary Remediation Using a
Regression Discontinuity Approach: Addressing Endogenous Sorting and Noncompliance." National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 14194 (April), 46.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, (2014) “Where is the Land of
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 129(4): 1553-1623, 2014.
De Paola, M., and V. Scoppa (2014): “The Effectiveness of Remedial Courses in Italy: a Fuzzy
Regression Discontinuity Design,” Journal of Population Economics, 27(2), 365–386.
Jacob, B. A., and L. Lefgren (2004): “Remedial education and student achievement: A regressiondiscontinuity analysis,” Review of economics and statistics, 86(1), 226–244.
Imbens, G. W. (2004). Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under exogeneity: A
review. Review of Economics and statistics, 86(1), 4-29.

29

Lavy, V. (2016). "Teachers’ Pay for Performance in the Long-Run: The Dynamic Pattern of
Treatment Effects on Students’ Educational and Labor Market Outcomes in Adulthood." NBER WP, 2016.
Lavy, V. (2017). “Long Run Effects of Free School Choice: College Attainment, Employment,
Earnings, and Social Outcomes at Adulthood”, NBER Working Papers Number, 2016.
Lavy, V., & Schlosser, A. (2005). "Targeted Remedial Education for Underperforming Teenagers:
Costs and Benefits." Journal of Labor Economics, 23(4), 839–874.
E. Leuven and B. Sianesi. (2003). "PSMATCH2: Stata module to perform full Mahalanobis and
propensity

score

matching,

common

support

graphing,

and

covariate

imbalance

testing".

http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s432001.html. Version 4.0.11.
Martorell, P., & McFarlin, I. (2011). "Help or Hindrance? The Effects of College Remediation on
Academic and Labor Market Outcomes." Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2), 436–454.
Nybom Martin and Jan Stuhler. “Biases in Standard Measures of Intergenerational Income
Dependence”. Draft, April 1, 2016.
Robins, J., and Y. Ritov, “Towards a Curse of Dimensionality Appropriate (CODA) Asymptotic
Theory for Semi-Parametric Models,” Statistics in Medicine 16 (1997), 285–319.
Schwartz C. Analice “Remedial Education Programs to Accelerate Learning for All”. Global
Partnership for Education, Working Paper Series on Learning, No. 11 May 1, 2012.
Scrivener, S., Weiss, M. J., Ratledge, A., Rudd, T., Sommo, C., & Fresques, H. (2015). "Doubling
Graduation Rates: Three-Year Effects of CUNY’s Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP) for
Developmental Education Students." MDRC. Retrieved from http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED558511
Van Effenterre Clémentine. “Post 16 Remedial Policies: a Literature Review.” Centre for
Vocational Educational Research London School of Economics & Political Science, Research Discussion
Paper 005, April 2017.
30

Table 1: Comparison of Mean Covariates for Treated and
Matched Students - Based on Propensity Score Matching
Treated
Students

Matched
Students

10.37

10.54

-0.18
(0.42)

Mother’s years of schooling

10.63

10.76

-0.12
(0.51)

Number of siblings

2.51

2.38

0.13
(0.23)

Immigration status

0.02

0.02

0.00
(0.01)

Male

0.42

0.43

-0.01
(0.03)

101363

98340

3022
(8701)

47537

45730

1807
(3435)

0.32

0.33

-0.01
(0.04)

Former Soviet Union

0.20

0.21

0.00
(0.05)

Ethiopia

0.02

0.02

0.00
(0.01)

Europe-America (excluding former Soviet Union)

0.06

0.06

0.00
(0.01)

Israel

0.40

0.39

0.01
(0.04)

73.43

72.59

0.84

A. Student’s characteristics
Father’s years of schooling

B. Parental characteristics
Parental Average Income
Father’s average annual income (2000-2002)
Mother’s average annual income (2000-2002)
Parents’ ethnic origin
Asia-Africa (excluding Ethiopia)

C. Student’s achievements
Average lagged score in matriculation exams (prior to
twelfth grade)

Difference (1-2)

(0.90)
Number of credit units received prior to twelfth grade
D. School’s characteristics
Enrollment in twelfth grade

Enrollment in tenth grade through twelfth grade

6.84

6.84

0.00
(0.38)

177.65

179.51

-1.86
(21.56)

544.34

589.92

-45.58
(68.11)

Number of schools
40
34
Number of students
1789
1168
Notes: The table reports descriptive statistics for treated and matched comparison students. Difference of means between
treated and matched students is reported in col. 3. Standard errors for the differences corrected for clustering at school level are
reported in parentheses. Each treated student was matched with a student from comparison schools that had the nearest
propensity score. Some comparison students were matched to more than one treated student. The following variables were used
for the estimation of the propensity score: gender, immigration status, parental schooling, number of siblings, two measures of
pretreatment outcomes indicating the quartile of a student’s average score in matriculation exams taken before the twelfth grade
and the quartile of the number of credit units awarded before the twelfth grade, school matriculation rate in 1999, school’s
religious status,school size, its square, and the number of students in the twelfth grade.

Table 2: Estimates of the Effect of Additional Targeted Individulaized Instruction on Bagrut Eligibility

OLS
(1)

Participants
Nearest
Neighbor
Matching
(2)

Kernel
Matching

OLS

(3)

(4)

Nonparticipants
Nearest
Neighbor
Matching
(5)

Kernel Matching
(6)

A. Full Sample
Mean for the treated group
Estimate

0.681
(0.466)
0.131
(0.025)

0.131
(0.017)

0.465
(0.499)
0.126
(0.015)

0.006
(0.017)

-0.008
(0.013)

-0.005
(0.011)

B. Below Median Family Income
Mean for the treated group
Estimate

0.654
(0.476)
0.172
(0.032)

0.195
(0.024)

0.372
(0.484)
0.193
(0.021)

0.009
(0.019)

0.000
(0.018)

-0.003
(0.016)

C. Above Median Family Income
Mean for the treated group
Estimate

0.705
(0.456)
0.091
(0.025)

0.056
(0.023)

0.561
(0.496)
0.051
(0.020)

0.002
(0.018)

-0.013
(0.018)

-0.014
(0.016)

Notes: The table reports estimated treatment effects on the student matriculation status for program participants (cols. 1–3) and for students that studied in treated schools but did not
participate in the program (cols. 4–6). Columns 1 and 4 present OLS estimates from models that control for student’s and school’s characteristics. Estimates for cols. 2, 3, 5, and 6 are
based on nearest neighbor matching and kernel matching methods and were computed using Stata procedures developed by Becker and Ichino (2002). The following variables were used
for the estimation of the propensity score in each panel: gender, immigration status, parental schooling, number of siblings, two measures of pretreatment outcomes indicating the quartile
of a student’s average score in matriculation exams taken before the twelfth grade and the quartile of the number of credit units awarded beforethe twelfth grade, school matriculation
rate in 1999, school’s religious status, school size, its square, the number of students in the twelfth grade and the average family income in 2000-2002. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are corrected for clustering at the school level in OLS regressions. Panel A presents the estimation for the entire sample while in panel B, C, D and E the sample is stratified to students
with above median matriculation scores prior to 12th grade and students below the median, students with family income belwo median and students with family income above median,
respectivly.The stratification is carried by removing the students in treated schools who don't belong to the selected group.

Table 3: Estimates of the Effect of Additional Targeted Individulaized Instruction on Post Secondary Schooling by 2013

OLS
(1)
Enrollment
Mean for the treated group
Estimate

Kernel
Matching

OLS

(3)

(4)

0.631
(0.483)
0.072
(0.019)

Years of Schooling
Mean for the treated group
Estimate

Participants
Nearest
Neighbor
Matching
(2)

0.081
(0.021)

0.231
(0.093)

Kernel Matching
(6)

0.508
(0.500)
0.076
(0.019)

-0.003
(0.016)

2.293
(2.281)
0.220
(0.093)

Nonparticipants
Nearest
Neighbor
Matching
(5)

-0.008
(0.017)

-0.007
(0.017)

1.997
(2.452)
0.227
(0.089)

0.087
(0.074)

0.046
(0.074)

0.064
(0.074)

Notes: The table reports estimated treatment effects on the student's post-secondary enrollment and years of schooling for program participants (cols. 1–3) and for students that studied
in treated schools but did not participate in the program (cols. 4–6). Columns 1 and 4 present OLS estimates from models that control for student’s and school’s characteristics. Estimates
for cols. 2, 3, 5, and 6 are based on nearest neighbor matching and kernel matching methods and were computed using Stata procedures developed by Becker and Ichino (2002). The
following variables were used for the estimation of the propensity score are gender, immigration status, parental schooling, number of siblings, two measures of pretreatment outcomes
indicating the quartile of a student’s average score in matriculation exams taken before the twelfth grade and the quartile of the number of credit units awarded beforethe twelfth grade,
school matriculation rate in 1999, school’s religious status, school size, its square, the number of students in the twelfth grade and the average family income in 2000-2002. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the school level.

Table 4: Estimates of the Effect of Additional Targeted Individulaized Instruction on Years of Schooling by Instituation Type and by Groups by 2013

OLS
(1)

Participants
Nearest
Neighbor
Matching
(2)

By Family Income (Kernel Matching)
Kernel
Matching

Above Median

Below Median

(3)

(4)

(5)

2.564
(2.274)

2.004
(2.255)

0.145
(0.112)

0.297
(0.124)

0.610
(1.540)

0.410
(1.304)

-0.157
(0.068)

0.004
(0.066)

1.420
(1.843)

1.065
(1.675)

0.205
(0.095)

0.168
(0.094)

0.266
(0.954)

0.261
(0.939)

0.032
(0.044)

0.093
(0.044)

0.160
(0.550)

0.170
(0.648)

0.040
(0.032)

0.008
(0.038)

0.096
(0.489)

0.090
(0.491)

A. Post Secondary Schooling
Mean for the treated group
Estimate

2.293
(2.281)
0.220
(0.093)

0.231
(0.093)

0.227
(0.089)

B. University Schooling
Mean for the treated group
Estimate

0.514
(1.434)
-0.080
(0.064)

-0.075
(0.063)

-0.085
(0.055)

C. College Schooling
Mean for the treated group
Estimate

1.249
(1.772)
0.212
(0.075)

0.235
(0.086)

0.202
(0.078)

D. Teacher Colleges
Mean for the treated group
Estimate

0.264
(0.947)
0.059
(0.035)

0.060
(0.040)

0.063
(0.035)

E. Vocational Two Year College
Mean for the treated group
Estimate

0.165
(0.599)
0.006
(0.032)

0.026
(0.033)

0.025
(0.032)

F. Other
Mean for the treated group
Estimate
Number of Observation

0.093
(0.490)
0.021
(0.016)

0.029
(0.016)

0.023
(0.015)

0.019
(0.020)

0.032
(0.020)

7,008

4,326

7,006

3,543

3,462

Notes: The table reports estimated treatment effects on the student's post-secondary years of schooling in a specific type of post-secondary institution for
program participants (cols. 1–3) and for subgroups by ability as measures by matriculation scores prior to 12th grade (cols. 4-5) and by family income (cols. 67). Column 1 present OLS estimates from models that control for student’s and school’s characteristics. Estimates for Column 2 is based on nearest neighbor
matching and Columns 3-6 are based on kernel matching methods and were computed using Stata procedures developed by Becker and Ichino (2002). The
following variables were used for the estimation of the propensity score: gender, immigration status, parental schooling, number of siblings, two measures of
pretreatment outcomes indicating the quartile of a student’s average score in matriculation exams taken before the twelfth grade and the quartile of the number
of credit units awarded beforethe twelfth grade, school matriculation rate in 1999, school’s religious status, school size, its square, the number of students in the
twelfth grade and the average family income in 2000-2002. Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the school level.

Table 5: Estimates of the Effect of Additional Targeted Individulaized Instruction on Earnings and Employment, Stacked 2012-2015

OLS
(1)
A. Employmet
Mean for the treated group

Estimate

Participants
Nearest
Neighbor
Matching
(2)

Kernel
Matching

OLS

(3)

(4)

Nonparticipants
Nearest
Neighbor
Matching
(5)

0.897

0.878

(0.304)

(0.327)

Kernel Matching
(6)

0.010

0.013

0.008

-0.007

-0.007

-0.009

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

B. Months Worked
Mean for the treated group

Estimate

9.781
(3.964)

9.488
(4.222)

0.173

0.248

0.143

-0.096

-0.093

-0.105

(0.088)

(0.095)

(0.082)

(0.080)

(0.086)

(0.085)

C. Earnings (NIS)
Mean for the treated group

Estimate

D. Percentile Ranking of Earnings
Estimate

Number of Observations

76913
(62927)

76042
(70392)

3116
(1958)

3656
(1908)

2812
(1750)

1046
(1358)

1538
(1288)

1722
(1318)

1.813
(0.797)

2.122
(0.864)

1.802
(0.751)

0.072
(0.559)

0.122
(0.598)

0.375
(0.578)

28,016

17,166

28,008

39,286

33,316

39,262

Notes: The table reports estimated treatment effects on the student's labor market outcomes for program participants (cols. 1–3) and for students that studied in treated schools but did not
participate in the program (cols. 4–6). Columns 1 and 4 present OLS estimates from models that control for student’s and school’s characteristics. Estimates for cols. 2, 3, 5, and 6 are based on
nearest neighbor matching and kernel matching methods and were computed using Stata procedures developed by Becker and Ichino (2002). The following variables were used for the estimation
of the propensity score: gender, immigration status, parental schooling, number of siblings, two measures of pretreatment outcomes indicating the quartile of a student’s average score in
matriculation exams taken before the twelfth grade and the quartile of the number of credit units awarded beforethe twelfth grade, school matriculation rate in 1999, school’s religious status,
school size, its square, the number of students in the twelfth grade and the average family income in 2000-2002. Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the school level.

Table 6: Estimates of the Effect of Additional Targeted Individulaized Instruction on Employment Outcomes
By Ability and Family Income, stacked 2012-2015 - Based on Kernel Matching
By Family Income
Above Median
Below Median
(1)
(2)
A. Employmet
Mean for the treated group
Estimate
B. Months Worked
Mean for the treated group

Estimate
C. Earnings (NIS)
Mean for the treated group
Estimate
D. Percentile Ranking of Earnings
Estimate
E. Annual Unemployment Insurance Benefits (Binary Indicator)
Mean for the treated group
Estimate
F. Annual Unemployment Insurance Benefits (NIS)
Mean for the treated group
Estimate
Number of Observations

0.899
(0.301)

0.895
(0.307)

-0.003
(0.010)

0.016
(0.012)

9.860
(3.910)

9.695
(4.020)

-0.023
(0.125)

0.256
(0.142)

82198
(66208)

71245
(58691)

612
(2502)

4111
(2134)

0.856
(1.030)

2.389
(1.085)

0.087
(0.282)

0.111
(0.314)

-0.001
(0.007)

0.012
(0.008)

969
(3766)

1179
(4114)

-47
(79)

116
(90)

14,176

13,842

Notes: The table reports the hetrogenouse treatment effects on the student's labour market outcome for participats
by matriculations scores prior to 12th grade and by average family income in 2000-2002. Columns 1 thru 4 present
estimates based on kernel matching using Stata procedures developed by Becker and Ichino (2002). The following
variables were used for the estimation of the propensity score: gender, immigration status, parental schooling,
number of siblings, two measures of pretreatment outcomes indicating the quartile of a student’s average score in
matriculation exams taken before the twelfth grade, the quartile of the number of credit units awarded before the
twelfth grade, school matriculation rate in 1999, school’s religious status, school size, its square, the number of
students in the twelfth grade and the average family income in 2000-2002. The stratification to boys and girls was
carried by removing the students in treated schools who don't belong to the selected group. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the school level.

Table 7: Estimates of the Effect of Additional Targeted Individulaized Instruction on Earning Mobility Outcomes Based on Kernel Matching
Individual Earnings (Avg. 2013-2015)
Participants

Non Participants

Treated
Group

Control
Group

(1)

(2)

P-Value for Differences
Between Groups
(Chi Square in Parentheses)
(3)

From Treated
Schools

Control
Group

(4)

(5)

P-Value for Differences
Between Groups
(Chi Square in Parentheses)
(6)

Log Wages (IGE)

0.049
(0.019)

0.109
(0.023)

0.037
(4.357)

0.102
(0.014)

0.106
(0.019)

0.875
(0.025)

Log Earnings (IGE) (Residuals on Age)

0.048
(0.019)

0.114
(0.024)

0.028
(4.819)

0.106
(0.014)

0.108
(0.019)

0.923
(0.009)

Percentile Ranking

0.066
(0.026)

0.130
(0.025)

0.073
(3.207)

0.139
(0.015)

0.140
(0.020)

0.957
(0.003)

Percentile Ranking (Residuals on Age)

0.071
(0.025)

0.135
(0.025)

0.069
(3.314)

0.143
(0.015)

0.144
(0.020)

0.977
(0.001)

1,435

4,036

3,590

4,036

Paternal Earnings (Avg. 2000-2002)

Number of Observations

Notes: The table reports the differences between the treated and matched control groups in estimated earning mobility as measured by regressing parental earnings
on individual earnings.We exclude individuals that have 0 as their or the father's avg. earnings. Columns 1-2 and 4-5 present regression estimates of the average
income of the fathers of the students in our sample in 2000-2002 on the individual earnings of the students in 2013-2015. Columns 1 displays results for the treated
group and column 2 presents results for the matched control group based on kernel matching using Stata procedures developed by Becker and Ichino (2002).
Column 4 presents results for students that studied in treated schools but did not participate in the program and column 5 the results for their matched control group
using kernel matching. Columns 3 and 6 present the p value and the Chi squared of the test comparing the mobility coefficient between the treated and control
groups. The following variables were used for the estimation of the propensity score: gender, immigration status, parental schooling, number of siblings, two
measures of pretreatment outcomes indicating the quartile of a student’s average score in matriculation exams taken before the twelfth grade, the quartile of the
number of credit units awarded before the twelfth grade, school matriculation rate in 1999, school’s religious status, school size, its square, the number of students
in the twelfth grade and the average family income in 2000-2002. Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the school level.

Table 8: Estimates of the Effect of Additional Targeted Individulaized Instruction on Marriage and Fertility
Participants
OLS
(1)

Nearest
Neighbor
Matching
(2)

By Family Income
Kernel
Matching
(3)

Above Median Below Median
(4)

(5)

0.717
(0.451)

0.722
(0.448)

A. Married (Binary Indicator)
Mean for the treated group

Estimate

0.720
(0.449)
0.043

0.044

0.047

0.020

0.072

(0.015)

(0.021)

(0.018)

(0.022)

(0.024)

B. Children (Binary Indicator)
Mean for the treated group

Estimate

0.726

0.719

0.734

(0.446)

(0.450)

(0.442)

0.035

0.033

0.032

0.027

0.038

(0.015)

(0.021)

(0.019)

(0.024)

(0.022)

C. Number of Children
Mean for the treated group

Estimate

2.073

2.010

2.139

(0.949)

(0.923)

(0.971)

0.050

0.047

0.064

0.091

0.051

(0.039)

(0.042)

(0.036)

(0.051)

(0.043)

D. Age at First Marriage
Mean for the treated group

Estimate

Number of Observations

26.732

26.030

(3.145)

(3.267)

-0.275

-0.286

-0.310

-0.450

-0.212

(0.132)

(0.229)

(0.214)

(0.243)

(0.224)

28.250
(3.087)

27.395
(3.261)

E. Age at First Child
Mean for the treated group

Estimate

26.391
(3.223)

27.833
(3.201)
-0.276
(0.149)

-0.262
(0.239)

-0.303
(0.226)

-0.516
(0.247)

-0.158
(0.238)

7,008

4,326

7,006

3,543

3,462

Notes: The table reports estimated treatment effects on demographic outcomes for program participants. Column 1 presents OLS estimates from models
that control for student’s and school’s characteristics. Estimates for cols. 2 and 3 are based on nearest neighbor matching and kernel matching methods
and were computed using Stata procedures developed by Becker and Ichino (2002). The following variables were used for the estimation of the
propensity score: gender, immigration status, parental schooling, number of siblings, two measures of pretreatment outcomes indicating the quartile of a
student’s average score in matriculation exams taken before the twelfth grade and the quartile of the number of credit units awarded before the twelfth
grade, school matriculation rate in 1999, school’s religious status, school size, its square, the number of students in the twelfth grade, and average family
income in 2000-2002. Columns 4-7 presents estimated treatment effect using kernel matching for a stratified sample using student’s average score in
matriculation exams taken before the twelfth grade as a measure of ability and average parental income in 2000-2002 as a measure of family income.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are corrected for clustering at the school level.

Tabel A1 - Program Time line
June
1999
Number of schools
joining the program

October
1999

January
2000

10

9

June
2000

October
2000

April
2001

23

24

June
2001

+

+

January
2002

34

33

Comparison
group

Treatment group (40 schools)
Date of
matriculation
exams

October
2001

+

PrePosttreatment
treatment
outcomes
outcomes
Notes: Notes: Two treatment schools have been excluded from the analysis. One school is missing in the scores dataset from
1999, leaving us with no pre-treatment outcomes. The second school did not provide any data about the program
implementation. As a result, we cannot identify the program participants or infer the proportion of students participating in the
program in that school. The inclusion of this school in the estimation of the program effects at the school level did not change
the magnitude or precision of the results.

Table A2: Number and Proportion of Participants in the Bagrut 2001 Program
Program participation rate
Number Number
of
of
students program
in treated participa
schools
nts

Mean

Min

Max

10th-12th grade

20,094

4,117

20%

7%

71%

12th grade

6,450

1,789

28%

11%

79%

Table A3 : Comparison of Mean Covariates and Outcomes for the Pretreatment Year
(1999), Treated and Comparison
Treated
Matched
Difference
Students
Students
(1-2)
Student’s characteristics:
Father’s years of schooling

10.35

10.48

-0.13
(0.45)

Mother’s years of schooling

10.73

10.95

-(0.22)
0.41

Number of siblings

2.58

2.25

0.33
(0.19)

Immigration status

0.03
.

0.06
.

-0.03
(0.01)

Male

0.44
.

0.46
.

-(0.02)
0.02

0.37
.

0.28
.

0.09
(0.03)

Former Soviet Union

0.19
.

0.22
.

-(0.03)
0.03

Ethiopia

0.02
.

0.05
.

-0.03
(0.02)

Europe-America (excluding for- mer Soviet Union)

0.07
.

0.08
.

-(0.02)
0.01

Israel

0.36
.

0.37
.

-0.01
(0.03)

65.67

67.40

-1.74

.

.

(1.54)

Number of credit units received prior to twelfth grade

4.96
.

5.51
.

-(0.55)
0.37

Matriculation rate

0.45
.

0.51
.

-0.06
(0.04)

212.39
.

239.24
.

-26.84
(33.00)

656.58
.

725.35
.

-(68.77)
101.33

Parents’ ethnic origin:
Asia-Africa (excluding Ethiopia)

Student’s achievements:
Average lagged score in matric- ulation exams (prior to
twelfth grade)

School’s characteristics:
Enrollment in twelfth grade

Enrollment in tenth grade through twelfth grade

Number of schools
40
34
Number of students
6725
5508
Notes: The table reports descriptive statistics from the pretreatment year (1999). Standard errors for
the differences corrected for clustering at the school level are reported in parentheses.

Table A4: Differences in Matriculation Rate Trends between Treated
and Comparison Schools for Pretreatment Years, 1996–99
Regressor
Unweighted
Weighted
(1)
(2)
Treatment x 1997

-0.037
(0.058)

-0.016
(0.065)

Treatment x 1998

0.010
(0.056)

0.016
(0.067)

Treatment x 1999

-0.023
(0.050)

0.008
(0.059)

Number of Schools
67
67
Notes: The table reports the interaction coefficients between
treatment status and year dummies. The dependent variable is the
school matriculation rate. The additional regressors are year dummies
and a treatment status dummy. Data are aggregated at the school
level. Estimates in col. 2 are weighted by cohort size. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. Seven schools missing in the test
scores datasets for years 1996–98 are not included in the sample.

Figure A2: Program Participation Rate by
Pre-Treatment Matriculation Rate

80%

80%

70%

70%

60%

60%

Participation rate

Participation rate

Figure A1: Program Participation Rate
by School Size

50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

0%
0

200

400

600

800 1000 1200 1400

Number of students in 10th-12th grade

0%
0%

20%

40%

60%

Matriculation rate in 1999

80%

