NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FADS, MARTINGALES, AND MARKET EFFICIENCY

Bruce N. Lehmann

Working Paper No. 2533

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1988

Thanks are due to Joanna W. Woos for effiicient and remarkably joyful research
assistance. I thank Ravi Jagannathaff, ete Ky'T D1ck Michaud, Steve Zeldes,
and seminar participants at the NBER Suniner- Un'st.itutE, the University of California
at Berkeley and Davis, the University of Iowa, and the University of Minnesota
for helpful coments. They share no responsibiTfty for any remaining errors.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
a'td1 riot those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2533
March 1988

Fads, MartingaleS, and Market Efficiency

ABSTRACT

Much of the theoretical basis for current monetary and financial th
economic efficiency of financial markets. Not surprisingly, considerable effort has been

expended to test the efficient markets hypothesis, usually by examination of the

predictability of equity returns. Unfortunately, there are two competing explanations of the

presence of such predictable variation: (1) market inefficiency, and stock price

'overreaction' due to speculative 'fads' and (2) predictable changes in expected security
returns associated with forecasted changes in market or individual security 'fundamentals'.

These explanations can be distinguished by examining equity returns over short time
intervals since there should be negligible systematic changes in the fundamental valuation
of individual finns over intervals like a week in an efficient market. This study finds sharp
evidence of market inefficiency in the form of systematic tendencies for current 'winners'
and 'losers' in one week to experience sizeable return reversals over the subsequent week
in a way that reflectapparent arbitrage profits. These measured arbitrage profits persist
after corrections for the mismeasurement of security returns because of thin trading and
bid-ask spreads and for plausible levels of transactions costs.

Bruce

Lehmann
Graduat1ttrOOl of Business
Colunbia University
405B Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027

1

1. Introduction
Much of the theoretical basis for current monetary and financial theory rests on the
economic efficiency of financial markets. Not surprisingly, considerable effort has been expended

to test the efficient markets hypothesis, usually in the form of the random walk model for stock

prices. Most earlier studies supported the random walk model, typically finding that the
predictable variation in equity returns was both economically and statistically small. However,
much recent research has found evidence that equity returns can be predicted with some reliability.'

What are the implications of predictable variation in asset returns for the hypothesis of
market efficiency? The answer is unclear because there are two competing explanations of this

phenomenon. Financial markets may be efficient and intertemporal asset pricing theory may
account for predictable changes in expected security returns. Alternatively, predictable variation in

equity returns may reflect the overreaction of stock prices to speculative 'fads' or the cognitive
misperceptions of investors in an inefficient market. This explanation has been emphasized in
Shiller(1984), Black(1986), and Poterba and Summers(1987) and the cognitive misperceptions
interpretation has been advanced by DeBondi and Thaler(1985) and Shefrmn and Statman(1985).

The empirical evidence from monthly returns can plausibly be attributed to either

explanation, leaving the hypothesis of market efficiency in an unsettled state. The two
explanations can be distinguished to some degree by examining asset returns over short time
intervals.2 As Sims(1984) and others have emphasized, asset prices should appear to follow a
maningale process over very short time intervals in an efficient capital market even if there are

tSec Fama(1970) for a detailed survey of the earlier research and Singleton(1986) for a
corresponding survey of the recent evidence on predictable variation in asset returns.

2M alternative testing strategy involves eminMion of the behavior of security return variances
for evidence of market inefficiency. The enormous variance bounds literature is in an odd state of
limbo because of now well-known statistical problems and continues to be the subject of much
research. French and RolI(1986) compare the variances of security returns when markets are
opened and closed and conclude that there is excess volatility due to private information trading and

mispricing caused by noise wading under plausible assumptions about information arnval. The
tests described below address the 'fads' model and the concomitant predictability of stock price
overreaction in a more direct fashion.

2
predictable variations in expected security returns over longer horizons. The economic intuition

underlying this result is that there should be negligible systematic changes in the fundamental

valuation of individual firms over intervals like a day or a week in an efficient market with
unpredictable information arrival. In contradistinction, the 'fads'model predicts serial correlation

in asset prices over all time intervals, although particular versions of the model presumably
emphasize predictability over particular differencingintervals.3

There are, however, severe econometric problems associated with the construction of
suitably powerful tests of this local martingale formulation of the hypothesisof market efficiency.
Shiller(198l) and Summers(1986) have both emphasized that the standard tests for the presenceof

serial correlation in security returns typically employed in empirical work have little power to
distinguish between random walk and (economically relevant) near random walk behavior. This
problem is likely to be particularly severe over short differencing intervals.

Many assets are traded on organized securities markets. If the 'fads' model is true,it is
reasonable to suppose that stock price overreaction infects many security returns. Hence, well-

diversified portfolios composed of either 'winners' or losers' might be expected to experience
subsequent return reversals in these ciivumstances. This observation suggests a simpleheuristic
strategy for testing the hypothesis of market efficiency: form costless (i.e., zero netinvestment or

self-financing) portfolios which give negative weight to current 'winners' and positive weight to

current 'losers'.
The local martingale and 'fads' models have differing implications for the behavior of the

3mere is considerable evidence that there arc systematic reversals in stock returns over longer
differencing intervals. DeBondt and Thaler(1985), Fama and French(1986), and Poterba and
Summcrs(1987) find evidence of such predictable variation in security returns over three to ten
year intervals. Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein(1985) and Jegadeesh(1987) provide sharpevidence
for the presence of predictable return reversals on a monthly basis. This evidence is consistent, in
principle, with the hypothesis that this predictable variation represents changing expected returns
and not the 'overreaction' of stock prices in an inefficient market, although the monthly evidence is

more difficult to incorporate into such an explanation. In particular, Chan(1987) provides
convincing empirical evidence that the results obtained by DeBondt and Thaler(1985) are
attributable in part to changes in tbe riskiness of winners and losers.

3

subsequent profits of these costless portfolios over short time periods. If equity markets are
efficient and a week (or other differencing interval) is sufficiently short for the model to apply, the
local martingale model predicts that these costless portfolios should tend to earn zero profits since it

implies that the current week's return on any security is simply noise that is not useful for
predicting subsequent security returns. In contradistinction, the 'fads' model suggests that stock
prices 'overreact' and, hence, that both winners and losers will experience return reversals at some
point. This implies that the profits of these costless portfolios will typically be positive over some

horizon. This procedure avoids the power difficulties associated with

series

autocorrelation

tests by extracting cross-sectional autocorrelauon information.4

The remainder of the paper is devoted to the rigorous quantification of this intuition and to
empirical examination of its implications for the hypothesis of market efficiency. The next section

characterizes portfolio strategies which suggest a simple procedure for testing this hypothesis and

contrasts this analysis with the more conventional approaches found in the literature. The
subsequent section discusses the empirical implementation of the test and addresses empirical
problems such as the presence of predictable fluctuations in measured security returns that have
nothing to do with market inefficiency or the fads model. The fourth section provides empirical.
evidence and the final section contains concluding remarks.

2. The Profits on Return Reversal Portfolio Strategies in an Efficient Market
As noted above, portfolios that involve short positions in securities that have experienced

recent price increases and long positions in those that have suffered price declines might be
expected to earn abnormal profits if asset prices in part reflect overreaction to speculative fads. The

key to employing this intuition to test the hypothesis of market efficiency is the developmentof
measures of abnormal profits. This section is devoted to a discussion of the comparative merits of
several such strategies.

This intuition has been exploited by Jegadeesh(1987) to develop powerful cross-sectional tests of
linear asset pricing relations.

4
Consider the following simple portfolio strategies involving a given set of N securities over

T time periods. At the beginning of each period t+k, buy Wit dollars of each security i. This

involves going long security i when wj1 is positive and short selling it when this quantity is
negative. Each position is closed out at the end of each time interval (i.e., a! the end of period

t+k). (loose the weights w so that they are negative when security i is a 'winne? and positive
when security i is a 'loser'.

In particular, set the number of dollars invested in each security proportional to the
previous period's return (Rfl) less the arithmetic average of the returns on all securities in that
period (R1) (Le., the renmi of an equally weighted portfolio of these N assets). Ignoring the factor
of proportionality, the weights are given by:

(1)

wit=—[Rjt—RJ

where:

(2)
1=1

The goal is the measurement of abnormal profits on this class of portfolio strategies.
Simple accounting profits in period t+k (lr& are given by:5

N

N

(3)

,t = i—i wR1

—

— [Rjt—J(Rjt+k--I+kJ
i=l

so that the average profit C) on this k period ahend portfolio strategy over T periods is:

(4) k 4± Rt,k - -4±
[R1J+k-+k]
t—li—l
1—1

Algebraic manipulation of this expression reveals:

(5) k

t—1

Ei-J[i+k-] _,,±
t1 ivl [Rjt-L][Rjt+k-j] i=1

where:

5These are profits (and not returns) because this is a costless (i.e., zero net invesnncnt) portfolio
strategy and, hence, rennns are not defined.

5

(6)

is the average return across both securities and tine (i.e., the average return of an equally weighted
portfolio over the T periods) and:

T

(7) 14R1
t=1

is the average return of security i over the T periods.

In short, average return reversal portfolio profits depend on the autocovariances of the

returns of an equally weighted portfolio, the autocovariances of the returns of the individual
securities, and the cross-sectional variation in the unconditional mean returns of theindividual
securities. Does the hypothesis of market efficiency have any implications for the behavior of

eitheri or1t?
The traditional answer to this question reflects Fama's (1970) suggestion that the efficient

markets hypothesis "only has empirical content, however, within a context of a more specific
model of market equilibrium, that is, a model that specifies the nature of market equilibrium when

prices 'fully reflect' available information" (pp. 413-414). For example,it is common to assume
that security returns are independently distributed (and often identically distributed as well) with
constant expected returns in the filter rule literature and ibe monthly studies of return reversals.

It is easy to see the implications of the ancillaiy hypothesis that security returns are

independently distributed over time for return reversal portfolio profits. The population
autocovariances of both individual securities and the equally weighted portfolio are zero when

security returns are independently distributed. Hence, expected average profits on the return
reversal portfolio mtegies are:

(8) E{k} __E{ [..]2}
because the strategies typically involve going long securities with below average returns and short

those with above average returns. The testable implication of this observation is that the expected

6
average profits of these portfolio strategies should be identical for each value of k.6

As with most market efficiency tests (which involve joint hypotheses), rejection of the
hypothesis that average portfolio profits are identical for each value of k might simply indicate that

returns are not independently distributed. This intrpretatioo is consistent with the hypothesis that
predictable variation in equity returns is attributable to time-varying expected returns in an efficient
market Put differently, the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis of market efficiency when it

is true (Le., a Type I error) involves both the usual sampling iu!Sand the probability that security
returns are not independently distributed. In other words,the conventional approach to testing the
hypothesis of market efficiency with return reversal portfoliosis not likely to yield a useful test in
the absence of a plausible a priori model of temporal variation in expected returns.
Now consider an alternative model of market equililxium, one based on continuous trading

possibilities, bounded price uncertainty, and the absence of arbitrage opportunities. Divide the T

period observation interval into I equally spaced disjoint intervals of length h(J) (i.e., T=Th(J)).
Suppose that it is possible to trade securities at any point in the interval (O,T). Finally, assume
that returns can be decomposed into predictable and unpredictable components ateach time j:
(9)

= EIj +

where Ej is the population conditional expected return of asseti given the conditioning information

set igj..i which includes past price changes and other information available at time j-1. Note that
the population conditional expected return Ej3 is a purely mathematical construct that has nothing to

do with the hypothesis of market efficiency.
The analysis requires one weak assumption about the stochastic properties of security price

changes. Loosely speaking, the requirement is that price changes exhibitbounded uncertainty over
arbitrarily small time intervals (i.e., over h(J) as J—o.). In particular, the requirement is:

(10) joE{€} <..a.5.Vj'.l,...,Nj"l,...,J
6This is a version of a result denved in Jegadeesh(1987) for linear asset pricing relations.

7
where s. denotes almost sure convergence.7 It is also sufficient that price changes have finite
(i.e., of order h(J)) over arbitrarily small time intervals. This assuniption is

variance

made in models that presume security price changes follow mixed jump/diffusion processes with
discontinuous sample paths.
This setting has implications for the behavior of security returns in the absence of arbitrage

opportunities which follow from the analysis of a simple portfolio strategy. At the beginning of

each time interval j, buy Ej dollars of security i (which is a short sale when this quantity is
negative) and close out the position at the end of each time interval j. The profit on this strategy is:

I

(11) t= {Ej+Eijeji}
.j=l

The quantities E1jej constitute a sequence of martingale differences with bounded variance

under these assumptions. Hence, the unexpected portion of profits on this strategy must converge
to a finite random variable by the martingale convergence theorem (cf., Hall and Heyde(1980)) as J

grows without bound. The profits on this portfolio strategy will have bounded risk and must be
bounded in well-functioning capital markets so that:8

I
(12) J!o EJ <oo a.s. V i = 1,..., N
j=l
and, hence:

(13)

I

E — 0 a.s. V i = 1,..., N
j-1
i—i

In other words, the serial conelatious o( individual security returns must be negligible for virtually
all trading periods because it is easy to construct portfolio strategies which diversify away the risk

The variance restriction can be replaced by bowidedness of the conditional first absolute moment
if restrictions on the behavior of e are idded to insure that the first absolute moment of their sum
is bounded. Note that the variance restriction may place implicit restrictions on the information set

8llis is related to the local martingale property of asset prices in an efficient market studied by
Sims(1984). The essential difference is that Sims' analysis also provides conditions under which
each of the Ej1 are asymptotically negligible (Le., of order h(J).

8

associated with price changes over time and this, in turn, places implicit bounds on the magnitude

of expected price changes.9 None of this is surprising—it is commonplaceto assume that the
conditional means and variances of continuous time stochastic processes are th of order h(J) as
h(J) becomes infinitesimal.

To facilitate the analysis of return reversal portfolio profits, consider the populationlinear

projection (which is again a purely mathematical construct) of the return on asset i in period j on
returns k periods ago:

(14)

= i(j.k)[Rio.krRj.k] + Vij

where the random variables V13 are uncorrelated with [R1(j.t)-Rj.k] by construction. These random

variables include both unexpected portion of returns cj and the part of expected returns that is not
explained by returns k intervals ago.
Recall that average return reversal portfolio profits are given by:

(15)

3tk =

4

=

[Rj(j..k)—Rj4][Rjj—Rjl

t j(j.k)[Rj(j.k)—Rj.k]2

l

By the analysis leading up to (13), average profits converge to:

(16) J_oo lEk =

jL44j.k)h(J)[Rjt+(j.k)h(JrRit+(}.k)h(J)]2

sincei is the profit on a costless, intertemporally well-diversifed portfolio (i.e., with weights of
order J) and, hence, the uncertain portion of portfolio profits (from the perspective of time j-k) is
9The following numerical example illustrates the simple interteinporal diversification argument.
Suppose that the typical annualized standard deviation of daily returns is 20% per year. If the
covariance between daily expected returns and security volatility makes a negligible contribution to
poitfobo profit variance, the expected annual profit on this daily strategy is on the order of 1.7
million times its variance. All but the most risk averse investors would treat such a strategy as
virtually riskless and this implies that the daily expected return and the variance of daily expected
returns (on which expected profits and their variance both depend) must be very smallif there are
no 'near' arbitrage oppostumties.

9
eliminated through intertemporal diversification. Since costless and riskiess portfolio strategies

cannot earn nonzero profits in the absence of riskiess arbitrage opportunities, it follows that
average profits must be zao in these circumstances.

These continuous trading strategies will earn nskless profits when security prices
'overreact' sufficiently to information in the marketplace and experience subsequent nontziviai
predictable price reversals. The overreacnon or fads müdel implies that j-k) 5 typically negative

and these strategies will earn riskiess profits if 'most' of these coefficients are negative by
investing in current expected winners and selling short securities which are current expected losers.

In principle, these observations permit a simple direct test of the hypothesis of market efficiency—
a test for the presence of particular arbitrage opportunities.1°

Of course, it is not a trivial matter to translate this observation into an operational test since

it is not possible to examine renwn reversal portfolio profits over an infinite number (i.e., as J_oo)

of infinitesimal time periods (i.e., as h(J)—O). Suppose that we proceed under the ancillaiy
hypothesis that a finite differencing interval such as a day or a week is a reasonable approximation
to an infinitesimal time period and that a finite number of such time intervals such as six months or
a year is a reasonable approximation to the infinite number of intervals required by the analysis.
•

The consmictive nanne of the argument leading upto (16) suggests a simple test based on
this approximation. Consider the J period profits:

t+J

(17)

11,kII1

Zj,k

jt+l

The return reversal portfolio strategies reflect a measured arbitrage opportunity if these J period

profits are consistently of one sign over the T/J periods covered by the data. Such a finding
constitutes evidence against the hypothesis of market efficiency. Failure to find a measured
arbitrage opportunity involves failure to reject the joint hypothesis that the market is efficient and

10As is well-known, the absence of unexploited arbitrage opportunities is necessary, but not
sufficient, for prices to 'fully reflect available information' in the absence of asymmetrically
informed investors.

10
that a finite number of non-infinitesimal time periods approximates continuous time.

There is a major difference between the impact of this ancillary hypothesis on the test based

on measured arbitrage opportunities and that predicated on a model of market equilibrium. The

adoption of the hypothesis that 3 discrete periods approximate continuous time can result in a

failure to reject the hypothesis of market efficiency when it is false (i.e., a Type II error). The
probability of committing a Type I error (i.e., rejection of the null hypothesis when it is true) is the

presumably negligible probability of picking a costless portfolio strategy ax random which had

profits of the same sign for T/J consecutive periods.'1 This stands in sharp contrast to the
conventional approach where the probability of false rejection of the null hypothesis includes both

the usual sampling problems and the probability that the underlying model of market equilibrium
(such as constant expected returns) is false.

Another way to see this distinction is to examine the analogous Fama(1970) strategy for

this model of market equilibrium. As noted above, average return reversal portfolio profits ik
converge to zero in the limit of continuous trading. A test of the null hypothesis that ik is zero
encounters the same conceptual difficulty as that based on independence of security returns. The

probability of rejecting this null hypothesis when it is true depends on the sampling error in the

estimate of Jtk

as

well as the probability that discrete trading over a finite number of non-

infinitesimal time periods well approximates continuous wading.

Of course, this test of the hypothesis of market efficiency avoids the problems associated
with specifying a model for expected return variation ax the cost of requiring measured arbitrage
opportunities to reject the hypothesis of market efficiency, a very stringent test which might make it

difficult to reject the market efficiency hypothesis when it is false. In addition, these portfolio
strategies can, ax bcst only detect sowces of market inefficiency that give rise to particular short
term arbitrage opportunities. For example, it is possible to construct asset pricing models in which

prices deviate from fundamental values because of speculative fads or noise trading and yet no
1tThis ignores potential measurement error in portfolio profits and any retrospective bias.

11

riskiess arbitrage opportunities arise.12 Alternatively, speculative fads may be marketwide
phenomena that give rise to long-term swings in stock prices such as bull and bear markets. In
other words, speculative fads may have an important influence on asset prices but their presence
will not be nnaniliguously reflected in measured arbitrage profits on these portfolio strategies

3. Empirical Methods, Potential Problems, and Safeguards
While the discussion of the previous section pointed to a general strategy for testing some

of the implications of market efficiency, it left considerable leeway for its actual empirical
implementation. In particular, the analysis left several choices open: (1) the appropriate asset

menu (i.e., the N securities); (2) the appropriate lag length k; (3) the horizon over which to
measure portfolio profits (i.e., J); and (4) the length of time interval that is sufficiently short for the

local martingale model to apply under the hypothesis of market efficiency (i.e., h(J)). Moreover,

the discussion presumed that market conditions were ideal (i.e., no taxes, transactions costs, or
impediments to trade), that prices could be measured without error, and that the examination of a
finite sample of portfolio profits can determine the presence or absence of arbitrage opportunities.

Each of these issues requires careful a priori consideration. While this is a truism about
empirical work in general, it has special force here since the strategy for testing the hypothesis of

market efficiency suggested by the analysis involves the search for evidence of unexploited
arbitrage opportunities in market prices. It is obviously trivial to generate portfolio strategies
which were profitable cx post but which need not have been profitable cx ante. This observation
suggests that these issues should be resolved prior to ewpirical investigation to avoid false rejection

of the null hypothesis (i.e., Type I errors). Of course, it is imperative that these choices be
reasonable ones in order to avoid failure to reject false null hypotheses (i.e., Type II cnufs).13
12See Campbell and Kyle(1987) for an explicit model of this form. Note that there is a
fundamental identification problem inherent in such models. Such models require explicit
structural relations for the fundamental value of a security from which measured asset prices

deviate due to fads or noise trading. In these circumstances, there will presumably always be a
can1i'We observational equivalent structural relation in which price equals ftuy1nntal value.
t3There is one kind of retrospective bias that cannot be easily mitigated. the fact that I read papers
in the monthly and longer horizon return reversal literature prior to embarking on this study

12

The empirical work that follows reflects one plausible set of a priori choices. The asset
menu was restricted to equity securities listed on the New York and American Stock Exchanges
because the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) returns file contains daily observations
on all such securities from 1962 to present. This permits the measurement of the returns on several

thousand assets over reasonably short time periods such as days and weeks. Since the fads model
predicts return reversals over some horizon, it made sense to base the portfolio weights underlying

the investment strategies on previous period returns. Hence, portfolio weights were taken to be
proportional to the difference between the current return on security i and the average return on all

securities in the portfolio (i.e., the return on an equally weighted portfolio) and lagged values of

these differences were used to form portfolios as well. Finally, a week was taken to be a
sufficiently short period for the local martingale model to apply while the horizon of the portfolio
strategy was set to twenty-six weeks.14 Shorter intervals such as days were deemed inappropriate
differencing intervals for reasons discussed below and other strategy horizons are reported below.

In short, the empirical work below reports snmmnry statistics for the following explicit
portfolio strategy. Consider a strategy based on the relationship between returns this week and k
weeks from now. A week was taken to begin on Wednesday and end on Tuesday to minimize the
number of days that exchanges were closed. Every week, all securities that were listed on the New

York and American Stock Exchanges in that week and k weeks from then were selected for
inclusion in the portfolio strategy.15 The number of dollars invested in each security was set to be

proportional to the current week's return less the arithmetic average of the current week's returns

(particularly Jegadcesh(1987)). It is worth noting that there is one cx a,ueforecast implicit here:
the results for 1986 were obtained after the first draft of this paper was circulated.
14The choice of twenty-six weeks was predicated on the loose notion that this constitutes a
reasonably large sample when innovations in returns are independently and identically distributed.
is some room for selection or survivorship bias here since an investor would not know
now that a firm would still exist in k weeks. Fortunately, the amount of delisting on the CRSP
tapes is sufficiently small (especially over a few weeks) that proper accounting for this bias would

probably have a negligible impact on the results. In addition, deisting alone overstates any
upward bias in portfolio profits since firms typically cease to exist on the CRSP tapes for many
reasons besides bankruptcy including name changes and takeovers.

13

on all securities meeting the criterion for inclusion.16 The factor of proportionality chosen was the
inverse of the sum of the positive deviations of individual security returns from this grand mean so

that the portfolios are scaled to be long and short one dollar of equity securities. In this case, these

costless portfolios have profits that are the difference in the returns on two dollar portfolios and,
hence, are measured in units of percent per unit time17
Hence, the number of dollars invested in security i in week t was:

(18) wt =

R{R11-1>0)
These quantities were then multiplied by the return on the corresponding security k weeks hence
and these returns were summed to arrive at portfolio profits for that week.

(19) ic =

wjtRjc+k

This process was then repeated for J weeks to generate the total profits on the strategy for the
portfolio horizon J:

t+J
(20)
j=t+1

Evidence against the hypothesis of market efficiency arises if these profits are consistently of one
16ThiS involves buying securities with negative rettns relative to the market average in this week
and financing the purchase by selling short securities which had returns in excess of the market
average this week. Unfortunately, the implicit assumption that investors have full use of the
proceeds of short sales is not valid in the marketplace. There are two reasons why this observation
is probably not cause for too much concern. The first reason is that costless portfolios can be
thought of as either an arbitrage sttazegy or as a marginal change in an existing portfolio that is long
all of the securities that meet the criterion for inclusion. The resuiction on the use of the proceeds

from short sales has no force under the latter interpretation. Secondly, existing margin

requirements require putting up margin for half of the market value of the long position. This is a
modest cost and proper accounting of borrowing costs does not much affect computed portfolio
profits since interest expense is typically less than 0.2% per week.
'7This is not necessarily innocuous since the scaling factor changes from week to week. All of the
analysis was performed with and without this scaling factor and none of the conclusions reported
below were altered appreciably. The scaling factor can be thought of as a measure of the crosssectional variation in returns in a given week.

14

sign over the forty-nine six month periods covered by the CRSP daily returnsfiles.'8

There is a major empirical problem with using weekly security returns to detect market
inefficiency in this fashion: there are predictable fluctuations in measured security returnsthat have

nothing to do with market inefficiency or the fads model. There are two well-known sources of
such movements: bid-ask spreads and thin trading. Eighty percent of the price movements over
successive transactions are between the bid and asked prices, giving the appearance of pronounced

negative serial correlation (even in daily returns). Simitrly, measured security returnsreflect the
price of a security on the last trade of the day without indicating when that trade occurred. This,

too, can give the appearance of negative serial correlation: firms with very high (low)measured
current returns will probably experience subsequent measured return reversals since the current
high (low) measured return on average overstates (understates) the true return.

This problem is largely mitigated by the employment of a few simple precautions. First,
note that these biases are only a serious issue for portfolio strategies linking this week's return to
that of next week (i.e., when k=l). In addition, the use of weekly data greatly reduces the severity

of the bid-ask spread and thin trading problems. As an added precaution, the portfolio weights

(but not the profits) for this strategy were also computed using four day returns (i.e., from
Wednesday through Monday). The absence of the security returns for the intervening Tuesday in
this modified portfolio strategy virtually eliminates bid-ask spread bias and substantially reduces

the thin trading bias as well.19 Note that this is a conservative procedure—it eliminates the
informative Tuesday returns (i.e., for securities which traded) as well as the uninformative ones
(i.e., for securities which did not trade) and, hence, is likely to overstate the contribution of bidt8Notc that the profits for horizon J are the unweighted sum of the profits for each of the I weeks.
This ignores the interest that could be earned (or the interest expense that could be incuned) on
these profits within the I weeks. This is analogous to the treatment of dividends and coupon
payments in the computation of bond and stock returns.
i9In other words, this modification virtually eliminates the correlation between the portfolio
weights and the measurement error in subsequent returns. In particular, the probability of a
securitylistedoneitherexchangenottradingonboth MondayandTuesday is quite small andthe
fact that a security traded at the bid or the ask price on Monday is likely to be unrelated to which of
these stares occurred at the close of trade on Tuesday.

15

ask spread and thin trading bias to portfolio profits.

Another important issue associated with the measurement of portfolio profits involves
transactions costs. These portfolio strategies involve extreme portfolio turnover since more than

two thousand stocks are typically bought and sold each week. Of course, anyone seriously
considering implementing such a strategy would modify it to reduce the frequency of trading.
Sirnihrly, it is not clear what transactions costs are relevant because the relevant transactions costs
would be smaller for an investor treating this portfolio strategy as a marginal change in an existing

active wading strategy. Rather than engage in experimentation to determine superior low
transactions costs versions of these strategies and risk the potentially serious retrospective bias that

could then arise, portfolio profits were computed under various assumptions about transactions
costs. Transactions cost per security per week were computed as tc*Iwjtwjt..i where tc is the
assumed one-way transactions cost per dollar transaction and wit is the number of dollars invested
in security i in week t. The profits axe reported for several values of tc°

There are several minor empirical problems which are not accounted for here but which
probably do not much affect inferences about portfolio profits. The empirical results presume that

it is possible to buy at the close of trade on one Tuesday and sell at the close of trade on the
subsequent Tuesday. Although it may not have been possible to execute these transactions at these
prices, the four day return computation largely eliminates any bias that might arise.21 In addition,

20Sweeney(1986) reports that a reasonable range includes 1f20 of one per cent for floor traders
(i.e., transactions taxes and clearing house fees), 1/10 to 1/5 of one per cent for money managers,

and 4/10 of one per cent for private investors using a discount broker. The latter number is

somewhat suspect since discount brokers are a relatively recent innovation. Note that any price
pressure generated by this wading strategy is ignored in the computationof transactions costs.
21The issue is that the closing price on the CRSP tapes is either abid or ask price so that half the
time the profit calculation assumes that one is buying (short selling) at too low (high) a price since
one buys (sells) at the asked (bid) price. Of course, this same observation means that the profit

calculation assumes that one subsequently closes out the position at too low (high) a price for

exactly the same reasons, leaving only a Jensen's inequality bias. From the Blume and
Stambaugh( 1983) analysis, this bias in profits (given true returns) is approximately:

E{x,k)

,k1 Wjt8

16

SEC regulations require that short sales take place only on upticks. This probably has a small
impact on the results especially since most of the measured profits comes from the long and not the

short positions. Finally, the portfolio profit computations ignore any price pressure generated by

this trading strategy—a serious problem only if large positions are taken in illiquid securities.
Typical position sizes will be reported below.

Finally, it is worth emphasizing the limitations of this method of analysis. As is
commonplace in empirical work, the null hypothesis of market efficiency is given special status
and the tests are constructed to avoid false rejection of this null hypothesis. This is especially true
in this context since rejection of the hypothesis of market efficiency is only strictly appropriate if
the portfolio strategies yield measured arbitrage profits—nonzero profits of the same sign for each
of the forty-nine six month periods covered by the data. The evidence could easily fail to meet this

stringent criterion even when the market was inefficient. For example, one week may not closely
approximate an infinitesimal differencing interval and individual security returns might be too noisy

to be used as reliable indicators of expected returns. Similarly, all securities listed on the NYSE
and the AMEX are included in the analysis even though a reasonable cx ante expectation is that the
small winners and losers contribute primarily to transactions costs and not to portfolio profitability.

While these potential power problems could presumably be alleviated by experimentation with
alternative differencing intervals, expected return predictors, and selection criteria, this practice
would increase the possibility of generating portfolio strategies which were profitable cx post but

which need not have been profitable cx ante. As it stands, most reasonable alterations of the
analysis would probably increase measured portfolio profits.

4. EmpirIcal Results
This section provides the promised empirical evaluation of the profitability of the costless

portfolio strategy described in the previous section. This strategy was applied toy all
where 8j is the percentage bid-ask spread. The bias is obviously trivial even if the bid-ask spread
is two or three percent (since the squared percentage bid-ask spread is negligible) and is rendered
even smaller by the observation that the portfolio weights sum to zero.

17

securities listed on the New York and American Stock Exchanges between July 1962 and
December 1986, the data contained on the CRSP daily returns file. The results shed considerable
light on the hypothesis of market efficiency.

Table 1 describes the main results of the paper. The portfolio strategies all involve buying
securities with negative returns relative to the market average over some interval and selling them at

the end of the next week and financing the purchase by selling short securities which had returns in
excess of the market average over the same interval and covering the short position at the end of the

next week. The portfolio weights were based on: the previous full week's returns, four day
returns to mitigate thin trading and bid-ask spread bias, and on the returns two, three, four,
thirteen, twenty-six, and fifty-two weeks ago. The last six lags (i.e., values of k) were chosen to
shed light on any persistence of return reversal effects.

The table reports the profits for five portfolio strategy horizons (i.e., values of I): one

week, four weeks (i.e., monthly), thirteen weeks (i.e., quarterly), twenty-six weeks (i.e.,
semiannually), and fifty-two weeks (i.e., annually). Six summry statistics are provided to
characterize the profits earned over these five horizons: the mean profit, its standard deviation, and
the t statistic of the mean profit as well as the maximum and minimum profit and fraction of periods

for which profits were positive. The number of observations on each portfolio horizon is also
reported. All of these computations ignore transactions costs which will be dealt with below.

The results in Table 1 sharply reject the hypothesis that equity prices reflect the absence of

arbitrage opportunities in frictionless markets. The two one-week portfolio strategies earned
strictly positive profits for each of the forty-nine observations of the a priori portfolio horizon of

twenty-six weeks as well as for each of the ninety-eight quarterly observations and twenty-four

annual observations. It is hard to imagine a more overwhelming rejection of the hypothesis of
market efficiency in frictionless marketsP

It is interesting to consider why such return reversals were not found in the early market
efficiency tests. As summarized in Fama(1970), these investigations found evidence of slight
negative serial correlation in individual security return autocorrelations and of slight positive

18

Table 1 also reveals that there is little measured persistence in the return reversal effect.
The portfolio strategy based on returns two weeks ago did earn strictly positive profits in each of
the forty-nine six month periods but, as is readily apparent, this observation does not survive the
inclusion of transactions costs (which is reported in Table 5 below). None of the other strategies
even came close to earning strictly positive profits across the sample for any portfoliohorizon.

Table 2 provides a more detailed description of the anatomy of the return reversal effect. It

reports the same summary statistics for the dollar portfolios of winners and losers as Table 1 with

one exception. The number of observations is replaced by the sample coirelation between the
winner and loser portfolio returns for each of the portfolio horizons. Note that these are portfolio

returns per dollar invested and, hence, the statistics for the winners portfolio are the opposite of
those implicit in the profits on the costless portfolios reported in Table 1 (i.e., the winners portfolio

is sold short in the costless portfolios).

These statistics account for the sources of the measured arbitrage profits reported in Table
1. The weekly mean returns of the two one-week portfolio strategies were of opposite sign and the

mean return of the winners portfolio was on the order of one-half the magnitude of that of the
losers portfolio in absolute absolute value. The sample variances of the weekly returns of the two

one-week portfolio strategies were comparable. The sample conelations of the weekly returns of
the two one-week portfolio strategies were large and positive—0.851 for the strategy based on the

previous weeks return and 0.873 for the strategy based on the first four days of the previous
weeks return. As a consequence, a short position in the winners portfolio has a large negative
correlation with a long position in the losers portfolio, greatly reducing the variance of the resulting

costless portfolio (by approximately 60% of the standard deviation of the losers portfolio) and
increasing its average profit (by approximately 40% over the mean of the losers portfolio).

autocorrelation in individual security return runs tests with weekly data. The values were so small
that it seemed implausible that they reflected anything like an unexploited arbitrage opportunity.
The principal alteration in this analysis is the employment of available information on many

securities (i.e., winners and losers) as opposed to the 'weak form' tests based on only lagged
individual security prices.

19

Put differently, the winners and losers portfolios have weekly mean returns within an order

of magnitude of their standard deviations. This implies that the weekly mean returns are much
larger than the corresponding sample variances—by a factor of six to nine for the winners portfolio

and of nine to fourteen for the losers portfolio. Recall that the instantaneous mean and variance of

individual asset and portfolio returns must be of the same order of magnitude to prevent the
occurrence of riskiess arbitrage opportunities in the continuous time asset pricing literature (i.e.,
the local martingale hypothesis). The resulting costless portfolios have mean profits approximately

equal to their standard deviations because of the large negative correlations between the long and

short positions in the losers and winners portfolios. As a consequence, the mean profits on these
strategies over twenty-six week periods were more than three times their standard deviations and
the profits were positive in each six month period.

It is worth emphasizing the role of the short position in the winners portfolio in these
profits. It is not the case that the returns on the losers portfolio were nearly always positive, being

positive in 65% to 70% of the weeks. Similarly, the short position in the winners portfolio
typically had positive returns in more than half of the weeks. Rather the short position in the
winners portfolio had a large negative correlation with the winners portfolio, rendering the costless

portfolio profits positive in between 85% and 94% of the weeks. The integral nature of the short

position in the winners portfolio in the costless portfolios' profits stands in sharp contrast tothe

role of short positions in the filter rule literature—as Sweeney(1986) has emphasized, short
positions contribute primarily transactions costs (and not profits) to filter rule profits.
It is difficult to interpret the behavior of these portfolios as reflecting time-vazying expected

returns even if one dismisses the suggestion that these measured aibiuage profits are evidence of

market inefficiency. For example, suppose that market prices were determined by the
consumption-based capital asset pricing model with time-varying consumption betas and risk
premia. If firms that had consumption betas above the market average this week typically had

consumption betas above the market average next week as well, then the consumption risk
premium would have to be highly negatively serially correlated from week to week. It is certainly

20
difficult to think of a story that could rationalize such a short run relation.23

Table 2 also aCCOUntS for the failure to find pronounced persistence in the return reversal

effect. The winners portfolio only has negative mean returns in the subsequent week and has
positive and increasing mean returns over time. Similnrly, the losers portfolio has large positive

mean returns in the subsequent week which diminish as time passes. This is a reflection of
measured mean reversion in stock returns which is the subject of some of my ongoing research.24

Tables 3 and4provideadetaileddescriptionof thecharacteristicsofthewinners and losers
portfolios, respectively, for the two one-week strategies and those based on one-week returns two

and three weeks ago. Eight statistics are given for each of the five quintiles of the winners and
losers portfolios (running from largest to smallest). As before, the tables report the mean profit, its

standard deviation, and the t statistic of the mean return as well as the maximum and minimum
profit for each quintile (i.e., for each twenty cents of the dollar invested in the winners or losers
portfolio). In addition, the tables provide three silmmfiry measures of portfolio characteristics by

quintile: average portfolio turnover, average investment per firm, and weighted average market
capitalization. The portfolio turnover calculation is the average sum across securities within each

quintiie of the transactions cost base I''ir'%'it-1I. Average investment per firm in each quintile is
the average value of twenty cents divided by the number of firms in each quintile in each week.
23To make matters concrete, let the excess return of security i be given by:

RirRfticI[RcrRftJ+€j
where istheconsumptionbetaofsecurityiattimet,R(isthereturnontheportfolioofthese

N assets that has the largest correlation with aggregate consumption, Rft is the return on the
riskiess (or any zero consumption beta) asset, and jct1 the portion of the return on security i
conditionally uncorrelaxed with aggregate consumption which has zero mean. Ifthe unconditional

+I,(RcrRftJ(Rct+1-Rft+1]) and cov(,+1[R+1-Rft+1]) are both zero
(which ignores, for example, the probably small impact of weekly leverage changes on
covarances cov(

consumption betas), then E{[R.et—RJ[Rct+1—Rft+1])<O if cov(jct,icc+j)>O (or vice versa) to
account for the observed positive average portfolio profits. It is hard to rationalize pronounced
negative serial correlation in either [R4z-RftJ or fjespecially in weekly data.
24This measured mean reversion reflects market inefficiency if a week as a short enough time
period for the local martingale model to apply. It may represent time-varying expected returns if
weekly trading does not well approximate continuous trading.

21

The market value calculation is the average across weeks in the sample of the weighted (by
portfolio weight) average market capitalization of the finns in each quintile of those finns for which
price and share data existed at the beginning of the week.
The measured arbitrage profits on the two one-week strategies reflect returns on reasonably

well-diversified portfolios (with weights typically ranging from 0.03% to 0.53%), not the reward

to investing in a few big winners and losers. To be sure, the largest winners and losers
experienced the largest subsequent reversals. However, the top three quintiles of winners and all
five quintiles of losers typically experienced nontrivial reversals in the next week. Moreover, the

average market capitalizations of the quintile portfolios were in size deciles six through nine,

mitigating concern about price pressure and liquidity. Note also the extraordinary volume of
transactions generated by the strategies: approximately three dollars a week per dollar long in the

return reversal portfolio strategy. In other words, the two one-week strategies profited from the
exploitation of many relatively small predictable price reversals each week and, hence, could have
been easily implemented since they would not have required large positions in iuiquid stocks.

Of course, there are legitimate concerns about the economic relevance of the profits
documented in Table 1. In particular, the costless portfolio strategies typically generate more than
two thousand round trip transactions per week and, hence, the resulting transactions costs might be

expected to wipe out the profits reported in Table 1. Table 5 reports the profits over six month
periods for the two one-week strategies and those based on one-week returns two and three weeks
ago under different assumptions about one-way transactions costs—the 0.05% to 0.1% that would

confront floor traders, the 0.1% to 0.2% costs relevant for large money managers, and the higher

values of 0.3% and 0.4%, with the latter value being approximately that charged to individual
investors by discount brokers. Note that the transactions costs generated by each portfolio strategy

implict in Table 5 probably overstate those that would actually be incurred since the strategies,
especially those based on four day returns and on the returns in previous weeks, would afford
investors the time to shop around for the best execution prices.

Table 5 changes some of the details of the interpretation of the results in Table 1 without

22

altering the main conclusions. The two one-week portfolio strategies still yielded measured
arbitrage profits at the levels of transactions costs that would be incurred by floor traders and large
money managers. In contradlSt3flCtlOfl, the strategy based on returns two weeks ago did not yield

strictly positive profits in each of the forty-nine six month periods covered by the CRSP data for

any level of transactions costs and, hence, its profits do not constitute a measured arbitrage
opportunity inclusive of transactions costs. Sincethese transactions costs computations probably

overstate the actual transactions costs, it seems reasonable to conclude that both one-week
strategies reflect measured arbitrage opportunitieswhile the persistence of return reversals is not
sufficient to yield arbitrage profits with the other strategies.

Finally, Figure 1 provides two additional summary measures of the behavior of the two

one-week portfolio strategies: time series plots and histograms oftheir weekly profits gross of
transactions costs. As is readily apparent, the series appear dominated by white noise with
positive mean. There is no noticeable pattern in the portfolio profits processes and, in particular,
no tendency for profits or their mean to decline over time. The histograms suggest that large (i.e.,
one to four percent per week) weekly profits are the rulerather than the exception In other words,
the profitability of these portfolio strategies is pervasive througout the sample period.Th

It is interesting to summarize these results by considering the profits for strategiesthat are
long $100 million of losers and short $100 million of winners. The average semiannual profits net
of the 0.10% one-way transactions costs that are probably relevant for floor traders and invesiment

of the integer displayed (i.e., 1% denotes the cell with
25The cells of the histograms are
observations ranging from 0.5% to 1.5%). The histograms exclude cells with fewer thantwelve
(out of 1276) observations. Hence, there are nine negative observations and thirty-eight positive
observations not reflected in the histograms.
26Fama and French(1986), Chan(1987), and Jegadeesh(1987) provide evidence that the return
reversal effects measured at longer differencing intervals are, in part, attributable to the now wellknown size effect—the pronounced tendency for the returns on stocks with small market
capitalizations to exceed those of stocks with large maitet capitalizations especially in the month
of January. Results not reported here suggest that return reversal strategies are, if anything, more
profitable outside of the month of January. This is primarily a consequence of the returns onthe
winners portfolio outside of the month of January. The average return on eachversion of the
winners portfolio was more negative and neaative returns occurred in a slightly largerfraction of
twenty-six week penods than the corresponding observations including January returns.

23

banks were $38.77 million for the conventional one-week strategy and $23.74 million for that

based on four day returns. The minimum semiannual profits were $17.86 million and $7.47
million, respectively, while the largest semiannual profits were $87.02 million and $51.68 million,

respectively. Moreover market liquidity is typically sufficient to accommodate transactions of the

size required by these strategies on this scale—typically three hundred thousand dollars in the

extreme losers and half of a million dollars in the extreme winners. These costless portfolio
strategies earned measured arbitrage profits despite generating $300 million of transactions a week

(the theoretical maximum is $400 million), more than one-third of which was generated by the
unprofitable transactions in the fifth quintile of smallest winners and losers. It is hard to sustain
the notion that these numbers are either trivial or were unattainable for investors 27

5.

Conclusion
Financial economics has enjoyed considerable success in interpreting stock price

movements as reflections of the arrival of new information in an efficient capital market. Early

empirical studies found little evidence against the hypothesis that equity prices were set in an

efficient market with constant expected returns. Theoretical developments since then have
suggested that expected returns typically vary in our equilibrium asset pricing models and, not

surprisingly, recent empirical research has found evidence of predictable variation in security
returns. While it is conventional practice to refer to this evidence as a reflection of time-varying
expected returns, the suggestion that predictable variation in security returns arises instead from
security price overreaction to speculative fads or the cognitive misperceptions of investors in an
271t is difficult to provide a quantitative measure of the degree of inefficiency represented by these

results. The following calculation may provide an order of magnitude estimate of the typical
pricing aor. If a week is sufficiently short for the local martingale model to apply, the costless

return reversal portfolios should have mean zero prflts net of transactions costs. The mean profits
of the two one-week strategies are approximately zero ax 040% one-way transactions costs. This
suggests a typical pricing error estimate of 0.80% if it is reasonable to assume that this measured

inefficiency represents unmeasured transactions costs (i.e., the value of time). Under these
assumptions, this calculation probably understates true 'total' (i.e., unmeasured plus out-ofpocket) transactions costs because the two one-week strategies are probably much less profitable
than optimal return reversal strategies.

24
inefficient market is currently enjoying a resurgence not seen in two decades.

These observations raise an old question: are equity markets efficient? It is especially
difficult to address this question with the conventional strategy of specifying a particular model for

expected returns and conditioning tests of market efficiency on this choice. Unfortunately,
empirically successful economic models of expected return variation are perhaps a few years off
and, hence, any rejection of market efficiency that might follow from such a test would probably
(and properly) be laid ax the doorstep of the chosen model of market equilibrium.

This paper has followed an alternative approach in testing the hypothesis of market
efficiency by examining security prices for evidence ci unexploited arbitrage opportunities. It does

so by examining the profits on feasible cx ante costless portfolios that should not earn riskiess
profits in an efficient market but could earn such profits if stock price overreaction affects many
equity returns. This practice avoids the problems associated with specifying a model for variation

in expected returns at the cost of requiring the presence of measured arbitrage opportunities to
reject the hypothesis of market efficiency, a vesy stringent test.

Despite the stringency of the test, the results suggest overwhelming rejection of the
hypothesis that equity pnces are set in an efficient capital market. Portfolios of securities that had

positive returns in one week typically had negative returns in the next week (on average, -0.35 to

-0.55 per cent per week) while those with negative returns in one week typically had positive
returns in the next week (on average, 0.86 to 1.24 per cent per week). The costless portfolio that
is the difference between the winners and losers portfolios had positive profits in roughly 90% of
the weeks and, if the strategy is viewed as having a horizon of twenty-six weeks, the profits were
positive in each of the forty-nine six month periods covered by the data. These measured arbitrage
profits persist after corrections for the mismeasuzement of security returns because of thin trading

and bid-ask spreads and for plausible levels of transactions costs. In addition, the portfolio
strategies involved only modest positions in liquid securities, suggesting that they could have been

implemented without generating substantial price pressure. Fmally, it is hard to rationalize short

run return reversals of this magnitude within an intertemporal asset pricing framework even

25
ignoring the evidence of market inefficiency suggested by the measured arbitrage opportunities.

Of course, these results may not stand up under closer scrutiny because of some source of
bias or measurement error that was not considered in the analysis. This seems unlikely since most
reasonable modifications of the analysis (such as eliminating transactions in the small winners and

losers) would increase portfolio profits. On the hypothesis that the main conclusions survive
further e,amintion, it is interesting to consider its implications for future research.2
Since there is little persistence in these measured return reversal effects, there will probably

be two typical responses by investigators who take the results seriously. One group will
emphasize the short-run nature of the measured effects and will presume that security prices can be

treated as though they were set (on average) in an efficient ma&et over longer horizons such as a

month. On this view, these results provide an interesting puzzle for students of security market
microstructure which may be interpreted as suggesting that total transactions costs greatly exceed

the out-of-pocket costs considered in Table 529 The other group will correctly suggest that these

tests have little power to detect longer term market inefficiencies and will continue to seek
additional evidence (and reinterpret existing evidence) of capital market inefficiency. These
investigators will probably consmict models of fair market value in inefficient markets and attempt

to measure deviations from market efficiency. Both efforts will presumably increase our
understanding of the determination of security prices.

281 offer some anecdotal evidence on behalf of this interpretation that I encountered after
completing this research. Rosenberg Institutional Equity Management successfully markets a
version of the portfolio strategy described in Rosenberg, Reid, and Lanstein(1985). In addition,
this firm sells a program trading product that goes long a version of the losers portfolio and short
S&P 500 futures contracts. We academicians apparently benefit from return reversal strategies—
the College Retirement Equity Fund has successfully pursued such a strategy (not the Rosenberg
version) as part of its actively managed portfolio. My understanding is that this invesmient practice

has become increasingly widespread. Presumably their activities, especially the computergenerated program trading versions, will eliminate any such arbitrage opportunities in the future,
yielding the opportimily to write a paper entitled "Retimi Reversals Revisited" at a future daze!

29Equity desks and research groups have traditionally been organized by industry with

comparatively little internecine contact concerning individual securities. Since winners and losers
freely cross industry bounds, this institutional observation suggests a possible reason why this
apparent inefficiency has been overlooked and why it may have been costly to exploit. See also
footnote 27.

26

Table 1
Profits on Costless Return Reversal Portfolio Strategies
By Portfolio Horizon—1962-1986
Panel A: Portfolio Weights Based on Previous Week's Return
Portfolio
Horizon
(Weeks)
One
Four
l'hirteen
Twenty-six
Fifty-two

Number
of
Fraction
Deviation Statistic Maxinaim Minimum Positive Observations
1276
0.2294 -0.0539 0.934
0.0156 41.07
319
0.0355 36.06 0.2709 -0.0219 0.991
98
1.000
0.5029 0.0845
0.0803 28.71
49
1.000
0.9446 0.2555
0.1449 22.50
24
0.2709 16.80 1.7277 0.5850 1.000
Standard

Mean

0.0179
0.0717
0.2329
0.4657
0.9289

t

Panel B: Portfolio Weights Based on First Four Days of Previous Week's Return
One

Four
Thirteen

Twenty-six
Fifty-two

0.0121
0.0484
0.1573
0.3146
0.6281

0.0144 30.02
0.0298 28.98
0.0571 27.27
0.0923 23.87
0.1699 18.11

0.2132 -0.0629
0.2380 -0.0301

0.867
0.972

0.0526
0.1515
0.4115

1.000
1.000
1.000

0.4032
0.5947
1.1281

1276
319
98
49

24

Panel C: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Two Weeks Ago
One

Four
Thirteen

Twenty-six
Fifty-two

0.0050
0.0200
0.0651
0.1302
0.2590

0.0118
0.0257

15.15
13.87

0.0460 14.02
0.0658 13.86
0.1129 11.24

0.1064 -0.0497
0.1241 -0.0599
0.2727
0.3936
0.5830

-0.0451
0.0242
0.0719

0.695
0.802
0.929
1.000
1.000

1275
318
98
49
24

Panel D: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Three Weeks Ago
One

Four
Thirteen

Twenty-six
Fifty-two

0.0018
0.0073
0.0236
0.0472
0.0993

0.0112
0.0246
0.0442
0.0702
0.1075

4.71

0.1085 -0.0556
0.1242 -0.0909
0.1708 -0.1104
0.2812 -0.1186

4.53

0.3682

5.77
5.31

5.28

-0.1115

0.575
0.638
0.694
0.776
0.833

1274
318
98
49
24

27

Table 1—Continued

Profits on Costless Return Reversal Portfolio Strategies
By Portfolio Horizon—1962-1986
Panel E: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Four Weeks Ago

Portfolio
Horizon

(Weeks

One

Four
Thirteen

Twenty-six
Fifty-two

Number

t

of
1an Deviation Statistic Maximum Minimum Positive Observations
0.1273 -0.0515 0.521
0.0111
3.56
0.0011
1273
0.1324 -0.0638 0.569
318
0.0043 0.0235 3.31
0.1370 -0.0655 0.649
0.0136 0.0379 3.53
97
0.1887 -0.0880 0.646
3.32
48
0.0279 0.0581
2.96
0.3 106 -0.0900 0.750
24
0.0557 0.0921
Standard

Fraction

Panel F: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Thirteen Weeks Ago
One

Four
Thirteen

Twenty-six
Fifty-two

-0.0009
-0.0034
-0.0112
-0.0210
-0.0421

0.0088
0.0182
0.0351
0.0432

-3.47
-3.35
-3.15
-3.37

0.0566 -3.64

0.0400 -0.0465
0.0617 -0.0599
0.0770 -0.1494
0.0546 -0.1179
0.0584 -0.1540

0.438
0.415
0.371
0.354
0.167

1264

316
97
48

24

Panel 0: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Twenty-six Weeks Ago

One

Four
Thirteen

Twenty-six
Fifty-two

-0.0004
-0.0017
-0.0055
-0.0111
-0.0222

0.0086 -1.71
0.0177
0.0335

-1.70
-1.62

0.0359 -2.14
0.0478

-2.27

0.0511

-0.0415

0.0759 -0.0530
0.0944 -0.0969
0.0773

-0. 1204

0.0459 -0.1588

0.473
0.455
0.458
0.396
0.375

1251

312

96
48

24

Panel H: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Fifty-two Weeks Ago

-0.0016

Four

-0.0065

Thirteen

-0.0210
-0.0419

Twenty-six
Fifty-two

-0.0831

0.0092 -6.18
0.0220 -5.14
0.0417

-4.87

0.0589 -4.91
0.0976 -4.09

0.0284 -0.1170
0.0490 -0.1555
0.0807 -0.1762
0.0740 -0.2009
0.0873

-0.3801

0.424
0.366
0.298
0.234
0.130

1225

306

94
47
23

28

Table 2

Weekly Returns on Dollar Portfolios of Winners and Losers 1962-1986
Panel A: Portfolio Weights Based on Previous Week's Return
Portfolio
Winners
Losers

Fraction Pairwise
t
Standard
Deviation
Statistic
Maxiimnn
Minimum
Positive
Correlation
Mean
0.851
0.0248 -7.96 0.1296 -0.1264 0.413
-0.0055
0.85 1
0.0124 0.0297 14.92 0.3321 -0.1338 0.7 14

Panel B: Portfolio Weights Based on First Four Days of Previous Week's Return
Winners
Losers

-0.0035
0.0086

0.0247
0.0295

-5.05
10.43

0.1171
0.3211

-0.1311
-0.1354

0.460
0.665

0.873
0.873

Panel C: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Two Weeks Ago

Winners
Losers

0.0003
0.0053

0.0253
0.0286

0.41

6.63

0.1638 -0.1458
0.2702 -0.1344

0.579
0.620

0.911
0.911

Panel D: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Three Weeks Ago

Winners
Losers

Winners
Losers

0.0022
0.0041

0.0261
0.0282

3.07

5.14

0.2154 -0.1406
0.2254 -0.1340

0.711
0.598

0.917
0.917

Panel E: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Four Weeks Ago
0.920
3.42 0.2041 -0.1129 0.736
0.0262
0.0025

0.0036

0.028 3

4.56

0.2320 -0.1569

0.590

0.920

Panel F: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Thirteen Weeks Ago

Winners
Losers

0.0039
0.0030

0.0268
0.027 1

5.17
3.97

0.2006 -0.1286
0.2174 -0.1376

0.816
0.578

0.947
0.947

Panel 0: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Twenty-six Weeks Ago

Winners
Losers

0.0038
0.0034

0.0268
0.0268

4.98
4.43

0.2191 -0.1288
0.2140 -0.1499

0.821
0.592

0.949
0.949

Panel R Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Fifty-two Weeks Ago
Winners
Losers

0.0045
0.0028

0.0280
0.0261

5.59
3.82

0.2326 -0.1410
0.2124 -0.1355

0.842
0.585

0.944
0.944

29

Table 3
Weekly Returns and Characteristics of Selected Dollar Portfolios of
Winners By Quintlle—1962-1986
Panel A: Portfolio Weights Based on Previous Week's Return
Averaae Portfolio (Tharacterisiics

Portfolio

Jnvestruent Maiket
Value in
per

Turnover llrm Millions of
t
Statistic
Maximum
Minimum
(Cents (Cents Dollars
Ouintilc Mean
77.7
-0.0041 0.0076 -19.02 0.0396 -0.0529 22.57 0.49
One
171.8
0.25
-0.0014 0.0055 -9.10 0.0424 -0.0255 23.09
Two
0.16
284.3
24.23
-3.35 0.0259 -0.0213
Three -0.0005 0.0050
393.5
0.10
0.46 0.0219 -0.0226 27.07
0.0001 0.0046
Four
Portfolio

Five

Standard

Deviation

0.0003 0.0044

2.78

0.0269

-0.0237

52.07

0.03

497.8

Panel B: Portfolio Weights Based on First Four Days of Previous Week's Return

One

Two
Three

Four
Five

-0.0030 0.0075 -14.32
-0.0008 0.0054
-0.0003 0.0049
0.0002 0.0047
0.0004 0.0044

-5.11
-2.04
1.15

3.60

0.0415 -0.0810
0.0284 -0.0277
0.0237 -0.0275
0.0213 -0.0223
0.0296 -0.0237

22.00
22.52
23.84
26.88
52.39

0.53
0.26
0.16
0.10
0.03

71.9
165.8

274.0
380.8
493.8

Panel C: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Two Weeks Ago

One

Two
Three

Four
Five

-0.0007 0.0070
-0.0000 0.0056
0.0002 0.0051
0.0003 0.0047
0.0005 0.0044

-3.42
-0.16

0.0430 -0.0320

1.44

0.0277 .0.0283
0.0292 -0.0285
0.0300 -0.0257

2.35
3.81

0.0378

-0.0313

21.21
21.85
23.41

26.60
52.16

0.49
0.25
0.16
0.10
0.03

77.3
171.7
285.1

393.7
497.8

Panel D: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Three Weeks Ago

One

Two
Three

Four
Five

0.0002 0.0070
0.0004 0.0058
0.0005 0.0053
0.0006 0.0049
0.0006 0.0045

0.94
2.41

3.27
4.15
4.81

0.0461 -0.0314
0.0463 -0.0313
0.0458 -0.0289
0.0407 -0.0259
0.0365 -0.0230

20.89
21.53
23.00
26.23
52.14

0.49
0.25
0.16
0.10
0.03

77.8
172.1

284.2
394.2
497.3

30

Table 4
Weekly Returns and Characteristics of Selected Dollar Portfolios of
Losers By Qulntlle—1962-1986
Panel A: Portfolio Weights Based on Previous Week's Return
Avera2e Portfolio Characteristics

Portfolio

Standard

Portfolio

t

Investment Market
Value in
per

Turnover Firm Millions of

Ouintile Mean Deviaiion Statistic Maximum Mn (Cents (Cents) Dollars
110.9
0.0065 0.0084 27.71 0.0918 -0.0274 24.34 0.29
One
198.6
0.0027 0.0066 14.47 0.0747 -0.0260 23.60 0.17
Two
0.12
294.7
9.70 0.0668 -0.0282 24.14
0.0016 0.0059
Three
0.08
385.9
26.54
6.51 0.0537 -0.0295
0.0010 0.0053
Four
480.9
0.03
4.92 0.0451 -0.0271 52.37
0.0007 0.0049
Five
Panel B: Portfolio Weights Based on First Four Days of Previous Week's Return
One

Two
Three

Four
Five

0.0036 0.0080
0.0019 0.0065
0.0013 0.0059
0.00 10 0.0054
0.0008 0.0048

16.14
10.61
8.01

6.43
5.82

0.0854 -0.0307
0.0726 -0.0286
0.0638 -0.0277
0.0566 -0.0281
0.0457 -0.0256

22.50
22.79
23.72
26.72
53.49

0.30
0.17
0.12
0.08
0.03

113.4
198.9

297.0
397.6
489.8

Panel C: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Two Weeks Ago

One
Two
Three

Four
FIve

0.0014 0.0076
0.0011 0.0063
0.0011 0.0057
0.0009 0.0052
0.0008 0.0047

6.44
6.36
6.77
6.39

0.0766 -0.0304
0.0516 -0.0292
0.0508 -0.0252
0.0501 -0.0274

6.12 0.0412 -0.0226

21.99
21.85
23.56
26.90
53.90

0.29
0.17
0.12
0.08
0.03

111.6
199.9
295.8
387.0
481.6

Panel D: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Three Weeks Ago

4.39 0.0607 -0.0312
5.00 0.0656 -0.0273

Three

0.0009 0.0075
0.0009 0.0063
0.0008 0.0056

4.95

0.0438 -0.0269

Four

0.0008 0.005 1

5.27

0.04 19

Five

0.0007 0.0046

5.59

0.0323

One

Two

-0.0242
-0.0244

21.70
21.53
23.17
26.57
54.01

0.29
0.17
0.12
0.08
0.03

111.5
199.9
295.0
386.2
480.1

31

Table 5
Profits on Selected Twenty-six Week Costless Return Reversal

Portfolio Strategies By One-way Transactions Cost—1962-1986
Panel A: Portfolio Weights Based on Previous Week's Return
Transactions

Cost
(Percent
0.05%
0.10%
0.20%
0.30%
0.40%

Number

of
an Deviation Statistic Maxitmim Minimnn Positive Observations
49
0.1445 20.67 0.9099 0.217 1 1.000
0.4267
49
0.8702 0.1786 1.000
0.3877 0.1442 18.82
Standard

0.3097
0.2317
0.1537

t

0.1436 15.10
0.1429 11.35
0.1423

7.56

Fraction

0.7909
0.7114
0.6321

0.1018
0.0249
-0.0520

1.000
1.000
0.898

49
49
49

Panel B: Portfolio Weights Based on First Four Days of Previous Week's Return

0.05%
0.10%
0.20%
0.30%
0.40%

0.2760
0.2374
0.1602
0.0830
0.0059

0.0921 20.98
0.0920 18.07
0.0917 12.24
0.0914
0.0911

6.36
0.45

0.5558
0.5 168

0.4389

0.1131
0.0747
-0.0021

0.3610 -0.0789
0.2830 -0.1558

1.000
1.000

0.979
0.898
0.449

49
49
49
49
49

Panel C: Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Two Weeks Ago

0.05%
0.10%
0.20%
0.30%
0.40%

0.0922
0.0541
-0.0220
-0.0981
-0.1742

0.0656
0.0654
0.0651

9.84
5.79
-2.36

0.0647 -10.61
0.0644 -18.94

0.3551 -0.0136
0.3165 -0.0513
0.2394 -0.1269
0.1622 -0.2024
0.0851 -0.2780

0.939
0.837
0.306
0.041
0.020

49
49
49
49
49

Panel D Portfolio Weights Based on One Week Return Three Weeks Ago

0.05%
0.10%
0.20%
0.30%
0.40%

0.0095
-0.0282
-0.1036
-0.1790
-0.2544

0.0700
0.0698

0.95
-2.83

0.0693 -10.46
0.0689 -18.18
0.0685 -26.00

0.2431 -0.1550
0.2050 -0.1913
0.1288 -0.2639
0.0525 -0.3365
-0.0237 -0.4092

0.551
0.306
0.041
0.020
0.000

49
49

49
49
49

32

Figure 1

Weekly Portfolio Profits—Full Week Strategy
Time Series Plot
Histogram
0.4

0.3

0.2

I

0.1

0.0

-1 0

234

1

Profit (percent per week)

0 260

520 780 1040
Week Number

Weekly Portfolio Profits—Four Day Strategy
Histogram

Time Series Plot

0.4
0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

..
-1 0

1

234

Profit (percent per week)

0 260 520 780 1040
Week Number

33

Bibliography
Black, Fischer, 1986, "Noise," Journal of Finance 41, pp. 529-543.
Blume, Marshall E. and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1983, "Biases in Computed Returns: An
Application to the Size Effect," Journal of Financial Economics 12, pp. 387-404.

(n, K. C., 1987, "On the Return of the Contrarian Investment Strategy," unpublished
manuscript, School of Business, Ohio State University.
Dc Bondt, Werner F. M. and Richard Thaler, 1985, "Does the Stock Market Overreact?"
Journal of Finance 40, pp. 793-805.
Fama, Eugene F., 1970, "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work,"
Journal of Finance 25, pp. 383-417.

— and Marshal E. Blume, 1966, 'Filter Rules and Stock Market Trading," Journal f
Business 39, pp. 226-241.

— and Kenneth R. French, 1986, "Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock
Prices," CRSP Working Paper No. 178, University of Chicago.
French, Kenneth R. and Richard W. Roll, 1986, "Stock Return Variances: The Arrival of
Information and the Reaction of Traders," Journal of Financial Economics 17, pp. 5-26.

Hall, Peter E. and C. C. Heyde, 1980, Martingale Limit Theory and Its Applications (New
York: Academic Press).
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1986, "Evidence of the Predictability of Equity Returns," unpublished
manuscript, Graduate School of Business, Columbia University.

Lo, Andrew W. and A. Qaig MacKinlay, 1987, "Stock Prices Do Not Follow Random Walks:
Evidence from a Simple Specification Test," NBER Working Paper No. 2168.
Merton, Robert C., 1982, "On the Mathematics and Economic Assinnptions of Continuous Time
Models" in Williani F. Sharpe and C. M. Cootner (ads.), Financial Economics: Essays in
Honor of Paul Cootn (Englewood Qiffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hail)

Poterba, James M. and Lawrence IL Summers, 1987, "Mean Reversion in Stock Prices: Evidence
and Implications," NBER Wasting Paper No. 2373.
Roll, Richard W., 1983, "On Computing Mean Returns and the Small Firm Premium," Journal of
Financial Economics 12, pp. 37 1-86.

Rosenberg, Barr Kenneth Reid; and Ronald Lanstein, 1985, "Persuasive Evidence ci Market
Inefficiency," Journal of Portfolio Management 12, pp. 9-16.

Shefrmn, Hersh !t and Mew Sttnun, 1985, "The Disposition to Ride Winners Too Long and Sell
Losers Too Soon: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Finance 41, pp. 774-790.
Shiller, Robert J., 1981, '"The Use of Volatility Measures in Assessing Market Efficiency,"

34

Journal of Finance 36, pp.291-304.

—, 1984, "Stock Prices and Social Dynamics," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
12, pp. 457-498.

Sims, Christopher A., 1984, "Martingale-like Behavior of Prices and Interest Rates," Discussion
Paper No. 205, Center for Economic Research, University of Minnesota.
Singleton, Kenneth J., 1987, "Specification and Estimation of Intertemporal Asset Pricing
Models" in Benjamin Friedman and Frank Hahn, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics
(New York: North-Holland).

Summers, Lawrence H., 1986, 'Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Fundamental Values?"
Journal of Finance 41, pp. 591-600.

Sweeney, Richard J., 1986, "Some New Filter Rule Tests: Methodology and Results,"
unpublished manuscript, Claremont McKenna College and Claremont Graduate School.

</ref_section>

