                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                BREXIT UNCERTAINTY AND TRADE DISINTEGRATION

                                     Alejandro Graziano
                                       Kyle Handley
                                        Nuno Limão

                                     Working Paper 25334
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25334


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2018




Corresponding Author: Limao: University of Maryland, Economics Dept.,Tydings Hall, College
Park, MD 20742. We acknowledge financial support from the NSF under grant SES-1360780
(Limao). We received helpful comments from Sebastian Sotelo and seminar participants at
Maryland, Michigan, Chicago Booth, the London School of Economics, World Bank and the
Bank of Canada. J. Frank Li provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Alejandro Graziano, Kyle Handley, and Nuno Limão. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Brexit Uncertainty and Trade Disintegration
Alejandro Graziano, Kyle Handley, and Nuno Limão
NBER Working Paper No. 25334
December 2018
JEL No. E02,F02,F1,F5

                                         ABSTRACT

We estimate the uncertainty effects of preferential trade disagreements. Increases in the
probability of Britain’s exit from the European Union (Brexit) reduce bilateral export values and
trade participation. These effects are increasing in trade policy risk across products and
asymmetric for UK and EU exporters. We estimate that a persistent doubling of the probability of
Brexit at the average disagreement tariff of 4.5% lowers EU-UK bilateral export values by 15 log
points on average, and more so for EU than UK exporters. Neither believed a trade war was
likely.

Alejandro Graziano                              Nuno Limão
University of Maryland                          Department of Economics
graziano@econ.umd.edu                           University of Maryland
                                                3105 Tydings Hall
Kyle Handley                                    College Park, MD 20742
University of Michigan                          and NBER
Ross School of Business - R3390                 limao@econ.umd.edu
701 Tappan St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
handleyk@umich.edu
1      Introduction

Trade agreements have been a driving force toward economic integration (cf. Limão, 2016). That trend may
be reversing in the face of recent trade policy disagreements, including threats to abandon or renegotiate
long-standing trade commitments by the United States1 and the United Kingdom’s looming Brexit from the
European Union (EU). Governments and firms worldwide are right to question whether policy commitments
will be reversed and lead to trade disintegration. We examine how changes in beliefs about policy reversals
impact trade in the context of Brexit.
    Specifically, we estimate how shocks to the probability of Brexit affect bilateral export investments and
trade flows between the UK and the EU. Our identification comes from monthly variation in exports as the
political process unfolded prior to the June 2016 referendum. As a result, the estimates are unaffected by
ex-post shocks — to financial markets, exchange rates, policy and politics — that might interact with and
confound policy uncertainty analysis. The estimated elasticities of exports to uncertainty therefore allow us
to isolate and quantify the trade effects of large permanent changes in the probability of Brexit. Standard
sunk investment models predict that higher uncertainty reduces investment by increasing the option value of
waiting to act (Dixit, 1989; Bloom, 2014). This mechanism implies that if trade agreements decrease trade
policy uncertainty (TPU), then they can spur export investments and increase trade integration (Handley
and Limão, 2015; Carballo et al., 2018). Conversely, the prospect of Brexit may lead to trade disintegration.
    We find that increases in the probability of Brexit, as measured by prediction markets for the referendum
outcome, reduce UK-EU exports and net export entry. The effect is largest in products with higher potential
protection in the event of a trade disagreement, i.e. higher risk. We model alternative trade policy risk
scenarios including one where UK and EU exporters face the current EU external tariff (the most favored
nation rate, MFN) and another where they face non-cooperative tariffs: a trade war. Using each of these we
construct model-based measures of tail risk: the share of lost profits if trade barriers increased to the MFN
or the non-cooperative rates.
    We find significant export uncertainty elasticities only for the MFN scenario, so exporters did not expect a
trade war. At the mean MFN risk a persistent increase in the probability of Brexit by one standard deviation
reduces UK-EU trade by 2.6 log points on average and the impact is twice as high for EU exporters to the UK
than vice versa. A doubling in that probability reduces UK-EU trade by about 15 log points; it reduces the
net entry of exported products by more than 10 percent. After the referendum this probability measure more
than doubled relative to its pre-referendum mean. We also show that large persistent political shocks, such
as polling swings in the voter exit share pre-referendum, are consistent with a doubling of this probability.
    We focus on the impacts of potential exit from agreements and show their impacts even if the outcome does
not materialize. Another approach is to compute the outcomes of actual changes in policy under possible
scenarios. Using simulations, Dhingra et al. (2017) find a 1 percent welfare loss for the UK under a “soft
Brexit” and 3 percent under a hard Brexit. A key driver of these welfare effects is a reduction in UK-EU
bilateral trade. Mulabdic et al. (2017) use gravity estimates and conclude that a reversal of previous trade
integration implies it will fall up to 30% if no trade deal is reached.2 Steinberg (2018) also finds reductions in
   1 The US has left the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), threatened to leave the World Trade Organization(WTO), and

renegotiated the North American and Korea-US Free Trade Agreements.
   2 Kee and Nicita (2017) find smaller effects on UK exports to the EU because MFN tariffs are negatively correlated with

demand elasticities. Baldwin et al.(2017) suggest the UK could form alternative, mutually beneficial trade agreements outside
the negotiation constraints of the EU. On the other hand, the UK would lose preferential access to markets where the EU already
has preferential trade agreements (PTAs) that generated more trade, better quality, and access to new varieties (Berlingieri et
trade and welfare using a calibrated, dynamic model. But in contrast to our empirical approach, his model
simulations attribute a small role to uncertainty in accounting for the trade effects.
  We build on Handley and Limão (2015, 2017) and a growing body of research that finds TPU is important
in explaining trade outcomes.3 Independent work by Crowley et al. (2018b) uses the framework in Handley
and Limão (2017) with UK firm-level export data. They find lower UK exporter participation in high MFN
products, but only when comparing post- and pre-referendum trade participation in the second semesters of
2016 and 2015. They find no impact for export values. Our approach and results differ from and complement
the literature in several other important ways.
  First, earlier work has identified trade effects using uncertainty reductions caused by a specific event such
as accession to the EU or the WTO. We estimate export elasticities from time-varying policy uncertainty
about trade policy regimes that may never materialize. A “leave” referendum result increases the likelihood
of a regime change, but its timing and policies were (and remain) uncertain. In our approach, we combine
monthly trade and prediction market data; we model the trade and belief processes in a way that allows for
dynamic effects via lags and derive an estimable elasticity to persistent shocks.
  Second, we provide a novel means to disentangle and quantify whether predictions about Brexit uncertainty
are reflected in the pattern of trade flows and participation. Mapping political events into specific firm- or
product-specific risk is difficult without the heterogeneity in risk exposure. Some recent papers handle this
challenge using variation in the timing and competitiveness of elections to estimate the effects on investment
and economic activity (Boutchkova et al., 2012; Julio and Yook, 2016).4 Our approach exploits the time
variation in prediction markets (as done by Zitzewitz and Wolfers, 2007; Snowberg et al. 2013) interacted
with industry variation in trade policy.
  Third, we estimate the differential effects of Brexit across UK and EU exporters. We find that the effects
are qualitatively similar, but not symmetric: the uncertainty elasticities are larger for EU exports to the
UK than in the opposite direction. We also estimate and confirm our baseline findings for UK trade with
other countries with which new agreements would need to be negotiated following Brexit. We also find the
results are present in sunk cost industries and reflected in asymmetric export entry and exit behavior. These
findings lend additional credibility for the channels highlighted by the model.
  Next, we discuss some background and motivation for our approach. In section 3, we outline the theory
that we use in section 4 to derive an estimation equation linking the dynamic response of exporters to trade
policy risks interacted with a measure of the Brexit probability. Section 5 provides the empirical estimates of
Brexit uncertainty on trade value and entry-exit behavior. We quantify the impacts and perform robustness
checks in section 6.2.
al., forth.).
    3 For example, Crowley et al. (2018a) show that “tariff scares” from anti-dumping actions against Chinese firms have spillover

effects on trade and investment decisions by other firms. Greenland et al. (forth) show that economic policy uncertainty reduces
trade and market entry in a cross-country panel gravity estimation. Shepotylo and Stuckatz (2018) find reductions in trade
and FDI to a news-based measures of TPU surrounding Ukraine’s scuttled effort to join the EU.
    4 Hassan et al., 2017; Handley and Li, 2018 obtain firm-level measures, by using textual measures from investor conference

calls.




                                                                2
2      Brexit: Background and Motivation

An important component of our strategy is to estimate the relationship between exports and measures of
UK and EU firms’ beliefs about Brexit. Thus we provide some historical background on the latent historical
support of UK voters for leaving the EU. We then show how more recent measures of such support relate to
aggregate trade participation leading up the referendum. We also discuss business and media attitudes that
explicitly point to the role of uncertainty that the model focuses on.
    UK voter support for leaving the EU has been high since its accession in 1973. That support is well
documented in surveys since 1977; it has averaged around 40%, fluctuating from 65% in 1980 to a low of
28% in 1991. The most recent upsurge occurred after the financial crisis to an above average 49%, but then
receded by 2016.
    As in many high income countries, parts of the UK were negatively affected by globalization, trade shocks
to manufacturing employment, and the aftermath of the Euro crisis. The latter strengthened the standing of
the eurosceptic UK Independence Party and was a factor leading to the 2013 promise by the Prime Minister
Cameron to hold a referendum. Following the Conservative Party’s general election victory in 2015, leaving
the EU once again became a potential reality. The EU Referendum Bill was presented in May and approved
in December 2015. The bill allowed the government to schedule a referendum vote before 2017. In February
2016, the vote was scheduled for June 23, 2016 and in that date 52% of voters agreed for ‘the UK to leave
the European Union’.
    The referendum was hotly debated by policymakers and business leaders in the media. A renegotiation
of commitments need not be detrimental to trade, but an acrimonious dissolution of the EU agreement was
certainly a risk. Perhaps with this in mind, Prime Minister Cameron used the vote as leverage to obtain a
commitment to renegotiate aspects of the EU relationship before announcing the referendum date.
    Nevertheless, there was evidence of rising uncertainty as the referendum approached. Survey results
indicated that 83% of UK CFOs reported a high level of uncertainty in 2016Q1, up 11 points over the
previous six months. Similar sentiments prevailed throughout Europe, especially among German and Irish
CFOs, where the EU relationship is important (Deloitte, 2016).5 The Deloitte chief economist noted that
this was historically non-trivial for the UK: “A fog of uncertainty has descended on the corporate sector.
Perceptions of financial and economic uncertainty are back to levels last seen in early 2013 as the euro crisis
abated.”6
    UK business leaders largely supported remaining in the EU because of uncertainty concerns. On the eve of
the vote, 1,200 business leaders wrote a letter to the The Times arguing that “Britain leaving the EU would
mean uncertainty for our firms, less trade with Europe and fewer jobs. Britain remaining in the EU would
mean the opposite: more certainty, more trade and more jobs.”7 However, some business leaders supported
Brexit, and discounted the risks of an exit.8
   5 The specific question was “How would you rate the overall level of external financial and economic uncertainty facing your

business?” and respondents chose either low, normal, or high. Most chief financial officers expected revenues to increase over
the next 12 months. But 75% of those in the UK answered it was not a good time to take greater risk—a 44-point downward
swing in a six-month period. Moreover, a majority of UK CFOs planned to decrease investment.
   6 UK finance chiefs delay hiring and investment as Brexit tops risk list. The Guardian (May 31, 2016).
   7 Letter to the editor. British business ‘benefits massively from EU’. The Times (June 22, 2016).
   8 The entrepreneur James Dyson wrote: “There is a perception that having a seat at the EU table means Britain has influence.

As David Cameron discovered in his recent attempt at renegotiation, we don’t [. . . ] There is a misplaced belief in the mythical
powers of the single market and its influence on and importance to the UK economy [...] For Remain supporters to argue that
the EU would impose trade tariffs is equally absurd.” ‘It’s our last chance. To remain would be an act of self-harm’. The Times



                                                               3
    There was substantial variation in polling data and prediction markets in the months leading up to the
referendum. In Figure 1 we plot two time-series. First, polling data on the share of respondents planning
to vote “Leave” plus undecided voters in the referendum. Second, the daily average price of a prediction
market contract that pays $1 if “Leave” wins the referendum and $0 otherwise. There are a large swings in
both measures, particularly around large events, such as the passage of the Referendum Bill itself and the
setting of the election date.
    Did the variation in the likelihood of Brexit in the months leading up to the vote affect trade? Simple
inspection of the data does not yield an obvious answer, which is one reason we focus on estimating the
elasticity of trade to Brexit uncertainty using high-frequency data. To underscore this point, we divide UK
and EU bilateral exports into high and low risk products, defined by those with a post-Brexit tariff above
the median MFN (high risk) and those below it. We then compute the export share of the low risk products.
In Figure 2 we plot a smoothed local polynomial through these shares from August 2015 to June 2016 along
with the 60-day moving average of the prediction market price shown in Figure 1. These two series visually
co-move and have a simple correlation of 0.22. A regression of the low risk shares on the contract price
moving average also indicates a positive relationship and allows us to control for bilateral importer-exporter
fixed effects.
    The relationship in Figure 2 is suggestive but may also reflect unobserved shocks and trends and fails to
account for other dynamic factors. For example, the relationship appears more muted in the last four months
before the referendum, when the prediction market price has several large trend reversals. We account for
these factors and allow for dynamic effects of the Brexit probability in estimating trade outcomes in section
5. We handle other identification issues in disaggregated trade flow data using a rich set of controls where
we can further explore how the impact is mediated by the degree of exposure to measurable trade policy risk
factors rather than simple trade share indicators.



3      Theoretical Framework

We employ the theoretical framework in Handley and Limão (2015) and Carballo, Handley and Limão (2018,
henceforth CHL) with some modifications to analyze Brexit. Here we describe only the basic elements and
implications of the model. Firms requiring sunk investments to export will experience an increase in the
option value of waiting if uncertainty increases, e.g. due to potential changes in trade barriers and product
regulations. We derive a cutoff condition for exporting and show how it relates to export value and product
entry and exit dynamics.


3.1     Environment

A firm v faces a standard CES demand in country i at time t,
                                            h             i
                                                       −σ
                                      qivt = Dit (τit )     p−σ         −σ
                                                             ivt = ait pivt ,                              (1)

where the business conditions term, ait , reflects a purely economic demand shifter, Dit , and a policy
component, the advalorem tax, τit ≥ 1, e.g. a tariff. The economic component can be further interpreted
2016, June 22.



                                                        4
                       σ−1
as Dit = εYit (Pit )         where εYit is the exogenous fraction of all country income spent on the differentiated
goods and Pit the CES price aggregator. We assume the mass of exporters relative to domestic producers
in the foreign destination is sufficiently small so that their entry decisions have a negligible impact on the
price index in that destination.
  A firm observes all relevant information before producing and pricing in a monopolistically competitive
market each period, which leads to the standard constant mark-up rule over marginal cost, cv , and results
in the standard expression for export revenue pivt qivt = ait c1−σ
                                                               v   ρσ−1 and operating profit πivt = ait c1−σ
                                                                                                         v   σ̃
where ρ = σ/(σ − 1) is the markup over marginal cost and σ̃ ≡ (1 − ρ) ρσ−1 . We describe the main results
in the context of policies that affect demand but they apply to other policies that affect profitability, e.g.
certain product standards may increase costs and these may change after Brexit, as we later discuss.
  The firm faces uncertainty about future values of business conditions; it believes that with probability γi a
new a0i is drawn from a distribution H̄i (a), independent of the current a. The firm takes the demand regime
ri = {γi , H̄i (a)} as time-invariant. This characterization encompasses a range of situations: if γi = 0 there
is no uncertainty; if γi = 1 then demand is i.i.d. and otherwise there are imperfectly anticipated shocks of
uncertain magnitude.


3.2        Firm Export Entry and Technology

The firm must incur a sunk cost, Ki , if it does not export in the previous period; it enters exporting if and
only if the net expected value of exporting, Πe − Ki , is at least as high as the expected value of waiting, Πw .
So at any given ait the marginal entrant from a continuum of firms is the one with cost equal to the cutoff,
cU
 it , defined by:
                                            Πe ait , cU                      U
                                                                                       
                                                      it , ri , β − Ki = Πw cit , ri , β ,                                  (2)

where β is the firm’s discount rate for the next period’s payoff. It reflects the probability of the survival of
export capital to a given market at the end of each period.9
  Using this framework we solve (2) using the value functions in Appendix A.2 to obtain the same equilibrium
cutoff expression in CHL in country i at t:
                                                                  1
                                                                 σ−1                          1
                                                     ait σ̃                     βγi [ω̄it − 1] σ−1
                              cU
                               it   = cD× Uit =
                                       it                             × 1+                                                  (3)
                                                  (1 − β)Ki                    1 − β (1 − γi )
                                                             ait − E(a0i ≤ ait )
                                      ω̄it − 1 = −H̄i (ait )                     ∈ (−1, 0].                                 (4)
                                                                     ait

The first term in equation (3) is the unit cost cutoff if business conditions were expected to permanently
remain at ait and reflects the present discounted value of the export investment without uncertainty. The
uncertainty factor, Uit , captures how much more stringent the cutoff condition is under uncertainty. We
see that Uit ≤ 1 if conditions are expected to change, γi > 0, and there is some scenario where conditions
deteriorate, ω̄it < 1. The latter is defined in (4) and is a measure of profit tail risk: the product of the
probability that business conditions deteriorate and the expected proportion of profits lost in that event.
  Thus a firm with costs below cU
                                it exports to i at t. A firm continues to export to a market as long its capital
   9 Thefirm’s discount rate on its export decision is β = (1 − δ) (1 − d) < 1, where the probability of firm and export capital
death are δ and d, respectively. Since we take the active producers as given and do not model domestic entry or use firm data
we abstract from domestic death and set δ = 0.



                                                                  5
survived and thus some exporters to i at t may have costs above cU
                                                                 it . CHL show that for any given ait both
entry and exports are reduced after an increase in uncertainty, which may be due to either unanticipated
increases in γ or increases in the risk of the distribution H̄ (in the second-order stochastic dominance sense).
Below we map these shocks to the Brexit setting.
  Uncertainty can also affect the intensive margin of exporting. This occurs if a firm can make additional
sunk investments to lower its marginal export cost. Handley and Limão (2017) show this generates a cutoff
rule with the same uncertainty factor as (3) applied to a deterministic cutoff corresponding to the technology
decision. The resulting upgrade cutoff is cU    U
                                           z = c × φ, where φ reflects upgrading cost parameters. Thus
both the export entry and upgrade cutoffs have the same elasticity with respect to the uncertainty factor.
This implies that the industry export equation we estimate can reflect both intensive and extensive margin
effects.


3.3        Industry Export Dynamics

In this subsection, we aggregate firm behavior up to the exporter-industry level—what we measure in the
data—and derive the adjustment dynamics that arise from sunk costs.
  An industry V is defined by the firms v ∈ V , which draw their productivity from a similar distribution,
GV (c), and face similar trade barriers in exporting to country i. Thus the cutoff can depend on V via
business conditions and tail risk. In stationary periods, defined as those where the cutoff and entry
decisions are unchanged relative to the previous period, there is a set of active exporters ΩiV in country x
serving country-industry iV . This set is the endogenous fraction of the NV potential exporters with costs
below the current export entry cutoff. Thus bilateral industry exports are given by aggregating sales from
all firms in x to i:                                                    Z     cU
                                                                               itV
                                        R aitV , cU               1−σ
                                                                                     c1−σ
                                                     
                                                  itV = aitV NV ρ                     v   dGV (c).                               (5)
                                                                          0

This expression applies if entry is currently easier than ever before, i.e. cU              U
                                                                             itV ≥ maxT <t ciT V . Otherwise we
must account for the legacy of surviving exporters. These are firms that started exporting to i under better
conditions and remain since operating profits are positive once the sunk cost is paid.
  To fix ideas, consider starting from a stationary period with a cutoff cU
                                                                          i0V followed by a single permanent
shock to cU
          i1V observed at the end of period t = 0 and a constant aiV . The constant aiV would prevail if
uncertainty increased but current conditions were unchanged. In this case, total exports can be written as
the sum of: (i) exports by firms that exited with probability 1 − β t and re-enter at the new cutoff ci1V ; and
(ii) export values given by equation (5) at the previous cutoff ci0V multiplied by the survival probability β t :
                                         
                                         R a , cU  ,                                  if cU      U
                                             iV  i1V                                        i1V ≥ ci0V
               R aiV , cU         t
                                    
                        itV , β         =                                                                                       (6)
                                          R a , cU  (1 − β t ) + R a , cU  β t  , if cU < cU .
                                              iV  i1V                   iV  i0V             i1V    i0V


Thus the estimation must account for lags of negative uncertainty shocks since they work via attrition.10
  10 Each of these expressions applies to more general cases and allows for any history of shocks between t = 0 and t − 1 provided

that either cU       U                                                    U       U       U
              itV ≥ ci0V , so the first line in equation (6) applies; or citV ∈ [ciT V , ci0V ) in the second line of (6) applies. So
                                                                                      U
the history we need to consider empirically is not necessarily of all shocks since ci0V . We denote this potential dependence of
exports on past cutoffs by the vector cU          U         U
                                          itV = {ci0V , ...citV }.




                                                                 6
3.4     Product Export Dynamics

The model can be applied to dynamics at the exporter-product level, if the sunk costs are product specific.
To examine dynamics for a large set of countries in a recent period at the monthly level we are restricted
to using product level data. Thus we must map the exporter-product to product dynamics. We do so by
exploiting the fact that a zero value in an ixV t cell implies that no firm v ∈ V from country x exported to
country i at time t. In that case, the cutoff must be lower than even the minimum cost (most productive)
firm, cU        min
       ixV t < cxV . A positive value indicates that at least one firm exported either because the cutoff is
sufficiently low at time t or because some firm survived from a prior export entry investment. In the appendix
we show how this insight can be used to directly relate entry and exit to uncertainty factor. In the empirical
section we explain how entry and exit are measured.



4       Identification and Uncertainty Measurement

To identify the impacts of uncertainty we decompose the export equation in (6) into shocks to uncertainty,
demand, and supply factors and provide an approach to control for the latter two. We then discuss how to
measure shocks to the probability of Brexit. Finally, conditional on Brexit, we describe how to measure the
tail risk over products under different scenarios. To be clear about the level of variation of each variable we
introduce x subscripts to denote export country.


4.1     Identification

4.1.1    Decomposition of Export Shocks

If there are any sales from x to i in industry V , then we can write exports in (6) as log deviations re-
                                                                                                     aixV t
lative to a baseline stationary period value. Using a “ b ” to denote log changes, e.g. âU
                                                                                          ixV t ≡ ln aixV ,
we obtain the first-order decomposition of current exports relative to a stationary baseline evaluated at
rixV = {aixV , cD             h
                ixV , NxV , b̄i }. In a stationary period t this is simply

                                         RixV t                                
                                   ln             = kc ĉU
                                                         ixV t + âixV t + N̂xtV + oixV t ,                   (7)
                                        R (rixV )

              ∂ ln R(a,c)
where kc ≡       ∂ ln c     ≥ 0 is the export elasticity with respect to the cutoff around a deterministic steady

state; under a standard Pareto productivity distribution with dispersion k, this export elasticity is equal to
k − (σ − 1) and oixV t = 0, i.e. there would be no approximation error.
    If we do not start in a stationary period then we must approximate each of the terms in [] in the second
line of equation (6). The expression in (7) shows how to approximate the stationary components in each t.
However, we must also account for the fact that the relative weights on RixV t and RixV t−T depend on when
the cutoffs changed, which may differ across destinations, i. We denote the dependence of those weights on
prior shocks in i by the history coefficient, bhit , and approximate it around b̄hi : interpreted as the average




                                                               7
export death rate into i.11 Thus the more general decomposition of (6) is:

       RixV t                                                                               
                = kc ÛixV t + ka âixV t + N̂xtV b̄hi + kc ÛixV t−T + ka âixV t−T + N̂xt−T V 1 − b̄hi + oixV t (8)
                                                                                                        
 ln
      R (rixV )

The first term in () in equation (8) is the same as in (7) after we use the definitions of cU , cD from (3) and
                 kc
define ka ≡ 1 + σ−1 . The second term in () is the approximation the stationary value in t − T . The average
export death rate, b̄hi , provides the relative weight and the history coefficient bhit has no first order effects
since Rt and Rt−T are approximated around common values.
  From (8) we can obtain an estimating equation focusing on the uncertainty shocks:

                                        ln RixV t = b̄hi kc ÛixV t + αixV + αit + oixV t .                                          (9)

We moved the stationary export value to the right in equation (9) where it is absorbed in the αixV fixed
effects, which also control for selection. The structural interpretation of the coefficient on ÛixV t will be useful
for counterfactuals and relies on the identification assumptions discussed below.


4.1.2     Identification Assumptions and Implications

The following four identification assumptions imply the set of fixed effects in (9) and control for all terms
other than ÛixV t .12

 A1: Common, constant, deep parameters across exporters, time, and varieties, including: (a) the elasticity
        of substitution, σ; (b) the probability of policy shocks in i, γi , and; (c) the export entry elasticity in
        stationary state, kc .

 A2: Common shocks to the potential mass of exporting firms: N̂xtV = N̂t .

 A3: Negligible changes in exporter- and industry-specific applied protection in the short-run: τ̂ixV t = τ̂it .

  A4 Negligible or random variation over time in pre-sample policy uncertainty, i.e. Ûixt−T V ≈ ÛixV .

  Our four assumptions have the following implications. A1 is required to estimate the coefficient on ÛixV t
and is maintained throughout the paper. A2 allows for exogenous shocks to the number of potential exporting
firms but restricts them to be common across exporters and thus are captured by time effects or by importer-
time effects, αit , when interacted with importer specific shocks. A3 implies that import demand shocks in
the period we consider, âixV t = D̂it − στ̂ixV t , can be captured by αit . A4 is required given that prior to the
announcement of the Brexit referendum there is no market probability data for the event. In the sample
period we explicitly allow for lagged effects of Û .
  We test the robustness of the results to some identification assumptions and approximation. The results
focus on bilateral trade between the UK and the EU. For UK-EU bilateral trade, A1(b) is reasonable. We
  11 This coefficient is equal to 1 − β T if conditions have worsened in i for T periods before t, and 1 otherwise. We can allow for

a more general history coefficient, bh  ixt , that reflects bilateral variation in the history coefficient but the approximation would
still be similar.                            
  12 α                     D               h
       ixV ≡ ln R aixV , cixV + 1 − b̄i k̃c ln UixV , controls the deterministic state exports in a stationary state and the pre-
                                                  aixtV
                                                                                   aixt−T V            
sample uncertainty under A4. αit ≡ b̄h
                                     i k̃a ln      aixV
                                                           + nt + 1 − b̄h
                                                                        i    k̃a ln     aixV
                                                                                                 + nt−T       as can be seen by using the
definition of a, A1 and A3.



                                                                  8
initially consider symmetric shocks γ and then allow for asymmetric shocks. We relax A2 and A3 by allowing
variation in the exporter x through bilateral shocks αixt or different combinations of importer and exporter
effects varying over time and sector. The quality of the approximation depends on how far the approximation
point is and on the functional form. We test robustness to the history approximation point by approximating
around bilateral history coefficients, b̄hix , and then controlling for bilateral-time effects, αixt .13


4.1.3       Timing of investment and export decisions

We use industry data at the monthly level and thus require certain timing assumptions to map between the
theory and the data. First, we focus on lumpy sunk investments that we assume a firm makes annually for
any given product destination. Taken literally, this implies that the relevant policy uncertainty in our sample
relates to what will occur after the referendum, i.e. any firm investing between July 2015 and June 2016 need
not make another investment in exporting to country-industry iV until after the referendum. Second, we
assume that not all firms in an ixV cells make investment decisions in the same month; otherwise we could
not explore variation over the year within any given ixV cell. Thus the identification requires investment
decisions to be staggered over time across cohorts of firms. An export shipment may be recorded in the same
month as the investment but it may also occur in later months, so we will include lags of ÛixV t to capture
these dynamics.


4.2         Uncertainty Measurement

First, we describe how preferential trade disagreements can affect the uncertainty factor, U , by increasing the
probability of riskier trade policies. Second, we model exporter beliefs about the probability of Brexit and
how shocks to the latter are related to prediction markets. Third, we outline the measurement of potential
trade policy risks conditional on Brexit.


4.2.1       Trade Disagreements

                                                                                −σ
We model uncertainty in demand conditions, aixV t = Dit (τixV t )                    , by focusing on potential shocks to
bilateral policy barriers, τixV t , but recognizing that other sources exist. If all uncertainty is policy related
then γi may capture the expected arrival rate of a (re)negotiation opportunity or a change in the government
that is necessary for a policy change. More generally, γ captures the probability of any demand shock, so we
keep this parameter constant throughout and describe how the uncertainty factor U varies over time due to
tail risk shocks.
  How do trade agreements affect uncertainty? We follow CHL in modeling an agreement as a choice of
an initial policy vector and a distribution, H̄, from which future policies are drawn. That distribution
can be written as H̄ = ΣS mS H S : a mixing distribution with probability weights mS over S mutually
exclusive uncertainty states, each with a fixed distribution, H S , characterized by different risk. The EU
aims to integrate the product markets of its members, which requires a credible and permanent reduction
(or elimination) of trade barriers such that uncertainty is low. CHL provide conditions where governments
  13 In this case, the approximation in (8) will have b̄h and applying the identifying assumptions A1 and A3 we obtain a version
                                                        ix
                                                                                                               aixtV
                                                                                                                           
of (9) where the fixed effects are αixV ≡ ln R aixV , cD   ixV   + 1 − b̄h                            h
                                                                         ix kc ln UixV , and αixt ≡ b̄ix ka ln a     + ln NNxt +
                                                                                                              ixV
            h           aixt−T V          Nxt−T
                                                   i
 1 − b̄h
       ix        ka ln     aixV
                                    + ln     N




                                                               9
that are export risk averse prefer higher weights on less risky distributions in a second-order stochastic
dominance sense.
  We apply this model in our context to two uncertainty states: S = {BR, EU }, so the policy is drawn from
either H BR with probability m or with probability 1 − m from the less risky distribution, H EU . The tail
risk is then given by the following weighted average:


                                                         BR                 EU
                                         ω̄ixV t = mixt ωixV + (1 − mixt ) ωixV .                                          (10)

Increases in the likelihood of a trade disagreement such as Brexit can then be modeled as increases in mixt ,
i.e. in the probability of a draw from the riskier policy distribution, as perceived by exporting firms.
  Three points are useful for the ultimate estimation equation and interpretation of results. First, the
probability of staying in the EU is similar across industries. Second, the underlying distributions, H S ,
can differ across industries and partners but are assumed to be time invariant; as discussed below. Third,
increases in m increase tail risk if and only if H EU SSD H BR , so its impacts on exports depend on risk
rather than mean effects.


4.2.2    Policy Risks

In Figure 3 we illustrate the scenarios the exporters consider. With probability γ (1 − m) policy is drawn
from H EU at some level no higher than the current one, τix
                                                         EU
                                                            . Therefore by remaining in the agreement there
                  EU
is no tail risk, ωixV = 1, because exporters believe the current policy represents a credible commitment for
the maximum barrier. If we take a narrow view and consider only tariffs, which have been eliminated, then
 EU                                                                       EU
τix = 1. We can also allow for the possibility of non-tariff barriers so τix ≥ 1 captures a tariff equivalent
factor of all bilateral trade policy barriers. One implication is that there is room for improved market access
through negotiation.
  With probability γm Brexit occurs and a new policy is drawn from H BR . We discretize the Brexit distri-
bution into mutually exclusive scenarios indexed by s = {W, M, F, R}: W ar, M FN, F TA and Renegotiation.
                                s
                                       P s                                                       s      s    EU
These occur with probabilities ηix , so s ηix = 1, and each implies a policy factor defined by τ̄ixV = τixV τix .
                                                         s
Policy in scenario s deteriorates relative to the EU if τixV > 1 and we assume this is the case under all except
renegotiation, so the conditional Brexit tail risk reflects only the top three scenarios in Figure 3.
                                                                    h          i
                                                                            −σ
                                                         X
                                         BR                      s     s
                                        ωixV −1=                ηix  (τixV ) −1 .                                          (11)
                                                      s=F,M,W

                                                                                 F      EU
Under the renegotiation scenario policy barriers remain at EU levels or lower, τ̄ixV ≤ τix . If firms place
a zero weight on this scenario then (11) remains unchanged. Allowing for ηiR ≥ 0, captures the possibility
that a renegotiation can generate improvements and makes it clear that even if on average policy conditions
                                          R                                     EU
were better under the renegotiation (if τ̄ixV was sufficiently low relative to τix ) it would still lower entry
and exports due to the higher risk.14
                      EU
  Replacing (11) and ωixV = 1 in (10) we obtain the unconditional trade policy tail risk before the referen-
  14 More broadly, this represents a post-Brexit scenario where business conditions for certain exporters have improved, aR
                                                                                                                          ixV ≥
aEU
 ix . This is possible if tariffs remain at EU levels and (i) certain restrictions are relaxed (e.g. product standards); or (ii)
governments implement policies aimed at expanding exports such as export credit subsidies, reductions in profit taxes or a
depreciated currency.



                                                              10
dum:                                                                    h           i
                                                                                 −σ
                                                         X
                                                                     s      s
                                 ω̄ixV t − 1 = mixt                 ηix   (τixV ) −1                        (12)
                                                      s=F,M,W


  We measure potential profit loss conditional on the MFN scenario by using observed EU MFN tariffs
applied to non-members. For the trade war scenario we construct non-cooperative tariffs as described in the
data section. We complement these with trade protection from four developed countries to address potential
measurement error via an IV approach. We define the FTA scenario as one where tariffs remain at zero, so
                                      F      F                                                 F
there is no product level variation, τixV = τix , but may reflect some non-tariff barriers so τix ≥ 1. We control
for any FTA risk using bilateral-time effects in the baseline; sector-time effects in section 6 and bringing in
                                                     s
additional data in section 6.1.3. We will show that ηix are absorbed in the estimated coefficients.


4.2.3   Firm’s Brexit Beliefs and Prediction Market Shocks

Having modeled the variation across industries we turn to the variation over time. Our objective is to
estimate the response to permanent changes in beliefs. Since we do not have direct information on exporter
beliefs, we model how they depend on observables. Specifically, we map changes in mixt , the probability
that a policy is drawn from a Brexit distribution, H BR , to Brexit measures from prediction markets.
  The definition of Brexit at t is that at some future period T a policy shock arrives and a new trade barrier
is drawn from H BR . We denote a referendum at T where a majority votes to leave as RT =1 and note it
was a necessary condition for Brexit. Conditional on RT =1 we define the probability of a policy draw from
H BR as pix . For firms exporting from x to i, with information set It , the average belief that Brexit will
occur can then be written as:
                                            γi mixt = γi pix Pr (RT | It ) .                                (13)

Conceptually we are modeling the firm belief of Brexit as the product of an exogenous time varying shock:
the probability of a leave referendum outcome, and an invariant component, γi pix . The latter represents
the probability that a policy shock arrives and the policy is drawn from H BR given a leave vote and will be
reflected in the estimation coefficients.
  We can approximate Pr (RT | It ) by using observables in the information set It that are common to all
firms. We let It be a function of information inputs that include data from prediction markets, polling or
both. Changes in the unobserved beliefs relative to a baseline period can then be approximated using a
first-order log change in information inputs, m̂t−l .

                                                                rlm m̂t−l + ert .
                                                           P
                                       Pr \
                                          (RT |It ) =                                                       (14)
                                                        l=0,...,L


The parameters rlm represent the elasticity of firm beliefs with respect to a change in a specific component
mt−l . We allow the elasticity to vary depending on whether the information is current (l = 0) or lagged up
to L periods. The sum rlm represents the long-run elasticity of firm beliefs with respect to a permanent
                        P

change in the information input, m.
  Our baseline information input is the Brexit contract price that at time t promises to pay $1 if a referendum
is held by the end of 2016 and leave wins. We also consider alternative inputs that can shape firm beliefs
and discuss how they are related.



                                                          11
4.3     Uncertainty Factor

To estimate (9) we combine the policy risk and probability shocks to provide an empirical measure of the
uncertainty factor. Using Û ≡ ln U (log change relative to the deterministic); applying the definition of U
in (3) and of ω̄ in (12) we obtain

                                                       1                   BR
                                                                                 
                                         ÛixV t =        ln 1 + β̃i mixt ωixV −1 .                                           (15)
                                                      σ−1
                     βγi
The term β̃i ≡    1−β(1−γi )   represents the expected duration of an export spell to i under the current conditions.
    To explore the interaction between industry variation in policy risk and the time variation in Brexit beliefs
                                                          BR
we derive a second order approximation to ÛixV t around ωixV = 1 and ln m0 , i.e. around the EU scenario
prior to the possibility of a referendum. In Appendix A.3 we show that this approximation combined with
                                                  BR
the empirical models we previously described for ωixV and mixt yields

                                                      L
                             β̃i mix0    X
                                                 s
                                                      X        n      h
                                                                                   −σ
                                                                                      io
               ÛixV t = −                      ηix         rlm mbvt−l 1 − (τixV
                                                                             s
                                                                                 )          F
                                                                                         + αixt    U
                                                                                                + αixV + erixV t              (16)
                              σ−1
                                        s=M,W         l=0

where the terms within {} are observable data: the ln contract price (mbvt−l ) and the expected proportion of
profit losses from trade policy deteriorations in the two Brexit scenarios with product variation, s = M, W .
                                                                                   F
The analogous term for the FTA scenario is captured by the bilateral-time effect, αixt , since it has no product
                               u
variation.15 The fixed effect αixV captures constant baseline uncertainty effects; and erixV t captures any error
from approximating beliefs.



5      Estimation

We map the model components described thus far into estimable equations for export values, entry, and
exit. We describe our main data sources and sample. We also discuss the results on export values and then
turn to further evidence for the uncertainty mechanism by analyzing export entry, exit, and heterogeneity
in high versus low sunk cost industries.


5.1     Export Values

Using the uncertainty factor in (16) in the export equation (9) and re-arranging we obtain the baseline
estimating equation:

                                      L                 n      h               io
                                                                            −σ
                                    X X
                                                  s                   s
                    ln RixV t =                  Wix (l) mbvt−l 1 − (τixV )       + αixV,it,jt + eixV t ,                     (17)
                                  s=M,W l=0


where the vector αixV,it,jt represents country-time (it, xt) and bilateral-industry effects; eixV t is an error
term. The key coefficients of interest that we report are cross-partial derivatives of (17) with respect to the
  15 The FTA effect is negative if exporters place weight on an FTA, η F > 0, with increase in policy barriers, τ F > 1; it is zero
                                                                      ix                                         ix
otherwise.




                                                                    12
prediction market contract price, mbv, and risk terms:

                                              ∂ 2 ln RixV t                  β̃
                                                                i = −b̄hi kc i mix0 ηix
                  X                 X                                                   X
                         s                                                           s
                        Wix (l) ≡                 h                                       rlm .               (18)
                                                          s )−σ
                                        ∂mbvt−l ∂ 1 − (τixV                 σ−1
                    l               l                                                   l


This sum of the estimated coefficients over the lags is what we define as the permanent cross-elasticity of
uncertainty and risk, E s = | l Wix s
                              P
                                      (l)|. The parameters in this elasticity are positive according to the model,
reflecting export elasticities to entry b̄hi kc , the baseline probability of Brexit conditional on a policy shock,
mix0 , and the expected export duration period under the next policy, β̃i . Thus, E s is zero only if ηix
                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                          = 0,
so scenario s = M, W was not believed by firms, or the measure used to capture changes in beliefs from the
baseline is uninformative, in which case l rlm ≈ 0.
                                        P

  We can learn about belief parameters of firms exporting to i such as the relative probability of post-Brexit
scenarios by using E M /E W = ηiM /ηiW .


5.2     Export Entry and Exit

In Appendix A.5 we derive the relationship between the cutoff and the probabilities of product entry and
exit. The basic insight we explore is that if we observe current but not lagged exports in an ixV cell then
this implies an increase in the cost cutoff between t and some prior period, t − 12, that induced the minimum
cost firm to enter, and possibly other firms below the new cutoff as well. Analogously, if we observe lagged
exports but no current exports then with probability, 1 − β̃, the firms exporting in t − 12 lost their export
capital and chose not to re-invest at the current cutoff. We estimate a linear probability model for the
mutually exclusive samples depending on lagged export participation. Entry is estimated for a sample where
Rix,t−12,V = 0 and exit on the complementary sample as follows:

                           EntryixV t = k̃cE ÛixV t + αixV,it,jt
                                                        E
                                                                  + oE
                                                                     ixV t if Rix,t−12,V = 0                  (19)
                            ExitixV t =   k̃cX ÛixV t   +    X
                                                             αixV,it,jt   +   oX
                                                                               ixV t   if Rix,t−12,V > 0.     (20)

The binary variables are defined as EntryixV t = 1 if RixV t = 1 and ExitixV t = 1 if RixV t = 0; both
are zero otherwise. The parameters for the uncertainty factor have a structural interpretation but the key
predictions we test are whether uncertainty reduced export entry; increased exit; and whether the latter
                                           
responds less strongly since abs k̃cX /k̃cE = 1 − β̃ < 1. We follow the approach in equation (17) and replace
the approximation for ÛixV t in (16), and control for a similar set of fixed effects.


5.3     Data

5.3.1   Uncertainty

The main measure of Brexit uncertainty we use is a prediction market based variable. Specifically, we employ
the average daily price of a contract traded in PredictIt.org paying $1 if a majority voted for Brexit in a
referendum held by December 2016 and zero otherwise. The market opened on May 27th 2015 and closed
on June 24th 2016.
  We interpret changes in the contract price as providing information that allows exporters to update their



                                                                 13
beliefs about the average probability of the event. In Figure 1 we plot this contract price until the day
prior to the referendum. We see that on average it was about 30% and exhibited substantial variation. For
example, there was an initial decline in the probability, which halted once the wording was approved. The
probability declined again in the month before the bill authorizing a referendum was passed in December
2015. Another increase is clear after the referendum date was set. After the campaign started the probability
of a majority Brexit vote declined initially, which tracks opinion polls, but then increased sharply in the
month before the vote. The day after the referendum the price converged to 1 (not shown). Some of the
daily variation will reflect noise trading but we expect this to be ameliorated by the monthly averages we
employ and that still exhibit considerable variation.
  The contract price is what the prediction market interprets from polls, political discussions, and other
information sources. In Figure 1 we also plot a polling average for individuals that either intended to vote
for “Leave”, or were undecided (RHS axis). This co-moves closely with the contract price, particularly once
the date of the referendum was set.16 We examine the robustness of the results to alternative measures of
uncertainty and further discuss some correlates of the contract price in Section 6.2 and in the Appendix.


5.3.2    Trade

We use bilateral monthly trade data from Eurostat at the 6-digit product level of the Harmonized System
(HS). The baseline estimation employs trade values between the UK and the EU from August 2015 to June
2016. To measure entry and exit outcomes, we extend the data back to August 2014 in order to condition
on export participation at t − 12.
  In Table 1 we summarize some key features of the data. First, the EU-27 countries account for about 42%
of UK exports and 52% of its imports in 2015. For the EU the UK represented, 7% of total exports and 4%
of imports. There is much less asymmetry in the data we employ for the estimation since it reflects bilateral
exports between the UK and individual EU countries.
  The export value regressions use the set of ixV observations with positive trade for all months in the
sample. This is a strict subsample of the entry and exit set of bilateral-HS6 observations but still covers
more than 90% of trade between the UK and EU. In Table 1 we provide summary statistics for the binary
EntryixV t and ExitixV t measures defined in section 5.2. Average entry in this period is about 25% and exit
is 14%; both variables have coefficients of variation above 1.75.


5.4     Trade Policy

We downloaded the simple average MFN tariffs in 2015 from the United Nations’ TRAINS database. We
construct tail risk factors at the HS6 level for 2015. This MFN tariff is the common external tariff that the
EU applies to all non-members except those with which it has PTAs. We employ product codes in which the
reported simple average does not include specific tariffs to minimize error coming from imputation methods
(this covers 94% of 6-digit product codes for the EU). In many cases there is limited or no variation below the
  16 There are well known issues with the uses of specific voting intention polls. We use a polling average from Number

Cruncher Politics that was used in this period to describe the evolution of voters’ intention to vote for Brexit. Examples
of its use are Bloomberg (http://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2016-brexit-watch/) and LSE (http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/
politicsandpolicy/polling-divergence-phone-versus-online-and-established-versus-new/). Its construction is detailed
in http://www.ncpolitics.uk/2016/04/faq-number-cruncher-politics-polling-average.html.




                                                           14
6 digit level. We also use MFN tariffs for other developed countries (the US, Japan, Canada, and Australia)
to construct instruments.
  In Table 1 we summarize some key features of these policies in the regression samples we use. The EU
MFN tariff is positive for over 75% of HS6 products; both the average and standard deviation of the log
                                                                            −4
tariff factor are equal to 0.04. The MFN risk factor is computed as 1 − τ M     ; its average is 0.15 and the
standard deviation is 0.125.
  In Table A1 we provide policy risk statistics by sector (21 sections of the HS classification). Products face
policy risk in all but two small sectors and for the remaining 19 sectors the average risk ranges from 0.014
to 0.34 and the coefficient of variation from 0.17 to 2. In one of the largest sectors, vehicles, the mean and
standard deviation of this risk is similar to that of the overall sample.
  We construct trade war risk measures using non-cooperative tariff estimates from Nicita et al. (2018).
Their estimates are built using an optimal tariff formula from a theoretical prediction that non-cooperative
tariffs are increasing in the importer’s market power in a product. There is substantial evidence supporting
this prediction and knowledge about how to address error in the measurement of this market power (cf.
Broda et al., 2008) that we build on. The resulting average non-cooperative for the EU is 57% and the
associated tail risk is 0.73. The latter is five times higher than the MFN risk average.


5.5       Export Value Estimates
                                                             s
We first estimate (17) constraining the cross elasticities, Wix , to be symmetric between EU and UK; and
subsequently show the results are qualitatively similar but quantitatively different if we allow for asymmetries.


5.5.1      UK-EU MFN Risk

In Table 2 we find evidence that increases in the probability of Brexit lowered UK-EU export values for
products where MFN tariffs would be applied. This effect is statistically significant at standard levels. The
first specification employs OLS and controls for importer-exporter-HS6 (ijV ) as well as monthly effects by
importer (it) and exporter (jt). Since the sample includes EU exports only to the UK and vice versa, the it
and jt effects are equivalent to bilateral monthly effects, ijt, so they control for any risk factor that is not
product specific, as defined in the FTA scenario, as well as other unobserved bilateral aggregate shocks (e.g.
exchange rates, FDI, etc.).
  The MFN risk measure is potentially subject to measurement error, which may attenuate its estimated
effect. Under a hard Brexit where the UK raises tariffs on the rest of the EU, the resulting tariff schedule
may differ from the current EU common external tariffs. In that case, the EU may also choose to change its
common external tariff and/or apply certain additional trade barriers on the UK.
  We address this source of measurement error by instrumenting the MFN risk factors. We do so by
computing the median HS6-specific MFN risk across the US, Japan, Canada, and Australia. The rationale
is that even if exporters are uncertain about the exact future protection level in the UK and EU, they know
that protection in certain products tends to be correlated across developed countries and use this information
to predict UK-EU MFN risk.17 The point estimates from this IV procedure in column 2 is -1.5, which is
about 1.8 times larger than the corresponding OLS estimate.
 17 In   appendix A.6 we describe the IV procedure and the high explanatory power of the first stage.


                                                              15
5.5.2      UK-EU Trade War Risk

If exporters believed that a trade war was likely after Brexit, then we should find lower exports in indus-
                                                                     W −σ
                                                                      
tries with higher tail risk under that scenario. We construct 1 − τiV     using the non-cooperative tariffs
described in the data section 5.4. The elasticities used to construct these tariffs are subject to two sources
of measurement error. First, they can take on extreme values, so we drop products with non-cooperative
tariffs above 180%.18 Second, there is idiosyncratic measurement error across importer-industry products,
iV , which we address via instrumental variables. Similarly to the MFN risk, we use other developed countries
(US, Japan, Canada, Australia), compute trade war risk measures for each, and take the median for each
product.
  The OLS estimates in column 3 of Table 2 indicate there is no effect from a trade war risk. The IV point
estimate in column 4 is negative and the implied trade war risk is about one-third of the MFN, although it is
not statistically significant. Additional controls can improve the magnitude of this coefficient but it remains
imprecisely estimated.19
  In sum, the trade war risk effect is negative but too imprecise to determine whether exporters placed
any significant weight on the probability of such an event. Moreover, since this additional control does not
significantly affect the MFN risk estimate, we will omit it from subsequent regressions.


5.6        Mechanism Evidence: Sunk Costs, Entry, and Exit

We provide evidence for the role of export sunk costs and entry and exit behavior, which are consistent with
the theoretical model.


5.6.1      Export Sunk Costs

The export entry predictions apply to industries with significant export sunk costs. Thus we examine if the
estimates so far are present in those industries and not others.
  We apply the approach in Handley and Limão (2017) to identify high sunk cost industries. Specifically, we
run an export probability model at the HS-8 level and estimate the impact of lagged exporting conditional on
standard participation determinants of current exporting. We estimate separate models for each HS 4-digit
industry and use significance in lagged participation as an indicator for sunk costs in that industry. We use
semi-annual exports of non-EU countries to the EU (and UK) from the first semester of 2012 to 2016. The
estimation details are in Appendix A.8. We base these estimates on exports of non-EU countries to the UK
so these flows are distinct from the dependent variable in the baseline UK-EU bilateral trade estimation.
There is considerable overlap in the resulting classification if we base it on exports to the UK or to other large
EU countries, which suggests an important industry component. Given this congruence in classifications we
use the UK-based classification and note the baseline results are similar with alternative classifications.
  Table 3 shows estimates based on subsamples under the respective high or low column heading. The
  18 The  threshold criteria is based on a statistical test of outliers based on sufficiently large distance from the interquartile
range and the restriction applies to about 6% of the baseline sample.
  19 For example, the estimated elasticities used to construct τ W are a function of the elasticity of substitution, σ (Broda et
                                                                  iV
al., 2008). If goods with higher σ are responding differently to Brexit shocks then this omitted variable would bias the trade
war risk estimates. When we control for this by adding section-month effects in column 4 we obtain a higher trade war risk
coefficient (and of MFN), but it remains imprecisely estimated.



                                                                16
high sunk cost represent about 88% of all observations in the baseline, which is re-assuring since we expect
that continuously traded industries will have high sunk costs. We find marginal increases in the absolute
value and statistical significance of the high sunk cost sample coefficients relative to the baseline in Table 2.
Conversely, we find positive and insignificant risk effects for low sunk cost industries.


5.6.2    Export Entry and Exit

In the presence of export sunk costs, the model predicts that uncertainty lowers exports via firm entry and
exit. The estimated export value coefficients reflect that behavior, but focus on continuously traded products
in this period and thus do not allow us to directly test them. Thus we now use a sample of intermittently
traded products to estimate export entry and exit using the specifications in equations (19) and (20).
    In Table 4, we find that entry decreased with MFN risk, as predicted. The estimates triple in magnitude
when we move from OLS (column 1) to IV (column 2). Exit increased with MFN risk, as predicted, and the
estimates double in magnitude when we move from OLS (column 3) to IV (column 4).
    Export entry is more responsive to MFN risk than exit in all comparable specifications. Firms can
immediately respond by entering when conditions improve but when they deteriorate firms choose to wait.
The more sluggish exit response occurs because it operates through foregone re-entry decisions. Existing
exporters at t − 12 face a new entry choice at time t only if they are hit by an exogenous shock to their
export capital. These shocks occurs with annual probability 1 − β, which is the model’s interpretation of the
ratio of medium run elasticity of exit to MFN risk relative to entry.
    Similarly to the export value specifications in Table 2, we find no significant impact of the trade war
scenario for entry and exit. The point estimates on MFN risk do not change substantially when controlling
for trade war risk . Also, similarly to the value estimation in Table 3, we find the impacts of MFN risk are
driven by the high sunk cost industries. Both sets of results are available on request.



6       Quantification and Robustness

We quantify the impacts of Brexit uncertainty on export values and participation via MFN risks. We start
with the baseline symmetric UK-EU estimates and then extend the estimation to allow these to differ for
the UK and EU. We also extend the estimation to capture an average of all Brexit risk effects (FTA, MFN,
War), which we find is driven by the MFN risk. Thus the full Brexit uncertainty elasticity is close to the
lower bound implied by MFN alone.
    We conclude the section by showing that the baseline results are robust to alternative specifications,
different measures of Brexit likelihood, and additional controls.


6.1     Quantification

The permanent cross-elasticities of exports with respect to Brexit uncertainty under different scenarios,
defined by equation (18) depend on constant parameters; we now use our estimates to quantify the uncertainty
elasticity of exports at alternative policy levels. The predicted average change in exports evaluated at the
mean risk from a shock to uncertainty captured by the log change in contract prices, ∆mbv = mbv1 − mbv0 ,



                                                       17
is given by the first line in this equation:


                                                
                                RixV (mbv)                  X            
                                                                                     −σ
                                                                                        
                           E ln                      =−             E s × 1 − (τ s )      × ∆mbv
                                RixV (mbv0 )
                                                          s=F,M,W
                                                                           
                                                                         −σ
                                                     ≤ −E M × 1 − (τ M )      × ∆mbv.                                      (21)

Recall that the E s represent the cross-elasticity of uncertainty and risk under scenario s — the cumulative
effect of a shock in the current period plus two lags. We focus on quantifying the impact from the MFN risk
alone, which is given by the second line and understates the full negative uncertainty effect according to the
model since E s ≥ 0.
  Using the IV estimates from Table 2, column 2 we have E M = 1.45 and the mean MFN risk is denoted
              −σ
by 1 −(τ M )  = 0.15
                     (Table 1). Thus we obtain the uncertainty elasticity at the mean MFN risk to be
                 −σ
E M × 1 − (τ M )     = 1.45 × 0.15 = 0.22. This implies that for a 10 log point Brexit uncertainty shock
exports fall by at least 2.2 log points. If we use the estimate from column 4 (which controls for any trade
war effect) we obtain a larger impact.


6.1.1    Symmetric Effects

Table 5 provides the quantification of the effects using the baseline estimates of E M for export values and
participation. That table includes both OLS and IV estimates for the formula given by the expression in
(21) but our discussion focuses on the IV unless specified.

Export Values

  A persistent increase in mbvt by one standard deviation lowers average exports by at least 2.6 log points due
to the MFN risk, as shown in Table 5, panel A. A standard deviation shock is equivalent to an interquartile
range increase in the sample.20
  In panel B of Table 5 we consider a doubling of Brexit uncertainty, so ∆mbv = 0.69. This results in at
least a 15 log point decrease in bilateral exports (IV). In section 6.1.4, we map this uncertainty change to
specific political and polling shocks.
  We illustrate the magnitudes of these shocks by plotting the export response to changes in Brexit uncer-
tainty and changes in MFN risk in Figure 4. For a given MFN risk the response of log exports to changes in
mbvt is linear. Figure 4(a) shows the change in exports at the mean MFN risk for mbv shocks ranging from
zero to 0.69, the shaded area represents 95% confidence intervals for the prediction.
  In Figure 4(b) we plot
                      the impacts of doubling uncertainty at different MFN risks, specifically the predicted
         M
                              
                           M −σ
value −E × 0.69 × 1 − τ            over a tariff range: 100 × ln τ M ∈ [0, 22.5]. The effect at the mean is 15
log points, as reported in Table 5. We note that 40% of observed tariffs in the sample are above the mean
and thus have larger impacts. For products with tariffs one standard deviation above the mean, or 15% of
the sample, the export reduction is 30 log points.
   20 The overall effect is the average of the effect on treated industries with positive MFN risk factors and those with no MFN

risk. The effect for the subset of industries with positive MFN risk factors is 3.3 log points.




                                                              18
Export Participation

  We perform the same quantification exercise for the entry and exit regressions in columns 3-6 of Table 5.
Permanently doubling Brexit uncertainty (Panel B) would reduce entry by almost 6 percent due to MFN
risk (column 5), and increase exit by about one third of that, 2% (column 6). This amounts to a net entry
reduction of doubling Brexit uncertainty of at least 8 percent. Even the smaller standard deviation shock in
Panel A implies a net entry reduction of about 1.4 percent.

Summary and implications

  These estimates indicate that the effects of Brexit can be inferred from the responsiveness of trade patterns
to the probability of measurable policy outcomes. The latter is a novel contribution to ex-ante analysis of
the impact of trade renegotiations. The effects for large political shocks that we identify seem reasonable.
The average MFN tariff in the EU is 4.5%. Using tariff elasticities from the literature, which range from 4
to 7 (Limão, 2016), the average trade response of exports to a permanent increase in those applied tariffs
would be 18 to 32 log points.21
  A further implication of our results that Brexit uncertainty pre-referendum lowered exports is that sub-
sequent analysis must account for this pre-referendum dip, particularly for industries with high MFN risk.
Results may vary depending on whether the initial period used for the analysis included mostly months with
high uncertainty, such as April or June 2016, or low uncertainty.


6.1.2       Asymmetric Effects

Thus far we presented cross elasticity estimates assuming they are symmetric for both the UK and EU
exporters. When we allow for asymmetries we find qualitatively similar results for the baseline export values
and thus restricted them to be symmetric for exposition purposes. However, for quantitative purposes, we
now present the asymmetric elasticities.
                                                                                M
  In Table 6, we find larger elasticities for EU export values to the UK, i.e. EEU > EUMK . The structural
interpretation of this asymmetry is that, conditional on a leave referendum outcome, the EU exporters placed
a considerably higher probability on an MFN reversion than UK exporters. We estimate these effects across
UK and EU export subsamples for convenience. A stacked regression obtains the same results due to the
set of fixed effects. In columns 3-6 we find the same pattern for entry and exit.

Exports

  The lower panel in Table 6 reports the quantification for Brexit uncertainty shocks. Panel A reports the
standard deviation shock in mbv, which is -3.6 log points for EU exports (column 2) and about half for the
UK (column 1). The counterfactual doubling of Brexit uncertainty inherits the same asymmetric patterns:
a reduction in EU exports of 21 log points and about half that for the UK.
  The large effects for the EU are not due to trade composition. As we noted in the data section, the
bilateral trade shares of the UK with each EU country are very similar in our sample and the average MFN
risk factor is roughly the same for each subsample.
  21 This partial equilibrium range of deterministic export changes due to tariffs is in line with magnitudes in calibrated general
equilibrium models (e.g. Dhingra et al., 2017, predict a 35% reduction one year after hard Brexit).


                                                                19
Entry and Exit

  There are also substantial asymmetries in export participation effects, as seen in columns 3-6 of Table 6.
The exit elasticity for the EU is almost twice the UK’s, a ratio similar to the export value estimates. The
entry elasticities display an even stronger differential, with the EU export response being about three times
larger than the UK’s.
  The resulting effect of a doubling of Brexit uncertainty via MFN risk is for an average reduction in entry
of 2.3% for the UK and 10% for the EU. Exit increases by 1.6% for the UK and 2.8% for the EU. In sum, a
doubling of Brexit probability would reduce net entry by 4% for UK exporters and 13% for EU exporters.

Summary and Implications

  This strong asymmetry of Brexit uncertainty for UK and EU exports has interesting implications. One
                   M
interpretation of EEU > EUMK is that the EU exporters believed there was a higher probability of an MFN
               M
scenario, mix ηix , than their UK counterparts. Alternatively, their underlying beliefs about these probabilities
can be the same but they may face different losses conditional on the MFN state. Our measure of MFN
tail risk is identical for the EU and UK but if EU exporters expect uniformly higher risk than UK exporters
                                                     M
then this would be reflected in higher estimates of EEU /EUMK . One reason for this is that under the MFN
scenario the UK would have to set new tariff schedule whereas the EU is more constrained due both to its
large membership and negotiated MFN tariffs with other countries.22


6.1.3      Average uncertainty effects and third countries

We now examine how much of the uncertainty effect is attributable to the MFN risk component and whether
it is offset (or exacerbated) by exports to third countries.
  To estimate the average impact of mbvt over all sources of risks we require additional data. The baseline
estimates condition on importer and exporter by time effects—thus absorbing any aggregate country shocks
including the average effect of mbvt . Thus, to condition on the same fixed effects but now identify the
average uncertainty impact, we extend the sample to include EU and UK exports to the rest of the OECD
plus Brazil, Russia, India and China. This extended sample accounts for over 85% of EU and UK exports
in 2015.
  We consider two alternative measures of ex-ante risk the EU and UK may face in these third countries:

                                         ixV −
                                      ω̄
                                              h1         i
                        ω̄ixtV   −1=                −σ
                                       mt ηix (τix ) − 1             if i = row; x = {EU, U K}.                         (22)


  The top one assumes that the risk does not vary systematically with Brexit probabilities. The bottom
alternative is more similar to (12): the exporters in x believe that after a policy change there is a probability
                                r
mt ηix they will face barriers τix ≥ 1 higher than the current ones. The key difference relative to (12) is that
we do not know what the exact risk an EU (or UK) exporter will face in the rest of the world under each
                                                                                     r
Brexit scenario; therefore we use a uniform increase across products and scenarios, τix . This is without loss
of generality when considering only the average uncertainty effect across all s.23
  22 Another reason is that UK firms may expect relatively more relief in the form of lower taxes on profits or a depreciated

currency.
  23 In section 6.3 we allow for an exception to this: countries with PTAs with the EU where the UK risks losing preferences.




                                                             20
  The export estimates in Table 7 use this extended sample. In column 1 we include fixed effects (ixV, it, xt)
and the mbv variable, which has a significant effect equal to −.23. This represents the differential average
uncertainty for UK and EU exporters selling to each other relative to their sales to third countries. If the
risk in third countries does not vary with Brexit probabilities, ω̄ixtV = ω̄ixV , then
                                                                                      the magnitude
                                                                                                       of the
                                                                    P            s          s −σ
coefficient in column 1 has the following structural interpretation: s=F,M,W E × 1 − (τ )          = 0.23, i.e.
the average uncertainty elasticity over all s scenarios. Note that this is just above the 0.22 estimate using
only the MFN risk for the EU-UK sample.24
  In columns 2 and 3 we estimate the cross-elasticity E M (OLS and IV). These are identical to the ones we
obtain in the baseline Table 2. Importantly, conditional on that EU-UK MFN risk, the average uncertainty
effect decreases considerably. It is close to zero and insignificant in the IV specification.
  In sum, we draw two implications from Table 7. First, the MFN risk is the driving force through which
uncertainty reduces exports in this setting. Second, the resulting export reduction between the EU and UK
is not mitigated by higher exports to third countries.


6.1.4      Political Shocks

The uncertainty elasticities can be used to compute the impact of any reasonable log change in the contract
price. Our description and headline numbers focus on a doubling of that price and associated growth in the
Brexit probability it models. Here we address two questions: is that a reasonable magnitude and what types
of political shocks are commensurate with it.
  Pre-referendum increases in mbv include one instance where it doubled (from before the bill was passed
to after the referendum date was set) but this increase was not persistent, until the referendum vote. After
the referendum outcome is realized the contract price was one, which more than doubled its daily average
of 0.28. Thus the doubling counterfactual is a conservative estimate of the impact of the referendum vote.
  In Table 8 we provided direct evidence that changes in shares of exit and undecided voters interacted with
MFN risk reduced exports.25 We interpret the result as a reduced form estimate of how political shocks can
have uncertainty effects. In Table A2 we provide direct evidence at the daily level of how the contract price
depends on measures of voter intentions and other political events. The shares of exit and undecided voters
have a positive effect, which becomes stronger after the referendum bill is passed. This model predicts that
the daily MBV average doubles if, after the bill is passed, the exit share increases by about 10 percentage
points. Is this type of swing in the exit share plausible? In the pre-referendum period the exit share ranges
from 0.38 to 0.48. Moreover, the mean exit share was 0.40 and the actual vote was 0.52 so it is clear that
this magnitude of voter sentiment change did occur.
  Our estimates also suggest that post-referendum events that increase exporter beliefs of Brexit may con-
tinue to dampen their exports. These events include the triggering of article 50 to start formal Brexit
negotiations in March of 2017. Changes in Brexit prediction market prices post-referendum could be app-
lied to more recent trade data as it becomes available to test how well the pre-referendum relationship we
estimate holds.
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                      E s × 1 − (τ s )−σ − E row × 1 − (τ row )−σ ,
  24 The
                                                                            P
           interpretation under Brexit-varying risk in third countries is   s=F,M,W
where E row is defined similarly to E s but reflects the beliefs of increased protection in third countries, ηrow .
  25 In order to achieve the same export outcome as a doubling of contract prices, the results in Table 8 show we require about

a 9 percentage point increase in the exit plus undecided share.




                                                                  21
6.2     Robustness

We provide additional evidence on our prediction market measure of the probability of Brexit and examine
some alternative measures in a regression context. We also provide a number of robustness checks against
our structural assumptions on trade policy risk measures and other potential threats to identification.


6.2.1   Uncertainty Measurement

In the baseline estimation, we use a simple average of the (ln) daily contract prices. In this section, we
examine robustness to alternative measures.
  There is heavier trading volume in contracts for specific days, which may represent an update in information
after a significant event. Thus we weight (ln) daily prices by the square root of the daily number of trades.
We use this weighted measure in OLS estimates and report the results in column 2 of Table 8. These results
are similar to the baseline (replicated in column 1 of Table 8 for comparison).
  Shocks to polls measuring Brexit voting intentions can also affect exporter beliefs. The share of respondents
stating they are undecided or will vote for Brexit varies considerably over time. Interestingly, the sum of
exit and undecided voters never falls below 52%. This series co-moved closely with the contract price,
particularly once the date of the referendum was set. Using this polling average to replace the mbv in
the baseline specification we find similar qualitative results (column 3 of Table 8). The magnitude of the
coefficient differs since the variables are not normalized to have similar moments.
  We perform the same robustness exercises for the export entry and exit regressions in Appendix Table A6.
Using contract weighted averages or polling data directly does not change our main entry and exit results.
  Using the prediction market contract price to measure beliefs remains more attractive empirically. First,
it is available starting from an earlier date. The average polling series starts only in September 2015. We
have to impute the previous two months using the September value to match the time frame of the baseline.
Second, polls can have non-linear effects on exporter beliefs since a 5 percent change can have a large effect
if polls are around 50% and no effect when far from that value. We see this effect clearly in the fractional
response margins in Figure A1. In contrast, a change in the probability measured through the contract price
has a clear structural interpretation that we use to compute the counterfactuals. Third, as we show in the
daily regressions in Appendix Table A2, the contract price does respond to observable polling data, so it
reflects a key piece of information, but it can also reflect other economic and political information that firms
use to form their beliefs that may not be fully reflected in polls.


6.2.2   Trade Policy Risk Measurement

For the baseline estimation trade policy tail risk measure, we use a common value for the elasticity of
substitution, σ = 4. We test robustness to this choice in Table 9. In columns 1-4 we show that the results
are robust to using σ = 2 or 3. In columns 5 and 6 we confirm they are robust to keeping only the HS6
industries with σ ∈ [2, 6] based on estimates of σ from Broda and Weinstein (2006). In columns 7 and 8 we
avoid using any model specific functional form for risk or imposing a value of σ by approximating U with
respect to ln τVM directly. We verify the negative and significant MFN risk effect from the baseline. The
magnitude of the tariff coefficient is larger since it reflects the effect of σ but the overall impact of a one
standard deviation change in the probability measure on exports is similar.


                                                       22
  In Appendix Table A7 we find that the baseline export entry and exit results are also robust to these
issues.


6.2.3     Specification and Identification

We check several alternative specifications and sub-samples.

Alternative Distributed Lag: The baseline uses the current monthly value plus two lags and we report
the sum of those coefficients. In Table A4 we show that the result is not sensitive to dropping the second
lag, which is often small and insignificant (column 2) or to adding a third lag (column 4). When only the
current value is used the cross elasticity is about half. This suggests there is up to two months between
export investments and shipments and/or there is a delayed exit response to bad news (as predicted with
sunk costs).

Other Time-varying Export Shocks and Beliefs: Under our baseline identifying assumptions, the
history coefficients are approximated around an average importer level. This implies those history effects
are log separable in (9) into it and xt effects and are thus controlled for. Since the UK and EU are the only
trading partners in our baseline sample, the it and xt effects are equivalent to ixt effects and thus control
for all unobserved aggregate bilateral shocks that are common across industries (e.g. exchange rates, FDI,
migration, corporate taxes, etc.). Exporters may have believed that governments would intervene to
counteract ex-post uncertainty in the hardest hit sectors. We can control for unobserved sector shocks,
which also relaxes assumption 3. We do so in Table 10 and find that uncertainty elasticities of the export
value and participation are larger.26


6.3       External Validity: Brexit beyond the EU

Under a hard Brexit any trade preferences the UK grants to and receives from non-EU countries could
also revert to MFN tariffs. We examine this risk for Turkey, Mexico, and South Korea—the three largest
non-European economies (by GDP) that the EU had a PTA with in our sample period. All three apply
negligible tariffs on most of the goods imported from the EU and vice versa. The long-standing agreements
with Turkey and Mexico have withstood the pressure of large shocks and potential trade wars, such as the
great trade collapse. Moreover, Turkey has a customs union with the EU since 1995, which would require it
to apply the EU tariff to UK products in the case of a hard Brexit.
  The specification in Table 11 is identical to Table 2, but it uses these three PTA countries instead of
the EU-27. We construct risk measures for each country. The estimates in Table 11 are qualitatively and
quantitatively similar to those in Table 2. The quantification of uncertainty shocks for the PTA sample
shows they are also similar to the EU-27 baseline. The common factor between the EU-27 and those PTA
countries is that their trade policy with the UK is exposed to similar uncertainty shocks, which provides
further evidence for the mechanism in our model.27
  Given the large number and types of trade agreements the EU has, a thorough examination of this question
requires a separate paper but the evidence thus far indicates that Brexit uncertainty impacts extend beyond
 26 We   define sectors using the standard 21 sections that group related HS-6 digit codes.
 27 In Appendix Table A7 we show that similar results hold for the entry and exit regressions, but they are less precise than
for the larger EU sample.



                                                             23
the UK-EU.



7      Conclusion

Trade disagreements and renegotiation have halted and possibly reversed the most recent era of global trade
integration. Brexit could result in the UK and EU increasing tariffs on a wide scale for the first time since
1973. Potential scenarios include a reintroduction of MFN tariffs or even higher levels in the case of sharp
disagreements or an economic crisis.
    While minor renegotiations on specific products are a normal part of the process of managed trade (Bagwell
and Staiger, 1990), little is known about the impacts of sharp reversals when countries abandon agreements
or threaten to do so. One of our contributions is to show that just the possibility of such large regime
shifts can have large negative impacts on trade flows and trade participation. In short, substantial policy
uncertainty over trade agreements that threatens their very existence may lead to disintegration.
    We find that shocks to the probability of Brexit reduce trade flows and trade participation. The effects are
largest where the reversion to MFN tariffs under WTO rather than PTA rules are highest. Brexit uncertainty
has already induced a net exit of traded products and a reduction in UK-EU bilateral trade flows. These
effects vary by country, industry characteristics and trade margins. We find larger negative effects of Brexit
uncertainty on EU exports relative to UK exports, in industries with high sunk costs, and at the product
entry margin.
    Our methodology measures the responsiveness of trade to increases in the likelihood of Brexit. So we can
model the counterfactual effect on trade flows of large political uncertainty shocks. Large, sustained shocks
during the renegotiation period that increase the likelihood of a “hard Brexit” could have substantial effects
in the interim. A doubling of that probability is predicted to lower exports by 10 to 20 log points and lower
export participation by as much as 10 percent.
    The effects of large policy reforms may be uncertain and difficult for firms to ascertain ex-ante (Pastor
and Veronesi, 2013) but quite important as several investment decisions rely on worst case scenarios and
tail risks (Kozlowski et al., 2017). Despite these difficulties, our research indicates that such uncertainty is
important in shaping firm export decisions well in advance of any actual policy change, a finding that is
relevant in this setting and more generally when evaluating ex-post impacts of actual changes.




                                                       24
References
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W Staiger. 1990. “A Theory of Managed Trade.” American Economic Review
  80 (4):779–795.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2016. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4):1593–1636.
Baldwin, Richard, Paul Collier, and Anthony Venables. 2017. “Post-Brexit trade and development policy.”
  Policy Insight No. 88, Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Berlingieri, Giuseppe, Holger Breinlich, and Swati Dhingra. forthcoming. “The Impact of Trade Agreements
  on Consumer Welfare: Evidence from the EU’s Common External Trade Policy.” Journal of the European
  Economic Association .
Bloom, Nicholas. 2014. “Fluctuations in Uncertainty.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (2):153–176.

Boutchkova, Maria, Hitesh Doshi, Art Durnev, and Alexander Molchanov. 2012. “Precarious Politics and
  Return Volatility.” The Review of Financial Studies 25 (4):1111–1154.
Broda, Christian, Nuno Limão, and David E. Weinstein. 2008. “Optimal Tariffs and Market Power: The
  Evidence.” American Economic Review 98 (5):2032–65.

Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein. 2006. “Globalization and the Gains From Variety.” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 121 (2):541–585.
Carballo, Jeronimo, Kyle Handley, and Nuno Limão. 2018. “Economic and Policy Uncertainty: Export
  Dynamics and the Value of Agreements.” NBER Working Papers 24368, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Crowley, Meredith, Oliver Exton, and Lu Han. 2018. “Renegotiation of Trade Agreements and Firm Expor-
  ting Decisions: Evidence from the Impact of Brexit on UK Exports.” Working paper, Available at SSRN
  3211689.
Crowley, Meredith, Huasheng Song, and Ning Meng. 2018. “Tariff Scares: Trade policy uncertainty and
  foreign market entry by Chinese firms.” Journal of International Economics .
Deloitte. 2016. “European CFO Survey – Politics Takes Center Stage.” Technical report.
Dhingra, Swati, Hanwei Huang, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Joao Paulo Pessoa, Thomas Sampson, and John
 Van Reenen. 2017. “The costs and benefits of leaving the EU: trade effects.” Economic Policy 32 (92):651–
 705.

Dixit, Avinash. 1989. “Entry and exit decisions under uncertainty.” Journal of Political Economy 97 (3):620–
  638.
Greenland, Andrew, Mihai Ion, and John Lopresti. forthcoming. “Exports, investment and policy uncer-
  tainty.” Canadian Journal of Economics .

Griliches, Zvi and Jerry A Hausman. 1986. “Errors in variables in panel data.” Journal of econometrics
  31 (1):93–118.
Handley, Kyle and J. Frank Li. 2018. “Measuring the Effects of Firm Uncertainty on Economic Activity:
  New Evidence from One Million Documents.” Mimeo., University of Michigan.

Handley, Kyle and Nuno Limão. 2015. “Trade and Investment under Policy Uncertainty: Theory and Firm
  Evidence.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (4):189–222.
———. 2017. “Trade under T.R.U.M.P. policies.” In Economics and policy in the Age of Trump, edited by
 Chad P. Bown, chap. 13. London,U.K.: CEPR, 141–152.


                                                    25
Handley, Kyle and Nuno Limão. 2017. “Policy Uncertainty, Trade, and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for
  China and the United States.” American Economic Review 107 (9):2731–83.
Hassan, Tarek A, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun. 2017. “Firm-Level Political
  Risk: Measurement and Effects.” Working Paper 24029, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Julio, Brandon and Youngsuk Yook. 2016. “Policy uncertainty, irreversibility, and cross-border flows of
  capital.” Journal of International Economics 103:13–26.
Kozlowski, Julian, Laura Veldkamp, and Venky Venkateswaran. 2016. “The tail that wags the economy:
  Belief-driven business cycles and persistent stagnation.” Mimeo., NYU Stern.
Limão, Nuno. 2016. “Preferential Trade Agreements.” In Handbook of Commercial Policy, vol. 1B, edited
  by Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger. North-Holland, 279 – 367.
Mulabdic, Alen, Alberto Osnago, and Michele Ruta. 2017. “Deep integration and UK-EU trade relations.”
 Policy Research Working Paper Series 7947, The World Bank.
Nicita, Alessandro, Marcelo Olarreaga, and Peri Silva. 2018. “Cooperation in WTO’s Tariff Waters?” Journal
  of Political Economy 126 (3):1302–1338.
Papke, Leslie E. and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. 1996. “Econometric Methods for Fractional Response Variables
  with an Application to 401(K) Plan Participation Rates.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 11 (6):619–632.
Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi. 2013. “Political uncertainty and risk premia.” Journal of Financial
  Economics 110 (3):520–545.

Shepotylo, Oleksandr and Jan Stuckatz. 2018. “Political Uncertainty, FDI, and Trade In Intermediate Goods:
  Evidence From Ukrainian Firms.” Working paper, Available at SSRN 2983695.
Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz. 2013. “Prediction markets for economic forecasting.” In
  Handbook of Economic Forecasting, vol. 2. Elsevier, 657–687.

Steinberg, Joseph. 2018. “Brexit and the macroeconomic impact of trade policy uncertainty.” Mimeo.,
  University of Toronto.
Wolfers, Justin and Eric Zitzewitz. 2006. “Interpreting prediction market prices as probabilities.” Tech. rep.,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                      26
        Figure 1: Brexit Average Daily Contract Price and Opinion Polling –
        5/27/15 to 6/22/16

                                                    .5

                                                                                                Opinion Polls                                                  .56
                                                                                                    (right)


                                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                                     Opinion Poll Exit and Undecided
                                                                                                                                                               .54
              Contract Price




                                                    .3
                                                                                                                                                               .52


                                                              Contract Price
                                                                   (left)
                                                    .2
                                                                                                                                                               .5




                                                    .1                                                                                                         .48
                                                                                 Wording                             Date Set
                                                                               1-Sep-2015          Bill Passed     22-Feb-2016    Campaign
                                                                                                  17-Dec-2015                    15-Apr-2016
                                                                                                       n...




Notes: The solid black line is the daily average price of a contract on PredictIt.org that pays $1 if
Britain votes to Leave the EU and zero otherwise. The dashed red line is share of respondents in
opinion polls that say they will vote leave or “undecided”. Major legislative and political events
are denoted by the vertical red lines.




        Figure 2: Brexit 60-day Moving Average Contract Price and Low MFN
        Risk Trade Shares – 8/15-6/16

                                                         .4
                                                                                                                                                          .63



                                                                                                                                                          .62
                                                                                                                                                                     Low Risk Trade Share (mean, smoothed)
              Contract Price (60 day Moving Avg.)




                                                     .35


                                                                                                                                                          .61



                                                         .3
                                                                                                                                                          .6

                                                               Contract Price (left)

                                                                                                                                                          .59

                                                     .25
                                                                                                                         Low Risk Share (right)
                                                                                                                                                          .58



                                                         .2                                                                                               .57
                                                              Aug-2015         Oct-2015     Dec-2015          Feb-2016      Apr-2016           Jun-2016


Notes: The solid black line is the 60-day moving average of the price of a contract on
PredictIt.org that pays $1 if Britain votes to Leave the EU and zero otherwise. The dashed blue
line is a local, first degree polynomial through the monthly trade share of low MFN risk products
in bilateral UK and EU exports with a shaded 95% confidence interval. Solid blue dots plot the
average low MFN risk share for each month (centered on the 15th of the month).




                                                                                                       27
Figure 3: Event Space and Probability Tree for Brexit and EU Trade Policy Distributions


                                                       WAR

                                                                                      Tail Risk
                                                       MFN                            Scenarios

                       Brexit                          FTA
                        ~


                                                     Renegotiation

       1
                        EU
                        ~

Notes: A shock arrives with probability γ and firms expect that a new trade policy factor τ is
drawn from a distribution H̄. We model H̄ as a mixture over a Brexit distribution H BR with
probability weight m and an EU distribution H EU with weight 1 − m. We assume that
H EU SSD H BR such that increases in m increase risk. We assume tariffs drawn from the EU
distribution are no higher than τ EU , which represents a credible commitment so that τ 0 ≤ τ EU .
We discretize the trade policy outcomes from a Brexit distribution into scenarios with tariffs
higher than τ EU — Trade W ar, M FN, and F TA — and a Renegotiation scenario where tariffs
could possibly be lower. The scenarios that are worse than the EU tariff generate tail risk that
affect export investment and re-entry decisions as described in the text.




                                                28
Figure 4: Average Export Response to Changes in Contract Price and MFN Risk

                                                         (a) Changes in Contract Price at Mean MFN Risk


                                                0


         Average Export Reduction (100 x ln)
                                                -5




                                               -10




                                               -15

                                                            1 SD          2 SD                                     2 x Mean


                                               -20
                                                     0         10        20         30       40         50         60         70
                                                                      Contract Price Shock Magnitude (100 x ln)


                                                         (b) Changes in MFN Risk at Large Political Shock

                                                0
         Average Export Reduction (100 x ln)




                                               -20




                                               -40




                                               -60

                                                               Mean        +1SD

                                               -80
                                                     0       2.5      5     7.5   10       12.5      15     17.5    20    22.5
                                                                            MFN Tariff Threat (100 x ln)


       Notes: Panel (a) uses the IV estimate of the cross-elasticity from Table 2 to
       compute the change in exports at the mean MFN risk factor over the range of a
       log change in the contract price (100 × ∆mbv) from 0 to 70. Panel (b) holds the
       change in the log contract price fixed at ∆mbv = ln(2), i.e. a large sustained
       political shock, and increases the MFN tariff. Grey shaded areas indicate 95%
       confidence intervals.




                                                                                     29
                         Table 1: Summary Statistics ‐ Regression Samples
                                            8/15‐6/16
       Aggregate Bilateral Exports and Within EU Trade Shares: Continuously Traded Sample
                              Mean         SD         Median        Min        Max        N
UK import value (Bn. €)       7.95        2.33         13.92        0.04      65.01       27
EU import value (Bn. €)       5.03        1.22          7.51        0.13      30.78       27
                             Export Values: UK‐EU Continuously Traded Sample
                                   Mean         SD       Median          Min                     Max             N
ln(exports)                        10.29       2.62       10.45          0.00                   20.60          637,263
ln Pr(Brexit)                      ‐1.23       0.12        ‐1.19        ‐1.50                   ‐0.98          637,263
          Trans. Vol. Weighted     ‐1.21       0.15        ‐1.19        ‐1.48                   ‐0.85          637,263
ln Poll Share (Exit+Und. %)         3.99       0.02         4.00         3.94                    4.01          637,263
ln Tariff                           0.04       0.04         0.03          0                      0.56          637,263
MFN risk                            0.15       0.13         0.12          0                      0.89          637,263
MFN Risk IV                         0.10       0.11         0.08          0                      0.49          637,263
Trade War Risk                      0.73       0.19         0.77         0.03                    0.98          533,258
Trade War Risk IV                   0.67       0.25         0.70         0.00                    1.00          533,258
                               Extensive Margin: UK‐EU Entry and Exit Samples
                                   Mean         SD       Median          Min                     Max             N
                       Entry sample: Conditional on Non‐Traded Status (Exports=0) at t‐12
Entry (binary)                    0.245         0.430        0.000          0              1                   647,488
MFN risk                          0.141         0.121        0.118          0            0.893                 647,488
Trade War Risk                    0.718         0.204        0.762         0.03          0.984                 528,916
                           Exit sample: Conditional on Traded Status (Exports>0) at t‐12
Exit (binary)                      0.141         0.348         0.000           0                  1            977,177
MFN risk                           0.148         0.124         0.118           0                0.893          977,177
Trade War Risk                     0.731         0.192         0.767         0.029              0.984          813,349
                                                UK‐PTA subsample
                                   Mean            SD         Median          Min                Max              N
ln(exports)                        11.72          1.77         11.67         6.84               18.69            27,709
MFN risk                           0.153         0.133         0.132           0                0.995            27,709
Notes: ln(exports) defined at the exporter‐importer‐HS6‐month level for UK and EU (2015 membership). Entry sample
is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products not traded in the same month of the previous year, and exit sample is
defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products traded in the same month of the previous year. Entry(t)=1 if Export(t)>0
and Export(t‐12)=0 for the exporter‐importer‐HS6 observation in month t from 8/15‐6/16. Exit(t)=1 if Export(t)=0 and
Export(t‐12)>0. Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly average (ln) MBV, the leave referendum prediction market contract
price. MFN risk defined as 1‐(τ MFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τ MFN=1+MFN advalorem/100. Trade War risk constructed
similarly using τ WAR and the latter is constructed using estimated export supply elasticities at HS‐6 (see text for full
discussion). The number of observations relative to MFN risk is lower due to unavailability of elasticity estimates for
certain country‐HS6 (‐10%) and removal of outlier elasticity estimates implying tariffs higher than 180% (another ‐6%).




                                                           30
               Table 2: UK and EU MFN and Trade War Risk ‐ Export Values
                           Monthly Export Value (ln) 8/15‐6/16
                                   1              2              3                            4
                                  OLS            IV            OLS                           IV

Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                   ‐0.793           ‐1.450              ‐0.900           ‐1.661
                                     (0.149)          (0.198)              (0.16)          (0.225)
Pr(Brexit)×Trade War Risk                ‐                ‐                 0.169           ‐0.595
                                                                          (0.108)          (0.748)

Exporter‐Importer‐HS6 FE              Yes             Yes                   Yes             Yes
Exporter‐Month FE                     Yes             Yes                   Yes             Yes
Importer‐Month FE                     Yes             Yes                   Yes             Yes
N                                   637,263         637,263               533,258         533,258
R2                                   0.875            n/a                  0.875            n/a
Notes: Dependent variable ln(exports) defined at the exporter‐importer‐HS6‐month level for UK and
EU (2015 membership). All estimations include exporter‐importer‐HS6, exporter‐month and importer‐
month fixed effects. Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly average (log) MBV, and MFN risk defined as 1‐
(τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN=1+MFN advalorem/100. Trade War risk constructed similarly using non‐
cooperative trade war tariffs from estimated export supply elasticities at HS‐6 (see text for full
discussion). The number of observations relative to MFN risk in columns 3 and 4 is lower due to
unavailability of elasticity estimates for certain country‐HS6 (‐10%) and removal of outlier elasticity
estimates implying tariffs higher than 180% (another ‐6%). Columns 1 and 3 employ OLS. In columns
2, 4 we instrument the risk variables by their respective median HS6‐specific risk across four large
countries (Australia, Canada, Japan and US). Coefficients report the sum of current and two monthly
lags. Robust standard errors clustered at the exporter‐importer‐HS6 level in parenthesis.




            Table 3: UK and EU MFN Risk in High vs. Low Sunk Cost Industries
                                      8/15‐6/16
                                              Monthly Export Value (ln)
                                    1             3                1          2
                                          OLS                           IV
              Sunk Cost Sample:   High          Low             High         Low

Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                     ‐0.929          0.203               ‐1.681         0.835
                                       (0.156)         (0.524)             (0.204)        (0.812)


N                                      559,889           57,915           559,889           57,915
R2                                      0.876           0.868               n/a             n/a
Notes: Dependent variable ln(exports) defined at the exporter‐importer‐HS6‐month level for UK and
EU (2015 membership). Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly average (ln) MBV, and MFN risk defined as
1‐(τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN=1+MFN advalorem/100. High sunk cost sample: HS4 codes with
significant semi‐annual persistence of exporter‐HS8 codes over 2013‐2016 where UK is the importer
(details in appendix). We instrument the MFN risk by the median HS6‐specific MFN risk across four
large countries (Australia, Canada, Japan and US). Coefficients report the sum of current and two
monthly lags. Robust standard errors clustered at the exporter‐importer‐HS6 level in parenthesis. All
estimations include exporter‐importer‐HS6, exporter‐month and importer‐month fixed effects.




                                                 31
                      Table 4: UK and EU MFN Risk ‐ Entry and Exit Probability
                                            8/15‐6/16
                                             Entry                           Exit
                                         1            2                3                          4
                                        OLS          IV               OLS                        IV

      Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                  ‐0.191          ‐0.606               0.107          0.204
                                          (0.055)          (0.09)              (0.029)        (0.038)


      N                                   647,488        647,488              977,177         977,177
      R2                                   0.406           n/a                 0.586            n/a
      Notes: Entry sample is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products not traded in the same month of
      the previous year, and exit sample is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products traded in the same
      month of the previous year. Dependent variable Entry(t)=1 if Export(t)>0 and Export(t‐12)=0 for
      the exporter‐importer‐HS6 observation in month t from 8/15‐6/16. Exit=1 if Export(t)=0 and
      Export(t‐12)>0. Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly average (log) MBV, and MFN risk defined as1‐
      (τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN=1+MFN advalorem/100. Columns 1, 3 employ OLS. In columns 2, 4 we
      instrument the MFN risk by the median HS6‐specific MFN risk across four large countries (Australia,
      Canada, Japan and US). Coefficients report the sum of current and two monthly lags. Robust
      standard errors clustered at the exporter‐importer‐HS6 level in parenthesis. All estimations include
      exporter‐importer‐HS6, exporter‐month and importer‐month fixed effects.



                                  Table 5: Quantification Results
                                            8/15‐6/16
                                1        2             3        4                           5            6
                               (ln) Exports         Entry      Exit                       Entry         Exit
                              OLS           IV               OLS          OLS               IV           IV


Uncertainty Elasticity at Mean MFN Risk
                        ‐0.118   ‐0.216                      ‐0.027         0.016           ‐0.086           0.030

A. One SD shock to ln(MBV) at mean risk
                      ‐0.014   ‐0.026                      ‐0.003        0.002            ‐0.010        0.004

B. Doubling ln(MBV) at mean risk
                     ‐0.082    ‐0.150                      ‐0.019        0.011            ‐0.059        0.021
Notes: Calculations employ OLS and IV coefficients from Table 2 and 3, and summary statistics from Table 1.
Columns 1‐2: change in (ln) exports, columns 3‐6: change in probability of entry/exit.




                                                      32
                                     Table 6: Asymmetric UK and EU MFN risk
                                                    8/15‐6/16
                                         Export Value (ln)           Entry                                        Exit
                                            1         2            3         4                             5               6
                                                 IV                    IV                                          IV
                              Exporter:    UK        EU           UK        EU                             UK              EU

Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                         ‐1.051       ‐2.012           ‐0.239       ‐1.011            0.153            0.275
                                           (0.253)      (0.315)          (0.125)       (0.13)           (0.049)          (0.059)


N                                         369,589      267,674           373,946      273,542           584,559         392,618

Uncertainty Elasticity at Mean MFN Risk
                                   ‐0.156                ‐0.300           ‐0.033       ‐0.145             0.022          0.041
A. One SD shock to ln(MBV) at mean risk
                                   ‐0.019                ‐0.036           ‐0.004       ‐0.018             0.003          0.005

B. Doubling ln(MBV) at mean risk
                                           ‐0.108        ‐0.208           ‐0.023       ‐0.100             0.016          0.028
Notes: IV regressions. Dependent variable ln(exports) defined at the exporter‐importer‐HS6‐month level for UK and EU
(2015 membership). Entry sample is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products not traded in the same month of the
previous year, and exit sample is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products traded in the same month of the previous
year. Entry(t)=1 if Export(t)>0 and Export(t‐12)=0 for the exporter‐importer‐HS6 observation in month t from 8/15‐6/16.
Exit=1 if Export(t)=0 and Export(t‐12)>0. Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly average (ln) MBV, and MFN risk defined as 1‐
(τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN=1+MFN advalorem/100. We instrument the MFN risk by the median HS6‐specific MFN risk
across four large countries (Australia, Canada, Japan and US). In columns 1, 3 and 5 the sample is UK exports to EU, and in
columns 2, 4 and 6 the sample is EU exports to UK. Coefficients report the sum of current and two monthly lags. Robust
standard errors clustered at the exporter‐importer‐HS6 level in parenthesis. All estimations include exporter‐importer‐
HS6, exporter‐month and importer‐month fixed effects. Statistics employed in quantitative calculations are from Tables A2
and A3.



                                      Table 7: UK and EU MFN and Overall Risk
                                         Monthly Export Value (ln) 8/15‐6/16
                                                       1                 2                         3
                      Sample (rel. to baseline):            + Exports to OECD & BRICs
                                                      OLS              OLS                         IV
                 Pr(Brexit)                              ‐0.233              ‐0.114              0.000
                                                        (0.049)             (0.054)             (0.058)
                 Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                                         ‐0.803              ‐1.569
                                                                            (0.148)             (0.199)
                 N                                    6,778,816           6,778,816           6,778,816
                 R2                                     0.872               0.872                n/a
                 Notes: Dependent variable ln(exports) defined at the exporter‐importer‐HS6‐month level
                 for UK and EU (2015 membership). All estimations include exporter‐importer‐HS6,
                 exporter‐month and importer‐month fixed effects. Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly
                 average (ln) MBV, and MFN risk defined as 1‐(τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN=1+MFN
                 advalorem/100. UK is a binary indicator for UK exports and EU is a binary indicator for EU
                 exports. The sample includes all exports of the UK and EU to the OECD and four large
                 developing countries: Brazil, Russia, India and China (BRIC). Coefficients report the sum of
                 current and two monthly lags. Robust standard errors clustered at the exporter‐importer‐
                 HS6 level in parenthesis. All estimations include exporter‐importer‐HS6, exporter‐month
                 and importer‐month fixed effects.




                                                             33
                                      Table 8: UK and EU Alternative Brexit Measures
                                            Monthly Export Value (ln) 8/15‐6/16
                                                               1              2                       3
                                                             Prediction Probability
                                                                           Contract
                                                         Unweighted                                 Polls
                                                                           Weighted
                                                           Average
                                                                           Average

                    Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                         ‐0.793            ‐0.707           ‐3.55
                                                               (0.149)           (0.142)          (0.675)

                    N                                          637,263          637,263           637,263
                    R2                                          0.875            0.875             0.875
                   Notes: OLS regressions. Dependent variable ln(exports) defined at the exporter‐importer‐HS6‐
                   month level. Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly average (ln) MBV, and MFN risk defined as 1‐
                   (τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN=1+MFN advalorem/100. Column 1 uses the baseline
                   unweighted monthly average of daily Pr(brexit), column 2 weights the daily probabilities with
                   the squared root of the volume of daily transactions. Column 3 defines Pr(Brexit) as the
                   average (ln) share of exit plus undecided voters. The poll data for July and August 2015 is
                   imputed to be the same as in September due to lack of data. Coefficients report the sum of
                   current and two monthly lags. Robust standard errors clustered at the exporter‐importer‐HS6
                   level in parenthesis. All estimations include exporter‐importer‐HS6, exporter‐month and
                   importer‐month fixed effects.




                                   Table 9: UK and EU Alternative MFN Risk Measures
                                           Monthly Export Value (ln) 8/15‐6/16
                                   1         2        3           4            5             6                       7          8
                                  OLS       IV       OLS         IV          OLS            IV                     OLS         IV
                                                                             industries with                       (ln) MFN tariff
 Parametric Assumptions:              σ=2                 σ=3
                                                                                 σ ϵ [2, 6]                             threat

Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk              ‐1.425      ‐2.670      ‐1.003       ‐1.857        ‐1.000      ‐1.610         ‐2.517        ‐4.873
                                (0.264)     (0.353)     (0.187)      (0.249)       (0.185)     (0.235)        (0.461)       (0.626)


N                               637,263    637,263     637,263       637,263       368,984    368,984         637,263       637,263
R2                               0.875       n/a        0.875          n/a          0.876       n/a            0.875          n/a
Notes: Dependent variable ln(exports) defined at the exporter‐importer‐HS6‐month level. All estimations include exporter‐importer‐
HS6, exporter‐month and importer‐month fixed effects. Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly average (ln) MBV, and MFN risk defined as 1‐
(τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN=1+MFN advalorem/100. Columns 5‐6 exclude industries with sigmas higher than 6 and lower than 2
based on estimations using US import data in Broda and Weinstein (2006). Column 7‐8 uses (ln) τMFN as the MFN risk measure.
Coefficients report the sum of current and two monthly lags. Robust standard errors clustered at the exporter‐importer‐HS6 level in
parenthesis.




                                                                34
                              Table 10: UK and EU MFN risk and Sector Trends
                                                  8/15‐6/16
                                  Export Value (ln)             Entry                                   Exit
                                     1          2            3          4                          5             6
                                    OLS        IV           OLS        IV                         OLS           IV

Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                 ‐1.081       ‐2.161            ‐0.278      ‐0.728            0.098         0.303
                                   (0.226)      (0.423)           (0.074)     (0.152)           (0.044)        (0.08)


N                                  637,263      637,263          647,488      647,488          977,177      977,177
R2                                  0.875         n/a             0.406         n/a             0.586         n/a

Notes: Dependent variable ln(exports) defined at the exporter‐importer‐HS6‐month level for UK and EU (2015
membership). Entry sample is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products not traded in the same month of the
previous year, and exit sample is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products traded in the same month of the previous
year. Entry(t)=1 if Export(t)>0 and Export(t‐12)=0 for the exporter‐importer‐HS6 observation in month t from 8/15‐
6/16. Exit(t)=1 if Export(t)=0 and Export(t‐12)>0. Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly average (log) MBV, and MFN risk
defined as 1‐(τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN =1+MFN advalorem/100. Columns 1, 3 and 5 employ OLS. In columns 2, 4
and 6 we instrument the MFN risk by the median HS6‐specific MFN risk across four large countries (Australia, Canada,
Japan and US). Coefficients report the sum of the included lags. Robust standard errors clustered at the exporter‐
importer‐HS6 level in parenthesis. All estimations include exporter‐importer‐HS6, exporter‐month, importer‐month
and section‐month fixed effects. We define sectors using the 21 sections of the HS that group related HS‐6 digit codes.



                                   Table 11: UK and Other PTAs MFN risk
                                    Monthly Export Value (ln) 8/15‐6/16
                                                             1                         2
                                                            OLS                       IV
                    Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                         ‐0.932              ‐1.937
                                                               (0.629)             (0.869)

                    N                                          27,709              27,709
                    R2                                         0.796                n/a

                    Uncertainty Elasticity at Mean MFN Risk
                                                        ‐0.143                     ‐0.297
                    A. One SD shock to ln(MBV) at mean risk
                                                                ‐0.017             ‐0.036

                    B. Doubling ln(MBV) at mean risk
                                                                ‐0.099             ‐0.206
                    Notes: Dependent variable ln(exports) defined at the exporter‐importer‐
                    HS6‐month level for UK and the three largest PTA countries in terms of GDP
                    (Turkey, Mexico and South Korea). All estimations include exporter‐
                    importer‐HS6, exporter‐month and importer‐month fixed effects. Pr(Brexit)
                    defined as the monthly average (ln) MBV, and MFN risk defined as 1‐(τMFN)‐
                    σ
                     , where σ=4 and τMFN=1+MFN advalorem/100. In columns 2 we instrument
                    the MFN risk by the median HS6‐specific MFN risk across four large
                    countries (Australia, Canada, Japan and US). Coefficients report the sum of
                    current and two monthly lags. Robust standard errors clustered at the
                    exporter‐importer‐HS6 level in parenthesis.




                                                          35
A      Appendix
A.1      Data Details and Sources
    • Trade flows: Monthly exports and imports between EU and OECD countries plus Brazil, Russia, India
      and China at the HS 8-digits level. Source: Eurostat.28

         – August 2015 to June 2016 at the HS 6-digits level used for value regressions.
         – August 2014 to June 2015 at the HS 6-digits level used for determining entry and exit same month
           the next year.
         – 2012 to 2016: Used to identify industries with sunk costs.

    • Probability of Brexit: Daily price of a contract from May 27, 2015 to June 23, 2016 paying $1 if
      “Leave” wins in the referendum. Monthly average of the log of the price used in regressions. Source:
      PredicitIt.org.
    • Polls: Daily average of published opinion polls from September 1, 2015 to June 22, 2016. Monthly
      average of the log of the share of exit plus undecided voters used in regressions. Source: Number
      Cruncher Politics.
    • MFN tariffs: One plus MFN ad-valorem tariffs of 2015 used to construct MFN risk measures. Source:
      TRAINS.
    • Non-Cooperative (NC) tariffs: one plus NC ad-valorem tariffs of 2006 (last available) used to construct
      Trade War risk measures. Source: Nicita et al. (2018).


A.2      Value Functions
The following derivation is adapted from Carballo et al. (2018). The export investment decision is ixV
specific for each firm so we omit these subscripts without loss of generality. The expected value of starting to
export at time t conditional on observing current conditions at , the firm’s own unit costs c, and the demand
regime r, is:
                          Πe (at , c, r) = π(at , c) + β[(1 − γ)Πe (at , c, r) + γEΠe (a0 , c, r)].        (A.1)
                                                         |      {z           } |      {z        }
                                                               No Shock              Shock

This includes current operating profits upon entering and the discounted future value. Without a shock the
firm value next period remains Πe (at , c, r). If a shock arrives then a new a0 is drawn, so the third term is
the ex-ante expected value of exporting following a shock, EΠe (a0 , c, r) = Eπ(a0 , c)/ (1 − β), where E denotes
the expectation operator.
  The expected value of waiting is

            Πw (c, r) = 0 + β 1 − γ + γ H̄(at ) Πw (c, r) +β γ 1 − H̄(at ) (EΠe (a0 ≥ ā, c, r) − K) .
                                                                         
                                                                                                                      (A.2)
                             |            {z            }    |                {z                   }
                                             Wait                                     Enter

A non-exporter at t receives zero profits from that activity today. The continuation value remains at Πw if
either demand is unchanged, with probability 1 − γ, or changes to some level that is not sufficiently high
to induce entry, with probability γ H̄(at ). If demand changes and is above some endogenous trigger level,
a0 ≥ ā, then we obtain the third term, reflecting the expected value of exporting net of the sunk cost,
  28 For intra-EU trade each member state imposes its own customs declaration thresholds for imports values to reduce respon-

dent burdens. Imports (or exports) below the thresholds are estimated or obtained from invoices and VAT filings. In practice
the statistical discrepancies are small. The extra-EU threshold is e1000 or 1000 kg. See the “Quality Report on International
Trade Statistics”, Eurostat (2010) at https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3888793/5848021/KS-RA-10-026-EN.PDF




                                                             36
K, conditional on the new demand being high enough to trigger entry. The conditional expected value of
exporting if a0 ≥ ā is given by

               EΠe (a0 ≥ ā, c, r) = Eπ (a0 ≥ ā, c, r) + β(1 − γ)EΠe (a0 ≥ ā, c, r) + βγEΠe (a0 , c, r).            (A.3)

  A firm with costs cv is indifferent between entering or waiting if demand is at a threshold level acv = ā (cv ).
Instead, of solving for ā (cv ) we characterize the marginal exporting
                                                                         firm at any current demand, which is
characterized by a cost parameter cU   t defined  by at = ā c U 29
                                                               t   . If a firm has costs equal to this threshold,
then in that period all other firms in that industry with lower costs also export to that particular destination.
  We obtain an expression for this cutoff by using the entry condition in (2); the value functions in (A.1),
(A.2) and (A.3), and the expression for EΠe (a0 , c, r).


A.3      Uncertainty Factor Derivation
                                                                                            
To obtain (16) we start with (15) and take a second order approximation wrt u = ω BR , ln m and around
u0 = (1, ln m0 ). We treat the observed policy risk measures as the true beliefs. The general form of the
approximation is
                                                                   1          T
            ln U (u) = ln U (u0 ) + (u − u0 ) · 5 ln U (u0 ) +       (u − u0 ) (H ln U (u0 )) (u − u0 ) + r,
                                                                   2
where 5 is the gradient function and H ln U (u0 ) is the hessian matrix and r the approximation error. We
evaluate around no tail policy risk, which implies that the following terms are zero: ln U (u0 ), the first and
second derivatives wrt ln m. The tail risk derivatives and cross effects evaluated at u0 are

                                                                          
                                      ∂ ln U         ∂ ln 1 + β̃m (ω − 1)
                             (σ − 1)          |u =                          |u0 = β̃m0
                                      ∂ω BR 0                 ∂ω BR         
                                   ∂ 2 ln U          ∂ 2 ln 1 + β̃m (ω − 1)                2
                          (σ − 1)           2 | u0 =                 2        |u0 = − β̃m0
                                  ∂ (ω BR )                 ∂ (ω BR )
                                                       2
                                                                            
                                     2               ∂ ln 1 + β̃m (ω − 1)
                                   ∂ ln U
                          (σ − 1)             |u =                            |u0 = β̃m0
                                  ∂ ln m∂ω 0               ∂ ln m∂ω BR

                                                    "                         #
                                     β̃m0   BR
                                                           ω BR − 1        m
                          ln U (u) =      ω    − 1 1 − β̃m0            + ln      +r                                   (A.4)
                                     σ−1                       2            m0

  where the first two terms in [] represent the first and second order effects of ∂ω BR and the third represents
the cross effect.
  Re-introducing the subscripts in (A.4) that indicate the level of variation and replacing ln mt = Pr \(RT |It )
                                                                                                         m0
  29 We can do so since a is common to all firms exporting to a given market in a given industry and the marginal cost is the

only source of heterogeneity among such firms. Assuming a continuum of firms in any given industry with productivity that
can be ranked according to a strictly increasing CDF, we can find the marginal export entrant for any at .




                                                             37
from (13) and use (14) to map to the estimation we have
                                      "                                        #
                                                    BR
                   β̃i mix0 BR                     ωixV  −1
                                                             + rl m̂t−l + ert + rixV t
                                                               P m
       ln UixV t =          ωixV − 1 1 − β̃i mix0
                    σ−1                                2         l
                                      "                                                    #
                                                                              BR
                   β̃i mix0 BR       P m                                    ωixV  −1     r
                 =          ωixV − 1      rl (mbvt−l − mbv0 ) + 1 − β̃i mix0           + et + rixV t
                    σ−1                 l                                        2
                    β̃i mix0 BR       P m                U
                  =          ωixV − 1      rl mbvt−l + αixV   + erixV t
                     σ−1                 l
                    β̃i mix0 P      s
                                       h
                                           s   −σ
                                                     iP
                  =                ηix  (τixV ) −1        rlm mbvt−l + αixV
                                                                          U
                                                                              + erixV t
                     σ − 1 s=F,M,W                      l

                    β̃i mix0 P s h s −σ            iP
                  =              ηix (τixV ) − 1        rlm mbvt−l + αixt
                                                                        F      U
                                                                            + αixV  + erixV t ,
                     σ − 1 s=M,W                      l

                              U
where the third line uses αixV     and erixV t defined below. The fourth replaces ωixV
                                                                                   BR
                                                                                       using (11) over all
s = F, M, W and the last one separates out the bilateral-time effect from the FTA scenario and defines it as
  F
αixt , so we obtain (16) in the text.

                        F      β̃i mix0 F h F −σ    iP
                       αixt ≡          ηix τix     −1     rlm mbvt−l
                                σ−1                    l
                                                  "                      !           #
                                                                   BR
                       U       β̃i mix0 BR                      ωixV  −1         P m
                      αixV   ≡          ωixV − 1    1 − β̃i mix0            − mbv0 rl
                                σ−1                                  2            l

                                           β̃i mix0 BR
                      erixV t ≡ rixV t +            ωixV − 1 ert
                                                            
                                            σ−1

A.4     Export Estimation Equation Derivation
We obtain equation (17) by replacing the uncertainty factor in equation (9) with eq. (16). Below we show
the steps to re-arrange and redefine the parameters to arrive at our estimating equation:
                                                                                             
                                       L
                       β̃  m
                          i ix0
                                X     X     n        h
                                                                −σ
                                                                   io
ln RixV t = b̄hi kc −             s
                                  ηix    rlm mbvt−l 1 − (τixV
                                                            s
                                                               )          F
                                                                      + αixt     U
                                                                             + αixV + erixV t  + αixV + αit + oixV t
                        σ−1
                               s=M,W        l=0
                                                                                                                 (A.5)
                L                n      h              io
                                                    −σ
              X X
                           s                   s
                                                          + b̄hi kc αixt
                                                                     F      U
                                                                                  + αixV + αit + b̄hi kc erixV t + oixV t
                                                                                                                        
         =                Wix (l) mbvt−l 1 − (τixV )                     + αixV
             s=M,W l=0
                                                                                                                 (A.6)
                      L          n      h              io
                                                    −σ
              X       X
                           s                   s
         =                Wix (l) mbvt−l 1 − (τixV )      + αixV,it,jt + eixV t                                  (A.7)
             s=M,W l=0


In the second line we rearrange terms and define Wix   s
                                                         (l) ≡ −b̄hi kc β̃iσ−1
                                                                            mix0 s m
                                                                                ηix rl . In the third, we collect terms
into groups of estimated coefficients, a set of terms absorbed by fixed effects αixV,it,jt , and the error term,
where the latter two are given by:

                 αixV,it,jt ≡ b̄hi kc αixt
                                       F      U
                                                    + αixV + αit , eixV t ≡ b̄hi kc erixV t + oixV t .
                                                          
                                           + αixV




                                                            38
A.5     Product Export Dynamics
Similar to the value estimation we illustrate the results based on starting at some stationary state at t − 12
and then considering two alternative types of shock: a deterioration or improvement in business conditions.
  We do not directly observe whether the unit cost of the most productive firm is below the cutoff, but we
do observe whether a product is traded at each point in time. We use r̄ixV t to denote the sales of the most
productive firm in the cohort of firms in the cell xiV productivity distribution at a point in time. It need not
identify the same firm across time periods due to churning in trade participation. We drop the xV subscripts
to simplify notation and define a latent variable that is a function of the sales of the most productive firm
and sales at the cutoff:                                     1−σ
                                                    r̄it     c̄it
                                           Zit =       U
                                                          =          .                                     (A.8)
                                                  r(cit )    cUit
If Zit > 1, then at least one firm will export and trade is observed. However, trade may be observed even if
Zit ≤ 1 because a firm survived from a prior export spell T periods ago when conditions were better. If a
firm survives with probability β T , then it will continue to have positive export sales even if these sales are
below what is implied by the cutoff, rit (cv ) < r(cU
                                                    it ). Alternatively, all firms from a previous period may be
hit by the death shocks with probability 1 − β T . In that case, exit will occur but it will be unobservable to
the econometrician if re-entry occurs, i.e. Zit > 1.
   We model entry and exit of product trade separately by conditioning on lagged trade participation. First,
                                                                       cU
we take the log of equation (A.8) so that zit = ln(Zit ) = (σ − 1) ln c̄it
                                                                        it
                                                                           is a latent variable that is a function
of the cutoff condition and the minimum unit cost draw from the cohort ln c̄it . Second, we let 1Titrade = 1 if
trade is observed. That latter always occurs when zit > 0. But we also observe trade if firms survive from a
previous export spell, even if they are below the cutoff, or if all firms exit and at least one re-enters in the
same period. So we must track lagged trade participation in period t − 12 as well. Rather than include a
lagged dependent variable as a regressor, we use it to condition the sample. This method is sometimes called
a restricted transition model.
   If we condition on a sample of products that were non-traded in t − 12 then we can model the probability
of entry as
                                  Pr(1Titrade = 1 | 1Tit−12
                                                        rade
                                                             = 0) = P robit [zit ]                   (A.9)
where P robit is a standard unit normal distribution with index function zit . We know in this case that
no firm was exporting in the previous period, so we do not need to consider deterioration relative to pre-
vious conditions that include a legacy of surviving firms. We can then estimate parameters on observable
determinants of zit that relate to the cutoff level.
   For exit, we condition on the sample of traded products in t − 12. If the export capital of at least one firm
survives until time t, then a product will continue to be traded regardless of business conditions. But there
is another possibility that all legacy firms from a previous spell exogenously exit with probability 1 − β T .
Even in this case, we may still observe continuing export participation in the product-level data. If at least
one firm is productive enough to re-enter after making a sunk investment, i.e. zit > 0, then we won’t observe
exit. The latter could occur if business conditions have not deteriorated at all or if they have deteriorated
but there is still some subset of firms that is below the cost cutoff.
 An observable exit only occurs in the event of death to the export capital of all firms exporting a product.
The probability of exit is therefore:

                            Pr(1Titrade = 0 | 1Tit−12
                                                  rade
                                                       = 1) = P robit −(1 − β T )zit .
                                                                                   
                                                                                                       (A.10)

The index function of the exit probability has the opposite sign from entry and it is re-scaled downward
in magnitude by (1 − β T ). We ultimately include the same regressors on the RHS of the exit regression
equations. So all coefficients should have the opposite sign of the entry equation (and the export value
equation). The coefficients and marginal effects are adjusted downward relative to the entry coefficients to
a degree that declines in the rate of survival β T .



                                                       39
A.6     Measurement Error in Policy Risks
The trade policy tail risk factors may contain errors relative to the true exporter beliefs of the policy barriers
that could prevail following Brexit. This is clear for the non-cooperative tariffs, which rely on inverse export
supply elasticities. But it could also be the case for MFN tariffs. While the EU would mostly likely apply
its extant MFN tariff schedule to UK imports if no deal is reached, the UK may negotiate new commitments
with WTO that are different from the current EU levels.
  We use a multiple indicators method to address the measurement error. If exporters did not expect the
MFN scenario to be exactly the current EU common external tariff, then we measure their beliefs with error.
Suppose τVM is the true tariff level exporters believe would prevail in a hard Brexit, but we measure the EU
tariff, τVM,EU . We can relate the measured and true risk factors by (1 − (τVM,EU )−σ ) = (1 − (τVM )−σ ) + eEU
                                                                                                             V ,
where eEU V  is classic measurement  error.
  To address this measurement error we compute the median MFN tariff τ̃VM of the U.S., Canada, Japan
and Australia for each 6-digit HS industry code, assuming that (1 − (τ̃VM )−σ ) = (1 − (τVM )−σ ) + ẽV . While
both measures are correlated with the true belief, we assume the measurement errors are uncorrelated,
                                                                  M −σ
Cov(eEUV , ẽV ) = 0. We interact our alternative measure (1 − (τ̃V )   ) with mbvt . We then include these as
                                   M −σ
instrumental variables for (1 − (τV ) ), their interactions, and their lags that could be measured with error.
We use the same approach and exogenous set of countries to construct instruments for the non-cooperative
tariffs.
  In the main text we report the overall weak identification F-stats of the full set of instrument variables.
These statistics are inflated by the fact that a product tariff appears multiple times for every time period and
country-product trade flow. In Table A3 we report F-statistics and coefficients of the zero-th stage regression
at the highest level of aggregation for our policy data: the HS 6 digit product level. The F-statistic on the
MFN and non-cooperative tariff estimates are above the threshold to rule out weak instruments concerns.
Moreover, the coefficients on the instruments are positive and significant, which is sensible given their
construction. We also note that the predicted regressors do not require an adjustment to standard errors
because the IV procedure already handles this issue. Further discussion of measurement error correction in
panel data is found in Griliches and Hausman (1986).


A.7     Contract Price Determinants
In this section, we explore the determinants of the contract price used in the econometric analysis to capture
the probability of Brexit. In order to do so, we exploit the daily variation of the contract price and polling
data along key dates in the year leading up to the referendum.
   In Table A2 we present the results of different specifications to explain the contract price. In column 1
the results shows that the average contract price over this period is 0.301 when we include only a constant
in the regression. We interpret this value as the average probability of a trade policy event that could cause
a profit loss for firms.
  A naive approach to understanding the determinants of the contract price is exploring the marginal effect
of the share of exit voters. We add this variable to the specification along with an indicator for the pre-
wording period in which we do not have opinion polls data. The marginal effect of the share of exit voters
on the contract price in column 2 is significant and statistically indistinguishable from 1. Moreover, the
explanatory power of this model is 0.143. As expected, the share of exit voters is a relevant variable to
explain the contract price.
  The share of undecided voters remained relatively high over the pre-referendum period with an average
value of 0.132. In fact, the sum of exit and undecided voters remained above 0.5 for most of the period. We
add the share of undecided voters in column 3 and find that both the share of exit and undecided voters
have a positive predictive power on the contract price.
  In column 4 we interact the share of exit and undecided voters by an indicator for the period in which the
Brexit bill gained Royal Assent (December 17, 2015) and became the European Union Referendum Act of
2015. Results show that the marginal effect of both the share of exit and undecided voters are significantly


                                                       40
higher after that date. We interpret this as a key institutional step towards the actual possibility of a trade
policy event.
  In column 5, we estimate a fractional response model using a logit link function for the dependent variable
and a binomial distribution following Papke and Wooldridge (1996). We plot the response relative to the
exit share of voters on [0, 1]. In the range for which we estimate the model, the relationship is nearly linear.
The average marginal effects in column 5 are nearly identical to the linear model for most regressors.
   In Figure A2 we show that the actual monthly average of the contract price in logs and the predicted
one based on opinion polls and the aforementioned political events are highly correlated. For this figure
we estimate a more complete model in logs in which we include a second order polynomial of the share of
exit and undecided voters, which allows coefficients to differ after the bill is passed. The simple monthly
correlation of this predicted variable and the one from the more parsimonious model in Table A2, column 4,
is higher than 0.95.


A.8     Sunk Cost Industries Estimation
Only industries with positive sunk costs to export are affected by trade policy uncertainty. To identify these
industries, we follow Handley and Limão (2017). We estimate the persistence of export participation at the
product level conditional on a set of controls. Significant correlation of lagged and current participation can
be interpreted as evidence of sunk costs.
  We use UK HS-8 product import data from 2012-2016 from the non-EU OECD exporters plus Brazil,
Russia, India, and China. This country set minimizes the risk of endogeneity that may arise from EU
countries over the period before the referendum. We define a variety Ṽ as a HS-8 product observation and
the corresponding HS-4 product code as a industry V . This yields 1,217 industries with an average of 7.7
varieties per industry and a standard deviation of 10.5. We use semester-level frequency data.
  We estimate the following equation for the period ranging from the first semester of 2013 to the first
semester 2016 for each V :

                TṼ xt = bsunk
                                  
                          V    max TṼ xt−1 , TṼ xt−2 + bV,2012 TṼ x2012 + αV xt + αṼ + ηṼ xt .

The dependent variable TṼ xt is an indicator taking the value of one if product Ṽ is exported from country x
at semester t to the UK. We control for initial conditions by TṼ x2012 , which is an indicator taking the value
of one if product Ṽ is exported by x at semester t to the UK in 2012. The terms αV xt and αṼ are fixed
effects capturing demand conditions, tariffs and transport costs, and industry conditions respectively. We
interpret positive and significant estimates of bsunk
                                                 V    as evidence of sunk costs.
  We estimate 1,032 of a possible 1,217 coefficients. We define as sunk cost (SC) industries those where
the estimated coefficient has a t-statistic greater than 1.96. The t-statistic criterion provides a natural rank
ordering of industries that is superior to using the estimated level of the persistence coefficient. In some
cases, the estimated coefficients may be high, but they are imprecisely estimated. There are 809 industries
we classify as high sunk cost (78%).
   In Figure A3, we show the relation between the persistence coefficient and the t-statistic where the red
line denotes a t-stat value of 1.96. It shows the same pattern as in Handley and Limão (2017) with all the
significant coefficients between 0 and 1, as expected. The average significant persistence coefficient is 0.33
with a standard deviation of 0.11.




                                                      41
Figure A1: Estimated Response of Prediction Market Daily Contract Price
Relative to Polling Share of Exit Voters




                 1
                 .8
        Daily Contract Price
            .4   .2
                 0    .6




                                                                           0      .1   .2    .3     .4      .5     .6      .7      .8   .9        1
                                                                                            Exit Share in Monthly Polling Avg.

Notes: Fractional response model of contract price relative to polling share of
exit voters, undecided, and interactions of indicators for referendum bill passage
and wording. Full set of average marginal effects in Table A5, column 6.




       Figure A2: Brexit Referendum Contract vs. Predicted Beliefs


                                                                               Brexit Referendum Contract vs. Predicted Beliefs
                                                                                            Based on Polls and Political Events
                                                                       -1
                          Monthly Average (ln) Contract Price for Brexit
                                                                       -1.1
                                                                       -1.2
                                                                       -1.3
                                                                       -1.4
                                                                       -1.5




                                                                               -1.4         -1.3             -1.2           -1.1             -1
                                                                                                        Predicted


Notes: Average monthly contract price is the same as the variable we used in our
baseline sample. The average of predicted monthly contract is based on model a
model in natural logs including a second order polynomial of the share of exit
and undecided voters allowing coefficients to be different after the bill is passed.




                                                                                                        42
 Figure A3: Sunk Cost Estimates. t-statistics vs Persistence Coefficient.




                                     20
    Persistence coefficient t-stat
                                     15
                                     10
                                     5
                                     0
                                     -5




                                          -.5   0                         .5   1
                                                    Persistence coefficient


Notes: t-statistics on persistence coefficient by HS-4 industry headings relative
to estimated persistence coefficient. Red line is a t-statistic of 1.96.




                                                         43
                             Table A1: MFN Risk by Sector ‐ UK and EU Trade
                                                 Exporter
                    Sector                    Shares (2015)      Mean       Median                       SD
1 Animals                                         0.007          0.271      0.317                       0.150
2 Vegetables                                      0.015          0.160      0.145                       0.152
3 Fats & Oils                                     0.002          0.182      0.210                       0.103
4 Prepared Foodstuffs                             0.024          0.341      0.382                       0.222
5 Minerals                                        0.072          0.014      0.000                       0.028
6 Chemicals                                       0.164          0.160      0.193                       0.078
7 Plastics, Rubber & Articles                     0.053          0.164      0.217                       0.079
8 Hides, Leather, & Articles                      0.006          0.127      0.129                       0.075
9 Wood, Straw & Articles                          0.008          0.090      0.061                       0.098
10 Pulp, Paper & Articles                         0.023          0.000      0.000                       0.000
11 Textiles & Articles                            0.034          0.271      0.265                       0.088
12 Footwear, Headgear, other                      0.010          0.230      0.168                       0.149
13 Stone, Plaster, Cement, other                  0.010          0.127      0.112                       0.098
14 Precious stones, Metals, Jewellery             0.017          0.029      0.000                       0.051
15 Base Metals & Articles                         0.053          0.073      0.065                       0.077
16 Machinery; Elec. Equip.; Electronics           0.224          0.074      0.065                       0.062
17 Vehicles, Aircraft, Vessels                    0.218          0.154      0.135                       0.116
18 Optical, Medical & other instruments           0.036          0.086      0.100                       0.060
19 Arms and Ammunition                            0.000          0.100      0.101                       0.017
20 Miscellaneous Manufactures                     0.022          0.097      0.101                       0.058
21 Art and Antiques                               0.001          0.000      0.000                       0.000
Overall                                           1.000          0.145      0.123                       0.125
Notes: EU‐UK subsample. Exporter shares calculated for 2015. MFN risk defined as 1‐(τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN
=1+MFN advalorem/100. HS6 codes within each section included if present in the baseline sample of continuing
country‐product HS‐6 varieties for 8/15‐6/16.




                                                        44
                        Table A2: Market Based Variable Daily Determinants
                               Daily Contract Price 5/27/15 ‐ 6/22/16
                                         1            2           3        4                           5

Share of Exit Voters                                    0.922          2.063            1.06        1.102
                                                       (0.159)        (0.181)        (0.395)       (0.418)
Share of Undecided Voters                                               1.59           1.032        1.057
                                                                      (0.136)        (0.199)       (0.203)
Bill Passed (BP)                                                                      ‐0.805        0.0160
                                                                                     (0.188)      (0.00744)
BP×Exit Voters                                                                        1.634         1.672
                                                                                     (0.439)       (0.460)
BP×Undecided Voters                                                                   1.008         1.070
                                                                                     (0.247)       (0.254)
Pre‐Wording                                             0.035           0.02           0.017        0.0169
                                                       (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.006)      (0.00587)
Constant                                  0.301         ‐0.080         ‐0.752         ‐0.271
                                         (0.002)       (0.064)        (0.083)        (0.166)


N                                          393           393            393            393            393
R2                                        0.000         0.143          0.347          0.391           N/A
Notes: OLS regressions in columns 1‐4. Average marginal effects of fractional response model in column 5
estimated by ML using logit link function and binomial distribution. Contract price is the daily average price
defined between 0 and 1 of the Brexit shares in predicitit.com (pays 1$ if the Brexit option wins the
referendum), share of exit and undecided voters is a daily average of different opinion polls constructed by
Number Cruncher Politics (shares between 0 and 1), Bill Passed is an indicator that takes the value of one
after the European Union Referendum Bill was given Royal Assent on 12/17/15, Pre‐Wording is an
indicator that takes the value of one before 9/1/15, when the final wording of the referendum question was
established. Share of exit and undecided voters not available before 9/1/15 and imputed to 9/15 monthly
average. Robust standard errors in parenthesis.



                                 Table A3: MFN and Trade War Risk
                                             1              2                           3
                                            OLS            OLS                         OLS
                                         MFN risk        MFN risk                 Trade War risk

          Median MFN risk                     0.832                 0.82               ‐0.050
                                             (0.015)              (0.016)             (0.034)

          Median Trade War risk                                    0.007               0.114
                                                                  (0.007)             (0.014)

          Constant                            0.075                0.073               0.656
                                             (0.002)              (0.005)             (0.010)

          N                                   4,128                3,390               3,390
          R2                                  0.387                0.383               0.023
          F‐statistic                         3192                 1311                36.39
          Notes: OLS regressions. Columns 1: MFN risk regressed on median HS6‐specific MFN
          risk across four large countries (Australia, Canada, Japan and US). MFN risk defined as
          1‐(τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN =1+MFN advalorem/100. Columns 2 and 3: MFN risk
          and Trade War risk regressed on median HS6‐specific MFN risk and Trade War defined
          across the same four large countries. Only HS6 products traded between EU and UK
          over the baseline sample included. Column 1 corresponds to IV results in all tables other
          than and column 4 of Table 2. Robust standard errors in parenthesis.




                                                      45
                                          Table A4: UK and EU MFN risk under Alternative Lags
                                                        Monthly Export Value (ln)
                                                   1             2                 3             4                                      5
                                                2 lags         1 lag            0 lags        2 lags                                 3 lags
                                             8/15‐6/16      8/15‐6/16        8/15‐6/16     9/15‐6/16                               9/15‐6/16

        Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                      ‐0.793               ‐0.866              ‐0.455                ‐1.382               ‐1.23
                                                (0.149)              (0.126)             (0.088)               (0.157)              (0.188)


        N                                       637,263             637,263              637,263               579,330              579,330
        R2                                       0.875               0.875                0.875                 0.878                0.878
        Notes: OLS regressions. Dependent variable ln(exports) defined at the exporter‐importer‐HS6‐month level, Pr(Brexit) defined
                                                                        MFN ‐σ                MFN
        as the monthly average (ln) MBV, and MFN risk defined as 1‐(τ ) , where σ=4 and τ         =1+MFN advalorem/100. Column 1
        replicates the baseline from Table 2 for comparison where coefficients report the sum of current and two monthly lags.
        Column 2 does not include the second lag and column 3 only includes the current lag. Column 5 adds an extra lag relative to
        the baseline and thus drops 8/15 observations. For comparison we use the same sample with the baseline 2 lag structure in
        column 4. Coefficients report the sum of the included lags. Robust standard errors clustered at the exporter‐importer‐HS6
        level in parenthesis. All estimations include exporter‐importer‐HS6, exporter‐month and importer‐month fixed effects.




                                Table A5: UK and EU Alternative Brexit Measures and Entry/Exit
                              Annual Product Entry and Exit Indicators, 8/15‐6/16 relative to 8/14‐6/15
                                                         Entry                                           Exit
                                             1               2             3                 4            5                                      6
                                          Prediction Probability                         Prediction Probability
                                                        Contract                                       Contract
                                        Unweighted                        Polls        Unweighted                                              Polls
                                                        Weighted                                      Weighted
                                          Average                                        Average
                                                        Average                                        Average

Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                            ‐0.191            ‐0.186             ‐0.766               0.107              0.100              0.400
                                              (0.055)           (0.053)            (0.237)              (0.029)            (0.027)            (0.122)

N                                             647,488           647,488           647,488              977,177             977,177            977,177
R2                                             0.406             0.406             0.406                0.586               0.586              0.586
Notes: OLS regressions. Entry sample is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products not traded in the same month of the previous year, and
exit sample is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products traded in the same month of the previous year. Dependent variable Entry(t)=1 if
Export(t)>0 and Export(t‐12)=0 for the exporter‐importer‐HS6 observation in month t from 8/15‐6/16. Exit(t)=1 if Export(t)=0 and
Export(t‐12)>0 for the exporter‐importer‐HS6 observation in month t from 8/15‐6/16. Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly average (ln)
MBV, and MFN risk defined as1‐(τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN=1+MFN advalorem/100. Columns 1 and 4 use the baseline unweighted
monthly average of daily Pr(brexit), columns 2 and 5 weight the daily probabilities with the squared root of the volume of daily transactions.
Columns 3 and 6 define Pr(Brexit) as the average (ln) share of exit voters plus (ln) undecided. The poll data for July and August 2015 is
imputed to be the same as in September due to lack of data. Coefficients report the sum of the included lags. Robust standard errors
clustered at the exporter‐importer‐HS6 level in parenthesis. All estimations include exporter‐importer‐HS6, exporter‐month and importer‐
month fixed effects.



                                    Table A6: UK and EU Alternative MFN Risk Measures and Entry/Exit
                                   Annual Product Entry and Exit Indicators, 8/15‐6/16 relative to 8/14‐6/15
                                                           Entry                                                            Exit
                                           1         2             3               4             5         6                        7                8
                                                              industries      (ln) MFN                                         industries       (ln) MFN
                                         σ=2       σ=3            with           tariff        σ=2       σ=3                      with             tariff
                                                               σ ϵ [2, 6]       threat                                          σ ϵ [2, 6]        threat

Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                       ‐0.326     ‐0.236          ‐0.249          ‐0.525           0.194       0.136         0.0923           0.346
                                         (0.098)     (0.07)         (0.074)         (0.171)          (0.051)     (0.036)        (0.035)         (0.089)

N                                       647,488     647,488         344,915         647,488         977,177     977,177         555,850         977,177
R2                                       0.406       0.406           0.410           0.406           0.586       0.586           0.585           0.586
Notes: OLS regressions. Entry sample is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products not traded in the same month of the previous year, and exit sample is
defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products traded in the same month of the previous year. Dependent variable Entry(t)=1 if Export(t)>0 and Export(t‐
12)=0 for the exporter‐importer‐HS6 observation in month t from 8/15‐6/16. Exit(t)=1 if Export(t)=0 and Export(t‐12)>0 for the exporter‐importer‐HS6
observation in month t from 8/15‐6/16. Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly average (ln) MBV and MFN risk defined as1‐(τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and
τMFN=1+MFN advalorem/100. Columns 1 and 5 use sigma=2, columns 2 and 6 use sigma=3 and columns 3 and 7 exclude industries with sigmas higher
than 6 and lower than 2 based on estimations using US import data in Broda and Weinstein (2006). Columns 4 and 8 use (ln) τMFN as the MFN risk
measure. Coefficients report the sum of current and two monthly lags. Robust standard errors clustered at the exporter‐importer‐HS6 level in parenthesis.
All estimations include exporter‐importer‐HS6, exporter‐month and importer‐month fixed effects.




                                                                          46
                  Table A7: UK and Other PTAs MFN risk and Entry/Exit
          Annual Product Entry and Exit Indicators, 8/15‐6/16 relative to 8/14‐6/15
                                          Entry                              Exit
                                    1                2                 3             4
                                   OLS              IV                OLS           IV

Pr(Brexit)×MFN Risk                   ‐0.182            ‐0.419             0.024            0.154
                                       (0.1)           (0.181)            (0.139)          (0.211)


N                                     99,480           99,480              67,634          67,634
R2                                     0.336            n/a                0.553            n/a
Notes: Entry sample is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products not traded in the same month of the
previous year, and exit sample is defined as exporter‐importer‐HS6 products traded in the same month of
the previous year. Dependent variable Entry(t)=1 if Export(t)>0 and Export(t‐12)=0 for the exporter‐
importer‐HS6 observation in month t from 8/15‐6/16. Exit(t)=1 if Export(t)=0 and Export(t‐12)>0 for the
exporter‐importer‐HS6 observation in month t from 8/15‐6/16. Pr(Brexit) defined as the monthly
average (ln) MBV and MFN risk defined as1‐(τMFN)‐σ, where σ=4 and τMFN=1+MFN advalorem/100. Sample
includes the UK and the three largest PTA countries in terms of GDP (Turkey, Mexico and South Korea).
Columns 1 and 3 employ OLS. In columns 2, 4 we instrument the MFN risk by the median HS6‐specific
MFN risk across four large countries (Australia, Canada, Japan and US). Coefficients report the sum of
current and two monthly lags. Robust standard errors clustered at the exporter‐importer‐HS6 level in
parenthesis. All estimations include exporter‐importer‐HS6, exporter‐month and importer‐month fixed
effects.




                                                  47
