                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     EXPECTATIONS UNCERTAINTY AND HOUSEHOLD ECONOMIC BEHAVIOR

                                       Itzhak Ben-David
                                         Elyas Fermand
                                      Camelia M. Kuhnen
                                            Geng Li

                                      Working Paper 25336
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25336


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2018




We thank Jesse Davis, Jacob Sagi, and seminar participants at Imperial College, Indiana
University, Oxford University, Rice University, and the University of North Carolina for helpful
comments and discussion, and staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for their help with
the Survey of Consumer Expectations data. All remaining errors are ours. This research was
supported by funding from the University of North Carolina and the Ohio State University. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Board, or its staff.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Itzhak Ben-David, Elyas Fermand, Camelia M. Kuhnen, and Geng Li. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Expectations Uncertainty and Household Economic Behavior
Itzhak Ben-David, Elyas Fermand, Camelia M. Kuhnen, and Geng Li
NBER Working Paper No. 25336
December 2018
JEL No. D1,D12,D14,D15,D84,G11,G4,G41

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that there exists significant heterogeneity across US households in how uncertain they
are in their expectations regarding personal and macroeconomic outcomes, and that uncertainty in
expectations predicts households' choices. Individuals with lower income or education, more
precarious finances, and living in counties with higher unemployment are more uncertain in their
expectations regarding own-income growth, inflation, and national home price changes. People
with more uncertain expectations, even accounting for their socioeconomic characteristics,
exhibit more precaution in their consumption, credit, and investment behaviors.


Itzhak Ben-David                               Camelia M. Kuhnen
Department of Finance                          University of North Carolina
Fisher College of Business                     Kenan-Flagler Business School
The Ohio State University                      300 Kenan Center Drive, MC #4407
2100 Neil Avenue                               Chapel Hill, NC 27599
Columbus, OH 43210                             and NBER
and NBER                                       camelia_kuhnen@kenan-flagler.unc.edu
ben-david.1@osu.edu
                                               Geng Li
Elyas Fermand                                  Federal Reserve Board
University of North Carolina                   MS 93
Kenan-Flagler Business School                  Washington, DC 20551
300 Kenan Center Drive, Finance Area           geng.li@frb.gov
McColl 4100
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
Elyas_Fermand@kenan-flagler.unc.edu
1     Introduction

Households differ in their economic expectations, in terms of the levels of these expectations
but also in terms of the uncertainty surrounding these levels (Dominitz and Manski (1997a),
Dominitz and Manski (1997b)). Theoretically, uncertainty is important for households’
economic behavior. Uncertainty regarding variables that impact future consumption should
induce prudent behaviors, including increased precautionary savings and liquidity, lower
levels of consumption, and lower exposure to risky financial investments (e.g., Gollier and
Pratt (1996), Carroll and Samwick (1998), Bertola, Guiso, and Pistaferri (2005)).
    Prior work has studied the drivers and consequences of the heterogeneity across house-
holds in the levels of their expectations regarding micro- and macro-level variables such as
income growth, stock market returns, inflation, or unemployment (e.g., Souleles (2004), Pi-
azzesi and Schneider (2012), Malmendier and Nagel (2016), Das, Kuhnen, and Nagel (2017)).
However, there is scant evidence regarding why households differ in their perceived uncer-
tainty around their economic expectations, and how this uncertainty influences their choices.
The lack of data sources containing measures of uncertainty as well as household economic
choices has been a critical impediment for the empirical investigation of these questions.
    In this paper we provide novel empirical evidence regarding the factors that contribute to
households’ uncertainty in their personal and macro-level economic forecasts, and the effects
of this uncertainty on households’ consumption, credit market, and investment decisions.
We use data from the Survey of Consumer Expectations (SCE) conducted by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York monthly since June 2013, which allows us to measure the degree
of uncertainty in respondents’ forecasts regarding their own-income growth, the national rate
of inflation, and the rate of growth in national home prices over the subsequent 12 months.
    We find that there exists a high level of within-person correlation in the uncertainty
expressed by individuals across the three measures of economic expectations. We then show
that uncertainty in economic expectations is higher among individuals with lower income,
lower education, a more precarious financial situation as measured by their likelihood of

                                              1
defaulting on debt, those not working either full or part-time, and those living in counties
with higher unemployment at the time of the survey. For example, having a college degree,
or having $100,000 higher income per year correspond to a third of a standard deviation
decrease in uncertainty about economic outcomes. These results indicate that people faced
with more economic adversity are more uncertain in their economic forecasts. This pattern is
in line with recent work in neuroscience which suggests that adversity changes brain function
such that people from more adverse backgrounds perceive higher environmental instability
(e.g., Sturge-Apple et al. (2016)). Moreover, we document significant county fixed effects in
people’s uncertainty, suggesting the existence of persistent local factors that drive the degree
of confidence that people have when assessing economic prospects for themselves and for the
nation as a whole. We find that the respondents whose subjective uncertainty is closer to
the objective volatility of the economic outcomes forecasted are those with higher incomes
and higher education. Finally, we show that people’s uncertainty in their micro- and macro-
economic forecasts predicts their economic decisions. Households that are more uncertain
in their economic expectations, even accounting for their socioeconomic characteristics, are
more likely to engage in precautionary behaviors—namely, they plan to reduce consumption,
secure additional credit access, and have lower exposure to equity market investments.
       Measures of uncertainty in households’ expectations about future economic outcomes
were not available until recently. Due to this lack of data, economists constructed proxies
for ex-ante uncertainty by examining ex-post realized volatility in the variable of interest,
which typically was income growth (e.g., Carroll and Samwick (1997) and Pistaferri (2016)).1
The indirect nature of proxies for subjective uncertainty made it difficult to unambiguously
interpret empirical results meant to test the theoretical links between ex-ante uncertainty and
household economic behavior. In a seminal paper, Dominitz and Manski (1997b) provided a
novel approach using survey data to measure the subjective uncertainty of U.S. households,
   1
    There are several recent studies that deviate from this paradigm. For example, Guvenen and Smith
(2014) propose using observed consumer choices to infer household perceived uncertainty. Also, Feigenbaum
and Li (2012) use forecast errors of projection models that allow for household superior information to
measure income uncertainty.


                                                   2
specifically regarding their future income levels, and found significant heterogeneity across
those surveyed. Around the same time, Guiso, Jappelli, and Terlizzese (1996) used survey
data from the Bank of Italy regarding people’s assessments for the distribution of their future
incomes to study the link between income risk and equity markets exposure. A decade
and a half after these early papers, a new data set containing measures of household-level
uncertainty regarding several economic outcomes was made possible through the creation
of the SCE. This new resource has so far been used mainly to understand beliefs about
inflation. Specifically, De Bruin, Manski, Topa, and Van Der Klaauw (2011) and Binder
(2017a) found that uncertainty in inflation expectations is higher among women and lower-
income individuals. One notable exception is Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2018) who
examine the connection between people’s uncertainty regarding returns to housing as an
asset class, and their interest in becoming a home owner.
       We contribute to the literature in two main ways. First, we show that there is a high
degree of correlation between how uncertain a person feels about their future income, which
is a micro-level variable, and how uncertain the person is about macro-level variables such as
inflation and home price appreciation at the national level, and that variation across people in
their level of uncertainty comes in part from their socioeconomic situation.2 Hence, the way
people construct distributions of future outcomes may cause spillovers from one domain to
another that our theories currently do not include, as they typically examine uncertainty with
respect to one economic variable only (e.g., own-income growth, as in Carroll and Samwick
(1997)). Our results suggest that people are influenced by their own or local economic
adversity when forecasting distributions of personal as well as macroeconomic outcomes, and
   2
     De Bruin, Manski, Topa, and Van Der Klaauw (2011) find that individual forecast uncertainty regarding
inflation expectations is highly persistent over time—that is, there is a positive correlation over time in
uncertainty regarding a specific economic outcome. Focusing on point estimates, rather than on uncertainty,
Dominitz and Manski (1997a) study individuals’ assessment of the probability of three types of near-term
economic misfortune: the absence of health insurance, victimization by burglary, and job loss. They find
that respondents that assign a high probability to one adverse outcome tend also to assign a high probability
to the other outcomes. Hence, our results together with these prior findings suggest that within-individual
there seems to exist a positive correlation across expectations, in terms of point estimates, as well as in the
uncertainty around these estimates.



                                                      3
thus similar levels of uncertainty will permeate these individuals’ forecasts about variables
that fundamentally may be unrelated. These findings complement the existing literature
that shows that personal experiences influence the formation of expectations levels. For
example, Malmendier and Nagel (2016), Kuchler and Zafar (2016), and Das, Kuhnen, and
Nagel (2017) show that people’s levels of expectations about macroeconomic outcomes relate
to the economic experiences they experienced as a cohort, or as residents in a specific locality,
or due to their idiosyncratic economic shocks.
       Second, we provide novel evidence on the effects of people’s expectations uncertainty on
several behaviors—specifically, consumption, investment, and borrowing decisions. Unlike
prior papers, where typically only one household decision could be observed in the data
(e.g., the share of wealth invested in equities, as in the case of Guiso, Jappelli, and Terl-
izzese (1996)), here we have information regarding several interdependent behaviors that in
theory should be impacted by people’s uncertainty about future economic outcomes. Thus,
we provide a broader assessment of the effects of uncertainty in expectations on households’
economic behavior relative to the prior literature, which is quite scarce and inconclusive, in
part perhaps due to the lack of ex-ante measures of household uncertainty. In particular,
the connection between uncertainty regarding economic variables and consumption deci-
sions has so far been empirically weaker than predicted by theory (e.g., Knotek and Khan
(2011), Christelis, Georgarakos, Jappelli, and van Rooij (2016)).3 Moreover, households’
precautionary savings, especially in liquid assets, are not significantly related to income or
unemployment risk (Fulford (2015b), Carroll, Dynan, and Krane (2003)), while the exposure
to equity markets is lower for those with higher income risk (Guiso, Jappelli, and Terlizzese
(1996), Betermier, Jansson, Parlour, and Walden (2012)). Finally, the link between uncer-
tainty and credit market behavior has been addressed only indirectly in a handful of papers.
Fulford (2015a), Gorbachev and Luengo-Prado (2016), and Druedahl and Jorgensen (2017)
   3
    A similar tension between theoretical predictions and empirical patterns is also found at the aggregate
level. For example, Carroll and Dunn (1997) and Knotek and Khan (2011) find that the response of aggre-
gate consumption to increases in uncertainty regarding income or general business conditions is much less
pronounced than predicted by theory.


                                                    4
provide evidence consistent with the idea that households concerned about future credit
availability hold low-interest rate savings while carrying expensive debt. This suggests that
households may act in a precautionary manner in their credit market activities, as borrowing
constraints could bind at times when bad income or consumption shocks occur.4
       Our findings that uncertainty correlates with economic actions complements the findings
of recent studies documenting that expectations levels relate to behaviors. This prior work
shows that households with higher inflation expectations have higher durable goods con-
sumption (D’Acunto, Hoang, and Weber (2017)), accumulate less wealth, are less leveraged,
invest less in non-liquid assets (Vellekoop and Wiederholt (2017)), and tilt their exposure
toward liabilities with fixed nominal rates (Malmendier and Nagel (2016)). Households ex-
pecting higher home price growth are more likely to buy larger and more expensive homes,
with higher downpayments (Bailey, Davila, Kuchler, and Stroebel (2017), Bailey, Cao, Kuch-
ler, and Stroebel (2018)). We add to this literature by documenting a general pattern that
suggests that uncertainty in expectations may lead to precautionary behaviors across several
economic choices.
       Our results suggest that policy interventions or messages meant to encourage household
behaviors related to consumption, investment, or credit decisions may not have equal ef-
fects on all households. Examples of such policies or messages include central bank forward
guidance, changes in disclosure to consumers about aspects of credit products, and changes
in consumers’ ease of access to investment products, or in the tax implications of such in-
vestments. Our findings imply that whether or not such policies will achieve the desired
outcome at the household level will depend critically on how uncertain each household is
about the future economic outcomes related to the variables that policy makers are at-
tempting to influence. The evidence in this paper also suggests that certain segments of the
population—based on socioeconomic characteristics, or location in the United States—may
   4
     Di Maggio, Kermani, Ramcharan, and Yu (2017) provide evidence that credit limits faced by households
are volatile. They find that increased uncertainty regarding local labor market conditions leads to a reduction
in leverage for high-risk borrowers, suggesting that lenders reallocate credit towards safer borrowers when
uncertainty spikes.


                                                      5
benefit significantly more than others from interventions that help reduce perceived economic
uncertainty. Lastly, our findings indicate that aggregate macro-level indices of uncertainty
(e.g., Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016)), Binder (2017b)) could mask important differences
across US households, and hence, that it would be beneficial to construct and track over
time measures of uncertainty for specific subgroups of the population.



2         Data

2.1        Sample Overview

We use the Survey of Consumer Expectations from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
(FRBNY). The SCE is an internet-based survey designed to collect rich, timely information
about consumer expectations and behavior. The SCE uses a rotating panel structure where
respondents are interviewed for up to 12 consecutive months.5 Each month, new respondents
are added to the panel as existing respondents rotate out.
        Our core survey sample contains observations from June 2013 to December 2017. The
full sample spans 55 months, with an average of 1,282 observations per month, and a total of
70,506 person-month observations. The SCE has a core survey component and various special
modules. Questions in the core survey are administered monthly in all years while the special
modules are fielded only for specific months. The core survey contains the key personal and
macroeconomic expectations variables. We focus on expectations for national inflation and
national house price growth as well as personal income growth. Respondents are asked to
provide a point estimate and a distribution of the growth rate for each of these variables
over the next 12 months. Specifically, they provide three responses: a directional indicator
(increase or decrease); a numerical estimate, in percent (point estimate); and a subjective
distribution (i.e., probability weights) over an exhaustive set of pre-defined outcomes (see
    5
     Respondents are household heads. They are defined as “the person in the household who owns, is buying,
or rents the home.” See Armantier, Topa, van der Klaauw, and Zafar (2016) for a full overview of the survey.




                                                     6
Appendix A for details).
       In addition to the core SCE survey, we use three special modules in our analysis: the
Credit Access Survey run three times a year (February, June, and October), the annual
Housing Survey run in February, and the annual Household Finance survey administered in
August. The Credit Access Survey covers from October 2013 to February 2017 (13 waves;
on average 1100 observations per wave), the Housing Survey covers from 2014 to 2016 (3
waves; on average 1,000 observations per wave), and the Household Finance Survey covers
2014–2016 (3 waves, on average 1,000 observations per wave).


2.2       Uncertainty Measures

We measure uncertainty regarding individuals’ 12-month expectations using the subjective
distributions they provide. Respondents provide probabilities over a support of 10 symmet-
rical bins of possible values of national inflation, national house price growth, or personal
income growth ranging from −12% to +12% (see Appendix A). Using these probabilities, the
FRBNY estimates parametric subjective densities using a method developed by Engelberg,
Manski, and Williams (2009), as described in Armantier, Topa, van der Klaauw, and Za-
far (2016). We use the standard deviation of the subjective distributions as our uncertainty
measure for each expectation variable. We also use the mean of these distributions to control
for expectations levels.6
       To obtain our analysis sample, we apply the following screens to remove outliers and
ensure data consistency. First, we assess the internal consistency of expectations and dis-
tributions by determining if an individual’s point estimates are within the support of the
subjective distributions they provide. If the point estimate is not in the support, we set
the point estimate of inflation, national home price growth, and personal income growth to
missing. Second, we trim the tails of the cross-sectional distribution of point estimates in
   6
    Survey participants are also asked to provide a point estimate for each of these forecasts. These point
estimates, while not identical to the means of the subjective densities calculated by the FRBNY, are signif-
icantly correlated with these means: for inflation, the correlation is 0.56, for national home prices it is 0.70,
and for personal income growth it is 0.69 (p < 0.01 for all correlations).


                                                       7
each month at the 0.5% level. Respondents with point estimates that lie in the 0.5% tails are
also set to missing. The questions for personal income growth are only asked to a subsam-
ple of individuals that are actively employed. For those seeking work, retired, studying, on
disability, or otherwise not working, no question is asked regarding personal income growth.
However, all participants are asked to estimate the growth rate, but not the distribution, of
their household income. We find that the personal income growth rate and the household
income growth rate point estimates have a correlation of 0.50 (p < 0.01). Thus, our third
pass through the data replaces the missing point estimates of personal income growth with
the data on household income growth to increase the sample size of our analysis and to
enable us to control properly for employment status.7 This combined income growth point
estimate is denoted as Income Growth P t Estit in our analyses.
       Summary statistics for density means and standard deviations are presented in Panel A
of Table 1. Density means—for individual i in month t—are denoted as: Expected P ersonal
Incomeit , Expected Inf lationit , and Expected N atnl Home P ricesit . Similarly, the sub-
jective density standard deviations are denoted as: SD(P ersonalInc)it , SD(Inf lation)it ,
and SD(N atnlHP )it . Panel A shows that over the next 12 months respondents expect, on
average, personal income to grow 3.12%, national inflation to be 3.60%, and national home
prices to grow 4.52%, and that there is substantial cross-sectional heterogeneity for each of
these subjective means. Likewise, average uncertainty for personal income growth is 1.98%,
for inflation it is 2.50%, and for national home prices it is 2.82%. In our sample, we find that
the three standard deviations are significantly correlated (Table 2). The standard deviation
of inflation and the standard deviation of national home price growth have a pairwise corre-
lation of 0.71 (p < 0.01). For those respondents with non-missing values for their standard
deviation of personal income growth (i.e., those currently employed), this quantity has a
correlation of 0.60 (p < 0.01) with the person’s standard deviation of national home price
growth, and a correlation of 0.56 (p < 0.01) with the person’s standard deviation of the na-
   7
    If we limit our sample to individuals who are actively employed, we find similar results to those observed
in the unrestricted sample.


                                                      8
tional inflation rate. Therefore, uncertainty in terms of these three dimensions of economic
outcomes, personal or at the macro level, is significantly correlated within person.
      Our main uncertainty measure, U ncertaintyit , is calculated as the average (i.e., the
common component) of the SD(P ersonalInc)it , SD(Inf lation)it , and SD(N atnlHP )it for
each individual i in month t who is employed as of that time. A secondary measure,
U ncertaintyitmacro , is calculated by averaging the latter two components only. Since both
are the average of several standard deviations of quantities measured in percentage points
(i.e., growth rates, all of similar order of magnitude), then these two measures are also quan-
tities measured in percentages.8 Panel A in Table 1 shows that both measures are very
similar regardless of the calculation method due to the high correlation of the underlying
components.9
      We do not observe large within-person correlations for the point estimates and distri-
bution means for the three economic variables. The correlations between either personal
income growth or household income growth, on the one hand, and inflation or national home
price growth estimates on the other, are no larger than 0.18. This indicates more than a
four-fold drop relative to the correlations observed within-person in terms of the uncertainty
that people have about these variables. The point estimates for inflation and national home
price growth rates have a correlation of 0.39 (p < 0.01), which again indicates these quanti-
ties are relatively more distinct within-person than the levels of uncertainty regarding these
estimates, whose correlation is equal to 0.71. These correlations can be seen in Table 2.


2.3       Household Characteristics and Behaviors

We present summary statistics for demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of re-
spondents in the SCE in Panel B of Table 1. We observe respondents’ age (Ageit ), gender
(F emalei ), and race (W hitei ). Measures of respondents’ socioeconomic status include their
household income, expressed in tens of thousands of dollars (Income/10, 000it ), and an in-
  8
      In unreported analyses we also use their first principal component, leading to similar findings.
  9
      The pairwise correlation between the two uncertainty measures is 0.96 (p < 0.01).


                                                       9
dicator for whether the respondent has a college education (Collegeit ). Income is reported
in categorical bins in several $10,000, $25,000, and $50,000 increments, with the last bin
including all households with income greater than $200,000 (see Appendix B for details).
We also construct an indicator Is W orkingit , which is equal to one if the person is working
full-time, part-time, or is on temporary / sick leave, but has a job to which they can return.
Moreover, as measures of precarious financial or economic conditions at the household or
the community level, we use the probability an individual believes they will not make the
minimum payment on their consumer credit in the next 3 months, P(def ault3months)it ,
and the county-level monthly unemployment rate, County % U nemplit , obtained from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics.10 The SCE also includes a measure of respondents’ numeracy, as
given by their ability to answer five basic questions about probabilities and compound inter-
est. Participants who answer at least four of the five questions correctly are deemed to have
high numeracy. In our sample, 71% of observations come from high numeracy respondents.
We use this variable to assess whether it moderates of the effects of people’s socioeconomic
characteristics on their uncertainty in their economic expectations.
      The economic behaviors that we study are related to consumption, and the use of credit
and equity markets. These aspects of household decisions are not assessed all in one data set
by the SCE, as certain modules are only implemented in specific months. Hence, different
samples of respondents will be used in analyses that address each of these economic behaviors.
      Consumption decisions are obtained from the Core, Household Finance, and Housing
modules. From the Core survey, we obtain an indicator of whether respondents plan to
increase total household spending in the coming 12 months, W ill Increase Spendingit .
This variable is available every month from 2013 to 2017 and the wording of the question
emphasizes total spending on a variety of items such as: groceries, clothing, housing, medical
expenses, transportation, and education, among others. We also create an indicator of
whether respondents plan to increase everyday spending on essential items in the coming
 10
      See the BLS Local Area Unemployment county file, available at https://www.bls.gov/lau/.



                                                  10
12 months, W ill Increase Everyday Spendingit , from the Housing and Household Finance
surveys. The samples shrink dramatically because of the infrequent administration of these
special modules and because the Housing survey only included spending questions for 2014
and 2015, while the Household Finance survey only includes this question for the 2014 wave.
Panel C in Table 1 shows that the average willingness to increase spending ranges from 70%
to 87% across these three measures. In addition, we obtain additional measures of specific
types of consumption from the Household Finance survey to use as dependent variables in
our analysis. Specifically, we use questions that elicit the percent chance of purchasing home
renovations, vehicles, trips, or home durables in the next 12 months after the interview date.11
These consumption measures are present in all three waves of the Household Finance survey
from 2014–2016, yielding a larger sample size of about 2,600 respondent-month observations.
Overall, the average probability of consumption for these various goods in the 12 months
after the survey varies from 20% to 40%.
       We use the SCE core survey, as well as the Credit Access module of the SCE, to inves-
tigate behavior related to credit markets. The core survey, while not focused on assessing
credit attitudes, includes data regarding people’s perceptions as to whether in general it will
be easier, or more difficult, to obtain loans or other forms of credit in the subsequent 12
months following the survey. We denote this variable as P erceived F uture Credit M arket
Conditionsit . Specifically, this variable is a score from 1 to 5, indicating how easy the respon-
dent believes that it will generally be for people to obtain credit or loans in the subsequent
12 months.12 From the Credit Access module we obtain two measures of credit seeking be-
haviors. The first measure, Seeks Credit Line Increaseit , is a score from 1 to 5 indicating
how likely the respondent is to seek an increase in available credit lines, either by asking
for an increase in their credit card or other loan limits, applying for a new credit card, or
  11
     Specifically, the questions ask: “In the next 12 months, what is the percent chance that you will purchase”
home renovations, vehicles, trips, or home durables. We construct the home durables measure by averaging
the responses for individual questions asking about appliances, electronics, and furniture.
  12
     This score is obtained from item Q32 in the Core survey.




                                                      11
for a home equity based-loan.13 The second measure, Seeks Credit T o Consumeit , is a
score from 1 to 5 indicating how likely the respondent is to seek credit to either purchase
a car or pay for education.14 Summary statistics for each of these variables can be found
in Panel D of Table 1. We observe that, on average, individuals perceive slightly tighter
credit markets (2.90 Likert points) and have relatively low likelihoods of demanding more
credit or obtaining credit for consumption (1.56 and 1.50 Likert points, respectively) in the
next 12 months. However, there is substantial variation across respondents, as the standard
deviation is about 0.8 Likert points for each of the three credit variables.
       We use data from the Household Finance module to study the effects of uncertainty
on three investment decisions: participation in equity markets, the proportion of equity
holdings to total assets, and the value of equity holdings. We construct the variable Invests
in Equitiesit as an indicator for whether the value of the respondent’s equity holdings is
greater than zero. We calculate the total value of equity as the sum of equity investments
in defined contribution, IRA, and savings / investment accounts. Panel E of Table 1 shows
that 64% of the sample participates in equity markets. We also construct the variable
EquityHoldings/Assetsit as the ratio of the dollar value of equity holdings and the dollar
value of total assets of the respondent. We calculate total assets as the sum of the balances
in respondents’ defined contribution, IRA, and savings or investment accounts, the value of
their farm or small business, the value of their vehicles (e.g., cars, boats, trailers), the value
of the primary home and additional real estate or land owned, and the value of other assets
(e.g., estate, trust, collectibles). In the sample, equity holdings are roughly 14% of total
assets. EquityInvestmentsit (log) is the natural logarithm of the sum of one plus the dollar
value of equity investments.
       The Household Finance module also allows us to get measures of people’s liabilities, and
net wealth, which we will use as controls in our analyses related to investment decisions.
  13
     Specifically, this variable is the average of the responses provided in items N17a1,2,4,5 and 6 in the
Credit Access survey module.
  14
     This variable is the average of the responses provided in items N17a3 and 7 in the Credit Access module.



                                                     12
Specifically, respondents’ liabilities, Debtit , are calculated as the sum of total real estate-
related debt on primary and other real estate or land, total consumer debt (e.g., credit
cards, auto loans, student loans, other personal loans, and legal or medical bills, and total
debt for which they have co-signed. The respondents’ net worth is measured by the variable
N etW orthit , which is the difference between the dollar value total assets and total liabilities,
divided by 100,000 (for readability of regression coefficients).



3     Results

3.1    Expectations Uncertainty Differences Across U.S. Households

We document that there is significant and predictable variation in how much uncertainty in-
dividuals in the U.S. population have in their micro- and macro-level economic expectations.
The variation in uncertainty of expectations is closely linked to the socioeconomic status
(SES) and environment of these individuals. As can be seen in the top panel of Figure 1,
plotting the average uncertainty by location shows that counties with respondents whose
uncertainty is in highest quartile of the distribution are found across the entire U.S. map.
That being said, when data is aggregated at the state level, as in the bottom panel of Figure
1, a prevalence of high uncertainty respondents is observed in South-East states, suggesting
the importance of geography for the formation of economic expectations.
    At the respondent level, our SES measures, income and college education, are strongly
associated with uncertainty of economic expectations. The top panel of Figure 2 shows that
the average within-person uncertainty—measured using the average of all three SD measures,
U ncertaintyit —declines appreciably as income rises. The average level of uncertainty for
individuals in the lowest two income bins is about 5% compared to roughly 2% in the top
two income bins; a 60% decline. We observe a similar pattern even when we split based on
income and college education in the lower panel of Figure 2. The lower panel shows that
individuals with a college degree, for the same level of income, have lower uncertainty in


                                                13
their economic forecasts compared to individuals without a college degree. However, the
difference in uncertainty by college education is particularly pronounced for those with low
incomes (<= $45, 000).
       Moreover, Figure 3 shows that a similar pattern is observed for each of the three com-
ponents of our main uncertainty measure: lower income individuals form more uncertain
expectations. The same pattern is also observed if we were to construct this figure by clas-
sifying respondents based on education (i.e., college degree or not), rather than on income.
       We further examine, using OLS regressions, the effects of SES and individual- and county-
level proxies for economic precariousness on respondents’ uncertainty in their economic ex-
pectations. The general regression model is shown below in Equation 1. We are primarily
interested in estimating the effects of SES, measured by Incomeit and Collegeit , on a re-
spondent’s expectations uncertainty, U ncertaintyit , and the effects of proxies for financial or
economic precariousness at the household and the community levels, as captured by variables
County % U nemplit and P(def ault3months)it . As controls we include exogenous individual
characteristics (Ageit , Age2it , F emalei , and W hitei ), the point estimates, or means, of their
expectations, as well as fixed effects for the county where the individual i lives at the time
t of the survey.15 We also include year-month fixed effects, denoted as µt . Standard errors
are corrected for heteroskedasticity and clustered at the respondent level. The results of this
baseline regression specification are shown in Table 3.


                                                          0                     0
 U ncertaintyit = α + βIncomeit + γCollegeit + Φ Xdef
                                                  it
                                                      ault,unemp
                                                                 + Ψ Xcontrols
                                                                      it       + µt + εit (1)


       The first column of Table 3 shows the regression of our main uncertainty measure on
exogenuous individual characteristics. The estimated coefficients on Ageit and Age2it sug-
  15
    As a measure of the mean of personal income growth we use the point estimate and for national inflation
and home prices we use the means of the expectation densities. As noted in the Data section, own-income
growth expectation distributions, and thus distribution means, are only elicited from respondents that are
working, which is roughly 60% of the overall sample. By using the point estimate—which is asked of all
respondents—we can reasonably control for the central tendency of respondent’s beliefs about their personal
income growth, given that we observe these measures are highly correlated with one another.



                                                    14
gest a U-shaped life-cycle pattern of expectations uncertainty, implying that young and old
consumers have higher uncertainty than middle-aged individuals. In addition, female re-
spondents have greater uncertainty in their expectations than male respondents. Holding
all else constant, uncertainty for females is, on average, 0.45 percentage points higher than
males, or 0.20 standard deviations higher.16 Moreover, white individuals are significantly
less uncertain in their predictions of economic variables than their non-white counterparts.
Uncertainty among white respondents is 0.90 percentage points (i.e., 0.4 standard devia-
tions) lower, on average, than among non-white respondents. Year-month fixed effects do
not have significant predictive power for uncertainty during the sample we study here.
    Column 2 in the table shows SES variables are strongly negatively correlated with uncer-
tainty, a similar pattern to the one observed in Figure 2. Uncertainty among college-educated
individuals is 0.65 percentage points (i.e., 0.28 standard deviations) lower than among non-
college educated individuals. Uncertainty also decreases with the income level, such that an
$100,000 increase in annual income corresponds to a decrease in uncertainty of 0.70 percent-
age points, or a third of a standard deviation.
    Column 3 includes regressors for the respondents’ employment status, the precariousness
of their own finances, as well as county-level unemployment. Individuals who are currently
working have significantly lower levels of uncertainty in their economic expectations. A one-
standard deviation increase in the respondent’s expected probability of near-term default
is correlated with an 18 basis point (i.e., 0.07 standard deviations) increase in uncertainty.
Similarly, a one-standard deviation increase in the county unemployment rate is associated
with a 5-basis point (i.e., 0.04 standard deviations) increase in uncertainty.
    In Column 4, we add county fixed effects. We also include as controls expectation point
estimates to absorb any effects of central tendency on uncertainty measures. There exists
significant dependence of the degree of people’s uncertainty on where in the U.S. they reside,
even controlling for their own income, education and other demographics. Most of the 3-
  16
     This is obtained by dividing the coefficient of 0.45 by the standard deviation of U ncertaintyit , which is
2.31.


                                                      15
percentage point increase in the R2 between Columns 3 and 4 stems from the inclusion
of county fixed effects which indicates the existence of significant local influences on how
confident people are when envisioning their own and the country-level changes in economic
conditions.
   Lastly, in Column 5, we use the uncertainty measure that only relates to macroeconomic
expectations since that is collected for all individuals regardless of employment status. Our
main results for our SES predictors hold with similar coefficients and statistical strength in
Column 5 as in Column 4, and the same is true for individual characteristics, point estimates,
and county unemployment.
   Forming expectations about future income, national inflation, and national house prices
may be more difficult for individuals with low numeracy, a characteristic that may also be
positively correlated with income or college education. Table 4 documents that high nu-
meracy indeed reduces uncertainty of respondents economic expectations whether we use
uncertainty over all 3 economic variables (Column 1) or just the macroeconomic quantities
(Column 2). We show that, on average, high numeracy reduces respondents’ expectations
uncertainty by roughly 1.8 percentage points (i.e., 0.78 standard deviations). In addition,
the relationship between uncertainty and SES characteristics—income, education, and ac-
tive working status—is significantly reduced by about two-thirds for respondents with high
numeracy. However, the numeracy of the individual does not have a significant effect on the
strength of the impact of the person’s perceived probability of default in the following three
months, or the level of unemployment in their county of residence, on their expectations
uncertainty.


3.2    Dynamics of Respondent Expectations

Our analysis assumes that our uncertainty measure—the standard deviations of the dis-
tributions of subjective expectations—indeed reflects the degree to which respondents lack
confidence in their forecasts for the three economic variables studied here. A necessary con-


                                             16
dition for this assumption to be correct is that consumers will update their expectations in
a manner consistent with Bayesian learning. That is, when people are more uncertain, upon
receiving additional information about the quantity they are predicting, they rely less on
the prior forecast and more on the new information.17 In other words, over time we should
observe larger changes, in absolute value, in the point estimate produced by an individual
in month t relative to that produced by the same person in month t − 1, if this individual
was more uncertain in his or her point estimate in month t − 1.
       The results in Table 5 show that this indeed the case. For each of the three expectations
we examine, we find a strong and positive correlation between the standard deviation around
the forecast produced for that variable in month t−1, and the absolute value of the change in
the point estimate from month t − 1 to t, by the same respondent. This pattern is consistent
whether we examine the update in expectations about personal income growth (Column 1),
the rate of inflation (Column 2), or the growth rate of national home prices (Column 3),
over the 12 months following the time of the survey. For example, a 1-percentage point
larger uncertainty for personal income expectations in month t − 1 leads to an absolute
revision of 0.79 percentage points in month t. We find that the correlation between the level
of uncertainty in a point estimate and the size of the revision of that estimate from one
month to the next is between 0.31 and 0.44, depending on which of the three quantities are
estimated (not shown). Correcting for the panel nature of the data, these correlations are
significant at p < 0.01 or better.


3.3       Subjective versus objective volatility

Our results so far indicate that lower SES households have expectations about personal
and macro-level economic variables that are characterized by more uncertainty, relative to
  17
    There is a high degree of overlap between the quantities estimated in months t − 1 and t, as they refer
to outcomes (e.g., the rate of inflation) over the subsequent 12 months —hence the time horizon of the two
predictions overlaps by 11 months. This is very close to a setting where the person attempts to forecast
the same variable repeatedly as new information arrives. Hence, we can use straightforward intuition from
Bayesian learning regarding the effect of prior uncertainty on the extent to which the person weights their
prior when forming their posterior belief.


                                                    17
households with higher SES. Here we examine how the subjective uncertainty of people of
low and high SES compares to objective benchmarks for uncertainty, or volatility, regarding
these economic outcomes. Given the short time during which a respondent is in the SCE
panel, we do not have sufficient data to calculate the objective volatility of the respondent’s
own income. Hence, we will focus on the two macro-level outcomes that these individuals
forecast, namely, the rate of inflation, and the growth rate in national home prices over the
subsequent year. We present this analysis in Table 6.
   The table shows subjective uncertainty (i.e., volatility) values for the rate of inflation
and for the rate of growth in national home prices, averaged across participants in various
SES categories, as well as objective measures of uncertainty, based on realized volatilies of
these variables. These objective volatility measures are calculated for two time windows:
several years prior to the SCE survey (January 2000 to December 2012), and during the
SCE sample period (June 2013 to December 2017). For inflation, the objective volatility
is calculated following the procedure used by the Federal Reserve Board, and detailed in
Hulseman and Detmeister (2017). Briefly, we obtain the 1-month annualized change in the
seasonally-adjusted Consumer Price Index (CPI), then calculate the change in the annualized
growth rate of the CPI for a given month t as the rate in the current month minus the rate in
the previous month, and compute the standard deviation of the changes of the growth rate
over the previous 60-months. We average the rolling-window standard deviations separately
for the in-sample and the out-of sample periods. For national home price growth rates, we
calculate the standard deviation of monthly percent changes in the seasonally-adjusted U.S.
Case-Shiller Home Price index (HPI), for the out-of-sample and for the in-sample period
separately, and then we annualize the monthly standard deviation by multiplying the result
by the square root of 12.
   Column 1 in Table 6 shows average values for subjective uncertainty regarding the in-
flation rate, while Column 2 shows average values for subjective uncertainty regarding the
growth rate in national home prices, separately for each income and education category.


                                              18
The bottom two rows of the table show the objective values for the volatility of inflation and
national home prices for years before and during the survey. For CPI inflation, the in-sample
(i.e., 2013-2017) objective volatility is 0.87% and for the Case-Shiller HPI the in-sample ob-
jective volatility is 0.62%. The out-of-sample (i.e., 2000-2012) values for realized volatility
for inflation and national home price growth rates are 1.41% and 2.44%, respectively. As can
be seen from Columns 1 and 2, higher SES respondents have levels of subjective uncertainty
about these two macro-level outcomes that are closer to the objective volatility of these
outcomes, whether the objective value is based on data from 2000 to 2012, or from 2013 to
2017. Specifically, college-educated respondents have, on average, 2% volatility around their
forecasts for inflation, and 2.49% volatility around their national home price growth rate
forecasts, whereas the subjective volatilities for people without a college degree are 3.18%
and 3.27%, respectively. Moreover, respondents in higher income categories are consistently
closer to the objective volatility for either macro-level outcome, relative to those at lower
income levels. For example, among people earning $25,000 per year, subjective uncertainty
is 3.47% in the case of inflation, and 3.71% in the case of national home price growth rates,
whereas the subjective uncertainty for these two outcomes among people earning $125,000
per year is 1.89% and 2.31%, respectively.
   Overall, the evidence in Table 6 indicates that individuals with higher SES have subjective
distributions about macroeconomic outcomes characterized by volatility levels that better
match the objective volatility observed in these outcomes.


3.4    Expectations Uncertainty and Economic Behavior

In this section we examine the relation between the uncertainty in individuals’ economic
expectations and several aspects of economic behavior, namely, their consumption, credit,
and investment decisions.




                                              19
3.4.1    Expectations uncertainty and consumption decisions

We find that individuals with more uncertainty in their economic expectations are signifi-
cantly less likely to increase their total spending as well as their everyday spending in the
next 12 months. These results are presented in Table 7. For example, Column 1 shows
a 1-percentage point increase in uncertainty predicts a 0.65 percentage points decrease in
the likelihood an individual will increase their spending. In other words, a 1 standard de-
viation (sd) increase in uncertainty correlates with a 0.03 standard deviation decrease in
the likelihood to increase spending. To put this in perspective, going from not employed
to actively employed only equates to a 0.05-standard deviation increase in the likelihood
of increased spending and income and college education don’t have significant correlations
with the dependent variable. Columns 2 and 3 show similar results when looking at every-
day spending in two different SCE sub-samples run at different periods during the year.18
A 1-percentage point increase in uncertainty predicts a 2.4 percentage points (Column 4)
lower probability for respondents to increase their everyday spending. Put another way, a
one-standard deviation increase in uncertainty is associated with a 0.16-standard deviations
decrease in the probability of increasing everyday spending. Column 3, which uses data
from the Housing survey is signed consistently with the result in Column 4 from the House-
hold Finance survey though the coefficient is not significant at the 10% level. In addition,
respondents are less likely to anticipate spending on home renovations, vehicles, and trips,
but there is no statistical relationship between spending on home durables, defined as appli-
ances, electronics, and furniture.19 These results are presented in Columns 4 to 7. All four
dependent variables take values between 0 and 100 (i.e., measured in percentage points).
For example, a 1-percentage point (one-standard deviation) increase in uncertainty predicts
  18
     The question regarding everyday spending is worded as: ”Over the next 12 months, what do you expect
will happen to your everyday spending on essential items? By everyday spending, we mean your daily living
expenses related to what you absolutely need.” Answers could be: increase, stay the same, or decrease. We
create an indicator for whether ”increase” was selected
  19
     We construct the variable for home durables by taking the average of the respondent’s answers to the
three individual spending questions




                                                   20
a–0.79 percentage point (–0.06 standard deviation), –0.61 percentage point (–0.05 standard
deviation), and –1.18 percentage point (–0.07 standard deviation) decline the probability of
a home renovation, vehicle purchase, or trip purchase, respectively, in the next 12 months.
       As in our prior models, here we include fixed effects for counties where participants live,
and fixed effects for year-month, to account for any time-related variation in aggregate spend-
ing patterns. Controlling for these fixed-effects, we find that people with higher incomes are
more likely to anticipate future home renovations (+1.1 percentage points) or consumption
of trips (+2.2 percentage points) and home durables (+0.79 percentage points), but not more
likely to plan on increasing their spending over the subsequent year. Expressed differently,
a one-standard deviation change in income (about 3 bins) corresponds to an increase of 0.19
standard deviations in the likelihood of home renovations, an increase of 0.04 standard de-
viations in the likelihood of vehicle purchase, an increase of 0.29 standard deviations in the
likelihood of purchasing a trip, and an increase of 0.19 standard deviations in the percent
chance home durable purchase.20 Once income is accounted for, the level of education does
not impact the decision to increase spending or most consumption measures. However, the
anticipated likelihood of purchasing a trip is strongly positively correlated with education
(+8.3 percentage points).
       A 1-percentage point increase in the probability of the respondent defaulting on debt
obligations in the near future predicts a 0.15 percentage point reduction of the probability
purchasing a trip in the coming year and about a 0.09 percentage point increase of the
probability of purchasing vehicles in the subsequent year. We find that unemployment in
the county of the respondent at the time of the survey does not have a significant effect on
their consumption decisions. Age has an inverted U-shape relationship with consumption.
Female respondents are significantly less likely to increase consumption relative to men (–3.2
percentage points). White respondents are significantly more likely to increase consumption
relative to non-white respondents (+4.6 percentage points). Moreover, respondent’s point
  20
    If instead of controlling for income in a linear fashion we do so using indicators for income bins, we
continue to observe that uncertainty is significantly negatively related to planned consumption.


                                                   21
estimates are positively correlated with willingness to increase spending, but personal income
has the largest magnitude and statistical strength. A one-standard deviation increase in
the income point estimate corresponds to a 0.09-standard deviation increase in willingness
to spend. Standardized coefficients for inflation and national house price coefficients are
roughly 0.02.


3.4.2     Expectations uncertainty and credit decisions

We examine whether people’s uncertainty in economic expectations can help predict their
behaviors in the credit markets. We report our findings in Table 8.
      The core survey, while not focused on assessing credit attitudes, includes data regarding
people’s perceptions on whether, in general, it will be easier or more difficult to obtain loans
or other forms of credit in the subsequent 12 months following the survey. Specifically, this
measure of credit market perceptions is a score from 1 to 5, indicating how easy the respon-
dent believes that it will generally be for people to obtain credit or loans in the subsequent
12 months.21 Column 1 of Table 8 shows that a 1-percentage point increase in uncertainty
corresponds to a more pessimistic outlook about future credit availability by about 0.02
Likert points. Expressed differently, a one-standard deviation increase in uncertainty corre-
sponds to a 0.07-standard deviations decrease (i.e., a more pessimistic outlook) in perceived
future credit market conditions. For comparison, a one-standard deviation increase in in-
come (roughly 3 bins) results in a 0.06-standard deviations more optimistic outlook for credit
access, with a similar magnitude for college vs. no college education. Furthermore, a higher
probability of default significantly negatively predicts future credit access outlook. A one-
standard deviation increase in the probability of default is correlated with a 0.13-standard
deviations more pessimistic outlook.
      More details regarding credit market behaviors are available in the Credit Access module
deployed by the SCE in a subset (about a fifth) of the months in the sample. Hence,
 21
   This score is obtained from item Q32 in the core SCE module. A value of 1 corresponds to “Much
Harder” and a value of 5 corresponds to “Much Easier”. A value of 3 is neutral.


                                               22
when examining these additional variables, the sample size is reduced, due to the lower
frequency with which these data are collected. Nonetheless, this additional module is useful
for assessing the degree to which individuals attempt to use credit either as a means of
precautionary behavior or as a means for current consumption. We examine these decisions
in Columns 2 and 3 in the table. The dependent variable in the second column is a score
from 1 to 5 indicating how likely the respondent is to seek an increase in available credit
lines, either by asking for an increase in their credit card or other loan limits, applying for
a new credit card, or for a home equity based-loan.22 The dependent variable in the third
column is a score from 1 to 5 indicating how likely the respondent is to seek credit to either
purchase a car or pay for education.23
       We find that uncertainty is positively correlated with seeking credit line increases. For
each 1-percentage point increase in uncertainty, individuals are 0.02 Likert points more likely
to seek an increase in their credit lines (Column 2). Put differently, a one-standard devi-
ation increase in uncertainty is correlated with a 0.06-standard deviations increase in the
Likert score to seek credit line increases. However, we do not observe that more uncertain
individuals have a higher propensity to use credit for consumption (Column 3). Income is
a positive predictor of both seeking credit in general and seeking credit for consumption.
Standardized coefficients are both about 0.04. College education positively predicts seeking
credit, but negatively predicts seeking credit for consumption uses with standardized coeffi-
cients of 0.02 and –0.03, respectively. Overall, the (standardized) impact of uncertainty on
credit decisions is on a similar order of magnitude of those of common predictors such as
income and education level.
       The level of unemployment in the county does not significantly change either credit-
related dependent variable in the table, a result similar to that observed in the analysis of
consumption decisions in Table 7.
  22
     Specifically, this variable is the average of the responses provided in items N17a1,2,4,5 and 6 in the
Credit Access survey module.
  23
     This variable is the average of the responses provided in items N17a3 and 7 in the Credit Access module.



                                                     23
   Age has a U-shaped relationship with the perceived ease of credit availability in general,
and with the interest in increased credit lines, but it does not relate to the person’s interest
in getting credit for immediate consumption. Being a female is a significant and negative
predictor of all the credit-related dependent variables in the table.
   The point estimate for the person’s income growth rate is a positive predictor of the
individual’s perceived ease of general credit availability, their interest in having increase
credit lines, and in seeking credit to finance consumption. The respondents’ point estimate
for the rate of inflation over the subsequent year is a significant and negative predictor of
their perceived ease with which credit will generally be available over that horizon, whereas
their point estimate for the growth rate in national home prices has the opposite effect.
The person’s interest in securing increased credit lines or in using credit for consumption is
unrelated either their point estimate for inflation or for the growth in national home prices.


3.4.3   Expectations uncertainty and investment decisions

To analyze investment decisions, we use data from the Household Finance module of the
SCE that was administered in August from 2014 to 2016. While the number of observa-
tions drops significantly relative to our main sample due to the infrequent administration
of this module, this subsample provides detailed information regarding respondents’ assets
and liabilities. Thus, we can construct a control variable that is not available for the main
sample: the respondents’ net worth. Moreover, this module allows us to assess the relation-
ship between uncertainty and the portfolio decisions of these individuals. Specifically, we
examine participation in equity markets, the value of equities held, and the proportion of
equities held to assets to understand the degree to which respondents’ uncertainty in their
economic expectations affects these financial decisions. We eliminate the top and bottom
1% of observations in terms of net worth, to minimize the effect of outliers.
   The results of the investment decision analysis are reported in Table 9. We use three
measures of exposure to equities: an indicator equal to 1 if the value of equity holdings


                                              24
of the respondent is greater than zero24 (Column 1); the dollar value of equity holdings
scaled by total assets (Columns 2 and 3), and the natural logarithm of the dollar value of
equity holdings (Columns 4 and 5). Aside from characteristics used in the prior analyses, we
include the person’s net worth, calculated as either the difference between their assets and
debt (Columns 1-3) or the log value of assets and the log value of debt (Columns 4-5).
    We document that individuals with higher values of uncertainty in their economic ex-
pectations are significantly less likely to invest in equities: a 1-percentage point increase
in uncertainty leads to a 1.3-percentage point lower likelihood of investing in equities (Col-
umn 1). Expressed differently, a one-standard deviation increase in uncertainty leads to a
0.06-standard deviations decrease in the likelihood of participating in equity markets. For
comparison, a one-standard deviation increase in income results in a 0.21-standard devi-
ations increase in the likelihood of investing in equities. Similarly, comparing college vs.
non-college educated individuals, a college education predicts an expected increase of 0.05
standard deviations in the likelihood of investing in equities. Further, active employment
predicts an expected 0.11-standard deviations increase in participation and a one-standard
deviation increase in net worth (roughly $570,000) predicts an expected 0.18-standard devi-
ations increase in participation.
    Table 9 also shows that more uncertain respondents also have a significantly lower frac-
tion of their assets invested in equities (–0.6 percentage point), whether we examine all
respondents (Column 2) or focus only on those who do participate in the stock market (–
0.9 percentage point in Column 3). Put another way, a one-standard deviation increase in
uncertainty predicts an expected 0.07-standard deviations lower fraction of equities (uncon-
ditionally) and a 0.08-standard deviations lower fraction of equities (conditional on partici-
pation). For context, unconditionally, income and net worth are the only two factors with
larger magnitude impacts than uncertainty, with one-standard deviation changes in each pre-
dicting ceteris paribus an increase of 0.12-standard deviations and 0.14-standard deviations,
  24
     Dollar value of total equity holdings is determined by the sum of equity holdings in defined contribution
or investment accounts.


                                                     25
respectively, in the equity share. Conditional on participation, uncertainty has the largest
standardized effect with other regressors such as income (+0.04 standard deviations), college
education (+0.02 standard deviations), active employment (+0.01 standard deviations), and
net worth (+0.07 standard deviations) having relatively smaller impacts.
   Finally, people with more uncertain economic expectations have a lower dollar amount
invested in equities. When we examine all respondents (Column 4), we observe that each
1-percentage point increase in uncertainty predicts a 12% decrease in the dollar value of a
respondent’s equity holdings. The coefficient is nearly the same if we condition on just those
who invest in stocks (Column 5). Recast in standardized form, a one-standard deviation
increase in uncertainty corresponds to a 0.05-standard deviations decrease in (log) equity
holdings, unconditionally. Conditional on participation in equity markets, a one-standard
deviation increase in uncertainty predicts a 0.10-standard deviations decrease in (log) equity
holdings. For perspective, a one-standard deviation increase in income predicts an uncondi-
tional 0.25-standard deviation increase and a conditional 0.18-standard deviation increase in
(log) equity holdings, respectively. Also, a one-standard deviation increase in the probability
of default predicts a 0.04-standard deviation unconditional decrease in (log) equity holdings
while a one-standard deviation increase in (log) assets corresponds to a 0.34-standard devia-
tion (unconditional) and 0.52-standard deviation (conditional on participation) increases in
(log) equity holdings.
   To summarize, across these models, we find that in general, higher income or education
levels, active employment, and a lower probability of financial distress lead to higher exposure
to equity markets. Age is not significantly related to the degree to which participants are
invested in equities, but gender plays a significant role, with female respondents having less
exposure to the stock market. The point estimates for income growth, inflation and national
home price growth rates are not significantly related to the respondents’ exposure to equities.
   As expected, we find that there exist a substantial wealth effect on portfolio allocation.
Specifically, people with higher net worth, or equivalently, those with higher asset levels, or


                                              26
those with lower levels of debt, have a larger exposure to stocks, whether this exposure is
measured as the probability of participating in the stock market, or as a fraction of assets
that is comprised of equities.



4        Alternative hypotheses and robustness checks

4.1       Uncertainty in Beliefs versus or Risk Aversion

We investigate whether uncertainty in economic expectations is simply a proxy for individ-
uals’ risk aversion. Starting in April 2015, respondents in our main sample were asked two
questions that capture their self-reported willingness to tolerate financial risk and their will-
ingness to tolerate risk in general in their daily activities. These questions are administered
upon a respondent’s first entry into the Core survey and about 60% of the sample was asked
these questions. The answers are on a scale from 1 to 7, with 7 indicating the highest level
of risk tolerance. The two risk tolerance measures have a correlation coefficient of 0.48.
We present the results of our analysis using only the risk preference measure defined as the
willingness to tolerate financial risk in Table 10.25
       Column 1 in Table 10 shows that risk tolerance is not significantly correlated with uncer-
tainty in expectations. These two concepts are therefore orthogonal personal characteristics
which may have different effects on individuals’ behaviors. The results in Column 2 show
that risk tolerance is not significantly correlated with willingness to spend while uncertainty
remains negatively correlated, as in our baseline analysis. Column 3 shows that risk toler-
ance has a positive and significant effect on the perceptions of ease of future credit access.
Furthermore, risk tolerance has a significant and positive effect on people’s exposure to eq-
uity markets, measured by whether they participate in the stock market (Column 4) or by
the (log) value of equity positions conditional on participation (Column 5).26 Columns 6
  25
     Repeating the analysis using the risk preference measure about the willingness to tolerate risks in daily
activities yields similar results.
  26
     The results obtained if other measures of equity market exposure are used (as in Table 9) are similar,


                                                     27
through 9 show that risk tolerance also positively affects the planned consumption of the
respondent in the following 12 months, in particular regarding the purchasing of durables
and travel. Importantly, however, the results across all columns in Table 10 indicate that
while risk tolerance impacts some of the behaviors we examine, uncertainty in expectations
continues to be significantly related to households’ consumption, credit or investment be-
haviors, even after we control for risk preferences. The effects of uncertainty on any of these
behaviors in specifications where risk tolerance is included as a control are similar to the
effects documented in the main analyses in Tables 7 through 9.


4.2     Attention During the Survey

It is possible that respondents do not attempt to answer the SCE questions to the best of
their abilities, and therefore we might misinterpret the data. For example, what we infer
to be true uncertainty about a particular economic forecast may in fact be a measure of
people’s level of disinterest in the survey. A stringent manner to test whether this is the
case is to examine whether there is positive correlation between people’s expectations and
what eventually happens. If people simply provide noise when answering the survey ques-
tions, their answers should not correlate with the realized values of the economic variable
forecasted. We investigate whether responses regarding income growth expectations (per-
sonal and household) are correlated with realized changes in actual household income. We
calculate realized income growth on four horizons: 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, and 11
                                       Incomet −Incomet−k
months. Growth is calculated as:           Incomet−k
                                                            where k ∈ 1, 3, 6, 11. For each realized
income growth horizon we require respondents to be in the survey for at least 2, 4, 7, and 12
months, respectively.27 We run our correlation tests by removing outlier values by trimming
the 1% tails of the expectation and realized income growth variables. The correlations be-
tween personal income growth expectations and realized income growth for the 6-month and
so we omit them here for brevity.
  27
     The maximum income growth interval is 11 months because individuals only appear in the survey for
up to 12 months. For example, if a respondent entered the survey in June 2013, we only have data from
June 2013 to May 2014.


                                                 28
12-month horizons are 0.06 (p < 0.05). The equivalent correlations for household income
expectations are 0.06 and 0.07 (p < 0.05), respectively. These positive correlations suggest
that survey respondents, on average, do not provide answers that are simply noise.



5     Conclusion

We document that households across the U.S. differ significantly in their uncertainty when
forecasting micro- and macro-level economic variables. A significant part of this heterogene-
ity in uncertainty is predicted by the degree of economic adversity faced by these individuals.
Specifically, people with lower incomes, education, more precarious work and financial situ-
ations, and living in counties with higher unemployment are more uncertain when asked to
forecast their personal income growth as well as the rate of inflation and the rate of growth
of national home prices. Better numeracy helps reduce people’s uncertainty across all of
their forecasts, and also, it lowers the influence of the people’s specific economic situation on
the degree of uncertainty that they have when making macro-economic predictions. More-
over, we find that people with higher uncertainty in their economic forecasts engage in more
cautious behaviors in terms of consumption, use of credit markets, and financial portfolio
allocations.
    Our findings suggest that it is important to understand which households are more un-
certain in their expectations, because those households’ responses to policy changes target-
ing these expectations or behaviors driven by these expectations may be more muted than
regulators expect. The fact that lower socioeconomic status individuals and those from com-
munities with worse economic conditions are the most uncertain in the population suggests
that a reduction of uncertainty would have a high impact among these individuals, in terms
of economic behavior per se but also in terms of reducing the cognitive burden that finan-
cial stress, likely related to uncertainty, imposes on these individuals (Mani, Mullainathan,
Shafir, and Zhao (2013), Carvalho, Meier, and Wang (2016)).



                                               29
   Also, if uncertainty in expectations varies with the business cycle, this can help explain the
differences in households’ consumption, credit, and investment decisions between good and
bad economic times. The importance of this uncertainty channel as a driver of the cyclical
nature of these household economic outcomes may be particularly high for households facing
more adversity. These implications are corroborated by the evidence in Pistaferri (2016)
who documented that households felt less secure following the recession of 2008–2009, and
in Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013), who report that the consumption decline was sharpest in areas
of greatest home prices decline and highest levels of leverage and attribute these results to an
increase in the income uncertainty that households faced and their presumed precautionary
response.
   Our findings also speak to the interpretation of certain household behaviors as rational
versus irrational. Gabaix and Laibson (2017) argue that behavior arising from imperfect
foresight is hard to distinguish from behavior arising from time preferences. In their model,
individuals who have a high degree of uncertainty in their forecasts appear as if they are
hyperbolic discounters, even if they are perfectly patient. Hence, uncertainty in economic
expectations may lead to patterns in consumption or other household decisions that may look
irrational, but it simply reflects the importance of noise in the signals that households receive
about future outcomes for the choices that they rationally make based on those signals.
   Overall, these results point to the importance of both the first and the second moment
of expectations when either modeling theoretically or interpreting empirically the economic
choices of households. Perhaps in part due to lack of data regarding the second moment
in beliefs, the literature has not made as much progress when investigating the causes and
effects of uncertainty on household actions, as when examining point estimates. Novel data
on uncertainty provided by large scale surveys can offer useful insights and help move the
literature forward in better assessing the formation and role of expectations on household
decisions.




                                               30
References

 Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2018). Perception of house price risk and home-
    ownership. NBER Working paper 25090 .

 Armantier, O., G. Topa, W. van der Klaauw, and B. Zafar (2016). An Overview of the
    Survey of Consumer Expectations. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No.
    800 .

 Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2018). The Economic Effects of Social
    Networks: Evidence from the Housing Market. Journal of Political Economy, forth-
    coming.

 Bailey, M., E. Davila, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2017). House Price Beliefs and Mortgage
    Leverage Choice. Working paper .

 Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4), 1593–1636.

 Bertola, G., L. Guiso, and L. Pistaferri (2005). Uncertainty and Consumer Durables Ad-
    justment. Review of Economic Studies 72, 973–1007.

 Betermier, S., T. Jansson, C. Parlour, and J. Walden (2012). Hedging labor income risk.
    Journal of Financial Economics 105 (3), 622–639.

 Binder, C. C. (2017a). Measuring Uncertainty Based on Rounding: New Method and
    Application to Inflation Expectations. Journal of Monetary Economics 90, 1–12.

 Binder, C. C. (2017b). Economic Policy Uncertainty and Household Inflation Uncertainty.
    The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 17 (2), 1–20.

 Carroll, C. D. and W. E. Dunn (1997). Unemployment expectations, jumping (S,s) trig-
    gers, and household balance sheets). NBER Macroeconomics Annual , 165–229.

 Carroll, C. D., K. E. Dynan, and S. D. Krane (2003). Unemployment risk and precau-
    tionary wealth: Evidence from households’ balance sheets. Review of Economics and

                                            31
   Statistics 85 (3), 586–604.

Carroll, C. D. and A. A. Samwick (1997). The nature of precautionary wealth. Journal of
   Monetary Economics 40, 41–71.

Carroll, C. D. and A. A. Samwick (1998). How important is precautionary saving? Review
   of Economics and Statistics 80 (3), 410–419.

Carvalho, L. S., S. Meier, and S. W. Wang (2016). Poverty and Economic Decision-Making:
   Evidence from Changes in Financial Resources at Payday. American Economic Re-
   view 106 (2), 260–284.

Christelis, D., D. Georgarakos, T. Jappelli, and M. van Rooij (2016). Consumption un-
   certainty and precautionary saving. Working paper .

D’Acunto, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber (2017). The effect of unconventional fiscal policy
   on consumption expenditure. Working paper .

Das, S., C. M. Kuhnen, and S. Nagel (2017). Socioeconomic Status and Macroeconomic
   Expectations. Working paper .

De Bruin, W. B., C. F. Manski, G. Topa, and W. Van Der Klaauw (2011). Measuring
   consumer uncertainty about future inflation. Journal of Applied Econometrics 26, 454–
   478.

Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, R. Ramcharan, and E. Yu (2017). Household credit and local
   economic uncertainty. Working paper .

Dominitz, J. and C. F. Manski (1997a). Perceptions of Economic Insecurity: Evidence
   From the Survey of Economic Expectations. Public Opinion Quarterly 61 (2), 261–
   287.

Dominitz, J. and C. F. Manski (1997b). Using Expectations Data To Study Subjective
   Income Expectations. Journal of the American Statistical Association 92 (439), 855–
   867.


                                           32
Druedahl, J. and C. N. Jorgensen (2017). Precautionary Borrowing and the Credit Card
   Debt Puzzle. Quantitative Economics. Forthcoming.

Engelberg, J., C. Manski, and J. Williams (2009). Comparing the point predictions and
   subjective probability distributions of professional forecasters. Journal of Business and
   Economic Statistics 27 (1), 30–41.

Feigenbaum, J. A. and G. Li (2012). Life Cycle Dynamics of Income Uncertainty and
   Consumption. The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 12 (1), 1–49.

Fulford, S. (2015a). How important is variability in consumer credit limits? Journal of
   Monetary Economics 72, 42–63.

Fulford, S. (2015b). The surprisingly low importance of income uncertainty for precaution.
   European Economic Review 79, 151–171.

Gabaix, X. and D. Laibson (2017). Myopia and discounting. Working paper .

Gollier, C. and J. W. Pratt (1996). Risk Vulnerability and the Tempering Effect of Back-
   ground Risk. Econometrica 64 (5), 1109–1123.

Gorbachev, O. and M. J. Luengo-Prado (2016). The Credit Card Debt Puzzle: The Role
   of Preferences, Credit Risk, and Financial Literacy. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
   Working Paper 16-6 .

Guiso, L., T. Jappelli, and D. Terlizzese (1996). Income Risk, Borrowing Constraints, and
   Portfolio Choice. American Economic Review 86 (1), 158–172.

Guvenen, F. and A. A. Smith (2014). Inferring Labor Income Risk and Partial Insurance
   From Economic Choices. Econometrica 82 (6), 2085–2129.

Hulseman, E. and A. Detmeister (2017, June). Was There a Great Moderation for Inflation
   Volatility? FEDS Notes, The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Knotek, E. S. I. and S. Khan (2011). How Do Households Respond to Uncertainty Shocks?
   Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review 96 (2), 5–34.


                                           33
Kuchler, T. and B. Zafar (2016). Personal Experiences and Expectations about Aggregate
   Outcomes. Working paper .

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2016). Learning from inflation experiences. Quarterly Jour-
   nal of Economics 131 (1), 53–87.

Mani, A., S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, and J. Zhao (2013). Poverty Impedes Cognitive
   Function. Science 341 (6149), 976–980.

Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi (2013). Household balance sheets, consumption, and the
   economic slump. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1687–1726.

Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider (2012). Inflation and the price of real assets. Working Paper,
   Stanford University.

Pistaferri, L. (2016). Why has consumption remained moderate after the Great Recession?
   Working paper, Stanford University.

Souleles, N. S. (2004). Expectations, heterogeneous forecast errors, and consumption:
   Micro evidence from the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Surveys. Journal of Money,
   Credit, and Banking 36 (1), 39–72.

Sturge-Apple et al., M. L. (2016). Vagal Tone and Children’s Delay of Gratification: Dif-
   ferential Sensitivity in Resource-Poor and Resource-Rich Environments. Psychological
   Science 27 (6).

Vellekoop, N. and M. Wiederholt (2017). Inflation Expectations and Choices of House-
   holds. Working paper .




                                            34
Figure 1: Geographic heterogeneity in uncertainty. This figure is constructed by
averaging the level of uncertainty across all individuals in a location (county or state) and
across time to calculate the average uncertainty in that location during the entire sample
period. Quartiles of these averages are calculated and correspond to the colors in the legend
shown above. Areas in gray have no data.


                                             35
                                                          6
               Uncertainty (average of SD measures) (%)
                                                          4
                                                          2
                                                          0




                                                                    5000        15000         25000         35000    45000         55000    67500          82500     125000          175000      200000

                                                                                                                    Income category
               Uncertainty (average of SD measures) (%)
                                                          4
                                                          3
                                                          2
                                                          1
                                                          0


                                                                        ]



                                                                                   ]



                                                                                                 ]



                                                                                                              ]



                                                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                                                ]



                                                                                                                                                           0]



                                                                                                                                                                         0]



                                                                                                                                                                                       0]



                                                                                                                                                                                                   00
                                                                    00



                                                                                00



                                                                                              00



                                                                                                            00




                                                                                                                                            00



                                                                                                                                                        50



                                                                                                                                                                    50



                                                                                                                                                                                     00
                                                                                                                    50




                                                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                                                   50



                                                                              75



                                                                                            25



                                                                                                         50




                                                                                                                                           50



                                                                                                                                                       7



                                                                                                                                                                    82




                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                    12




                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                               $4



                                                                            $6



                                                                                          $8



                                                                                                       12




                                                                                                                                       $4



                                                                                                                                                    $6




                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                  ,$
                                                                                                                  >$




                                                                                                                                                                                            >$
                                                              <=



                                                                           0,




                                                                                          ,



                                                                                                        $




                                                                                                                                      <=



                                                                                                                                                   0,




                                                                                                                                                                                 $
                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                     0,




                                                                                                                                                                              0,
                                                                         00




                                                                                                                                                 00



                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                      5



                                                                                                 50




                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                      45



                                                                                   67




                                                                                                                                              45



                                                                                                                                                             67
                                                                                               82




                                                                                                                                                                         82
                                                                    ($



                                                                                ($




                                                                                                                                            ($



                                                                                                                                                           ($
                                                                                              ($




                                                                                                                                                                     ($




                                                                                       No college                      College
                                                                                             Income and education category



Figure 2: Uncertainty by income and education levels. This figure shows the average
levels of uncertainty of participants across various levels of income and education. For the
purpose of the figure, for each participant the income and education level are set to be equal
to their maximum values across all the months when the individual was included in the
survey.




                                                                                                                              36
                                                     6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
      Uncertainty about personal income growth (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Uncertainty about inflation (%)
                                                     4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                         5000   15000   25000   35000   45000   55000                                            67500      82500      125000   175000   200000                                                      5000       15000   25000    35000    45000   55000   67500   82500   125000   175000   200000

                                                                                        Income category                                      6                                                                                                                                            Income category
                                                                                                 Uncertainty about national home prices(%)
                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                         5000       15000   25000    35000    45000   55000                                  67500      82500      125000   175000   200000

                                                                                                                                                                                              Income category



Figure 3: Uncertainty measured separately for personal income growth, inflation
rate, and growth rate of national home prices, by income. This figure shows the
average levels of uncertainty of participants in their forecast for their personal income growth
(first panel), inflation rate (second panel), and the growth rate of national home prices (third
panel) across various levels of income. For the purpose of the figure, for each participant
the income level is set to be equal to its maximum values across all the months when the
individual was included in the survey.




                                                                                                                                                                                                  37
                                       Table 1: Summary statistics
Summary statistics for expectations point estimates and uncertainty, respondent characteristics, and behav-
iors. Panel A shows beliefs variables, measured in percentage points. Those with the prefix “Expected” are
subjective distribution means. The SD variables are the standard deviations of the subjective distributions.
                                marcro
U ncertaintyit and U ncertaintyit      are constructed by taking the arithmetic average of all three SD mea-
sures or just the two macro measures, respectively. Panel B shows socioeconomic and demographic variables.
Income/10, 000it is the midpoint value of the bin selected by respondents (see Appendix B). Collegeit is an
indicator for higher education. Panels C, D, and E show variables related to consumption, credit, and equity
markets behaviors. Credit conditions variables are measured on a 5-point Likert scale.
                                                              Mean    Std Dev.    Min      Max      N
   Panel A: Expectations
   Expected P ersonal Incomeit                                 3.12      4.25    -25.27   36.28    35281
   Expected Inf lationit                                       3.60      4.27    -25.00   28.00    51671
   Expected N atnl Home P ricesit                              4.52      4.90    -25.00   36.28    51671
   SD(P ersonalInc)it                                          1.98      2.33     0.37    20.83    35281
   SD(Inf lation)it                                            2.50      2.65     0.37    21.92    51671
   SD(N atnlHP )it                                             2.82      2.56     0.42    21.29    51671
   U ncertaintyit                                              2.53      2.31     0.42    20.19    51671
   U ncertaintyitmacro                                         2.66      2.41     0.42    20.19    51671
   Panel B: Socioeconomic Status and Demographics
   Income/10, 000it                                           8.03       5.27      0.50   20.00 51671
   Collegeit                                                  0.58       0.49      0.00    1.00 51671
   Ageit                                                      50.62     14.95     17.00   99.00 51652
   F emalei                                                   0.45       0.50      0.00    1.00 51671
   W hitei                                                    0.86       0.34      0.00    1.00 51671
   Is W orkingit                                              0.68       0.47      0.00    1.00 51671
   P(def ault3months)it                                       10.32     20.49      0.00   100.00 51533
   County % U nemplit                                         5.34       1.73      1.40   27.20 51671
   Panel C: Consumption
   W ill Increase Spendingit                                  78.84     40.85     0.00    100.00 51669
   W ill Increase Everyday Spendingit (Housingmodule)         69.98     45.85     0.00    100.00 1812
   W ill Increase Everyday Spendingit (HHFmodule)             87.82     32.73     0.00    100.00 903
   % Chance P urchase Home Reno N ext 12 monthsit             28.75     32.29     0.00    100.00 2609
   % Chance P urchase V ehicles N ext 12 monthsit             23.74     29.30     0.00    100.00 2609
   % Chance P urchase T rips N ext 12 monthsit                39.34     39.04     0.00    100.00 2609
   % Chance P urchase Home Durables N ext 12 monthsit         20.73     21.20     0.00    100.00 2609
   Panel D: Credit-related variables
   P erceived F uture Credit M arket Conditionsit              2.90      0.83     1.00     5.00    51660
   Seeks Credit Line Increaseit                                1.56      0.75     1.00     5.00    11117
   Seeks Credit T o Consumeit                                  1.50      0.78     1.00     5.00    11117
   Panel E: Investment-related variables
   Invests in Equitiesit                                      64.06     47.99     0.00    100.00   2524
   EquityHoldings/Assetsit                                    13.78     20.01     0.00    100.00   2524
   EquityInvestmentsit (log of (1+ $ amount))                  6.68     5.32      0.00     15.52   2524
   Assetsit (log of (1+ $ amount))                            11.70     3.05      0.00    18.50    2596
   Debtit (log of (1+ $ amount))                               9.26     3.98      0.00     15.44   2584
   N etW orthit (hundred thousand $s)                         3.71       5.73     -5.47   45.05    2533

                                                    38
                            Table 2: Commonality across uncertainty measures and across distribution means
     The table shows the pairwise correlations between uncertainty measures, and expected values (based on the distributions) for the three
     economic variables measured in the core survey: personal income growth, the rate of inflation, and the rate of growth of national home
     prices in the 12 months following the time of the survey.
                                          Expected                 Expected
                                          P ersonal Expected N atnl Home
                                           Incomeit Inf lationit    P ricesit   SD(P ersonalInc)it SD(Inf lation)it SD(N atlHP )it




39
        Expected P ersonal Incomeit        1.0000
        Expected Inf lationit             0.0991∗∗∗     1.0000
        Expected N atnl Home P ricesit    0.1819∗∗∗   0.3901∗∗∗       1.0000
        SD(P ersonalInc)it                0.2647∗∗∗   -0.0639∗∗∗    -0.0649∗∗∗         1.0000
        SD(Inf lation)it                   -0.0087    0.2168∗∗∗     0.0139∗∗∗         0.5607∗∗∗            1.0000
        SD(N atnlHP )it                   0.0217∗∗∗   0.0438∗∗∗     0.2146∗∗∗         0.6019∗∗∗           0.7140∗∗∗          1.0000
                     Table 3: Uncertainty differences across the U.S. population
In the first four columns of the table the dependent variable is the average of the uncer-
tainty each participant i has regarding their point estimate for their personal income growth
(SD(P ersonalInc)it , if elicited), for the rate of inflation (SD(Inf lation)it ), and the growth rate of
national home prices (SD(N atnlHP )it ), all estimated for the 12-month period following the time
of the survey, i.e., month t. In the last column, the dependent variable is the average of only the
latter two variables, namely, SD(Inf lation)it and SD(N atnlHP )it . Standard errors are corrected
for heteroskedasticity and clustered at the respondent level. t-statistics are shown in parentheses.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                   U ncertaintyit   U ncertaintyit   U ncertaintyit   U ncertaintyit   U ncertaintyitmacro
  Income/10, 000it                                    -0.070∗∗∗        -0.052∗∗∗        -0.049∗∗∗          -0.056∗∗∗
                                                       (-15.57)         (-11.85)         (-10.69)           (-11.97)
  Collegeit                                           -0.647∗∗∗        -0.598∗∗∗        -0.585∗∗∗          -0.638∗∗∗
                                                       (-12.10)         (-11.35)         (-11.09)           (-11.71)
  Is W orkingit                                                        -0.527∗∗∗        -0.519∗∗∗          -0.311∗∗∗
                                                                         (-8.18)          (-8.11)            (-4.83)
  P(def ault3months)it                                                 0.010∗∗∗         0.009∗∗∗           0.010∗∗∗
                                                                         (8.40)           (7.54)             (7.95)
  County % U nemplit                                                   0.056∗∗∗         0.050∗∗∗           0.050∗∗∗
                                                                         (3.34)           (2.89)             (2.84)
  Ageit                              -0.064∗∗∗        -0.053∗∗∗        -0.044∗∗∗        -0.048∗∗∗          -0.046∗∗∗
                                      (-5.26)          (-4.42)           (-3.60)          (-3.88)            (-3.63)
  Age2it                             0.001∗∗∗         0.000∗∗∗          0.000∗∗         0.000∗∗∗            0.000∗∗
                                       (5.12)           (3.80)           (2.50)           (2.80)             (2.47)
  F emalei                           0.455∗∗∗         0.281∗∗∗         0.251∗∗∗         0.238∗∗∗           0.321∗∗∗
                                       (8.70)           (5.49)           (4.92)           (4.67)             (6.12)
  W hitei                            -0.904∗∗∗        -0.863∗∗∗        -0.818∗∗∗        -0.730∗∗∗          -0.759∗∗∗
                                      (-9.27)          (-9.29)           (-8.85)          (-7.81)            (-7.94)
  Income Growth P t Estit                                                               0.021∗∗∗           0.010∗∗∗
                                                                                          (9.72)             (4.40)
  Expected Inf lationit                                                                 0.029∗∗∗           0.045∗∗∗
                                                                                          (5.20)             (7.71)
  Expected N atnl Home P ricesit                                                        0.020∗∗∗           0.037∗∗∗
                                                                                          (4.68)             (8.26)
  Year-Month FEs                        Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes
  County FEs                            No               No               No                Yes                Yes
  Adjusted R2                           0.03             0.09             0.11             0.14               0.15
  Observations                         51652            51652            51514            51514              51514




                                                          40
                             Table 4: Numeracy effects on uncertainty
The dependent variable is U ncertaintyit , measured as the average of the SD of income growth,
inflation and national home price growth in Column 1, and, U ncertaintyit macro , the average of the SD

of inflation and national home price growth in Column 2. Variable High N umeracyit is an indicator
equal to 1 if respondent i at time t answered at least 4 of the 5 numeracy questions in the survey
correctly, and 0 otherwise. The regressions control for gender, age, age squared, county fixed-effects,
year-month fixed-effects, and for the point estimates (i.e., means) provided by the respondent
regarding personal (or household) income growth, inflation and national home price growth rates
over the 12 months following time t. Standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and
clustered at the respondent level. t-statistics are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                              U ncertaintyit   U ncertaintyitmacro
             Income/10, 000it                                   -0.098∗∗∗          -0.104∗∗∗
                                                                 (-8.79)            (-9.10)
             Income/10, 000it X High N umeracyit                0.072∗∗∗           0.071∗∗∗
                                                                  (6.03)             (5.83)
             Collegeit                                          -0.719∗∗∗          -0.780∗∗∗
                                                                 (-6.51)            (-6.87)
             College X High N umeracyit                         0.391∗∗∗           0.405∗∗∗
                                                                  (3.23)             (3.24)
             Is W orkingit                                      -0.783∗∗∗          -0.473∗∗∗
                                                                 (-6.42)            (-3.83)
             Is W orkingit X High N umeracyit                   0.468∗∗∗            0.317∗∗
                                                                  (3.64)             (2.43)
             P(def ault3months)it                               0.010∗∗∗           0.011∗∗∗
                                                                  (4.27)             (4.52)
             P(def ault3months)it X High N umeracyit             -0.002             -0.002
                                                                 (-0.89)            (-0.84)
             County % U nemplit                                   0.029              0.029
                                                                  (0.97)             (0.95)
             County % U nemplit X High N umeracyit                0.024              0.024
                                                                  (0.76)             (0.73)
             High N umeracyit                                   -1.843∗∗∗          -1.776∗∗∗
                                                                 (-7.67)            (-7.27)
             Controls for point estimates for growth rates
             of income, inflation, and national home prices        Yes                Yes
             Gender and age controls                               Yes                Yes
             Year-month FEs                                        Yes                Yes
             County FEs                                            Yes                Yes
             Adjusted R2                                           0.17               0.18
             Observations                                         51514              51514




                                                    41
                  Table 5: Uncertainty and point estimate revisions over time
The dependent variable in the linear regression models in the table is the absolute value of the
change between month t − 1 and month t in the point estimates provided by respondents regarding
their personal income growth (Column 1), inflation rate (Column 2), and rate of growth of national
home prices (Column 3), over the subsequent 12 months. The independent variable in each model
is the uncertainty the respondent had in their point estimate in month t − 1. Standard errors
are corrected for heteroskedasticity and clustered at the respondent level. t-statistics are shown in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                |∆P ersonal              |∆Inf lation             |∆N ational
                              Income Growth                 Rate                  Home P rice
                           P oint Estimateit−1,it | P oint Estimateit−1,it | P oint Estimateit−1,it |
   SD(P ersonalInc)i,t−1          0.793∗∗∗
                                  (18.87)
   SD(Inf lation)i,t−1                                     1.030∗∗∗
                                                           (34.83)
   SD(N atnlHP )i,t−1                                                                0.543∗∗∗
                                                                                     (26.58)
   Constant                       0.673∗∗∗                 0.166∗∗∗                  1.381∗∗∗
                                  (10.49)                   (2.87)                   (27.60)
   Adjusted R2                      0.11                     0.19                      0.10
   Observations                    30438                    48329                     42021




                                                 42
                         Table 6: Subjective versus objective volatility
The table presents subjective uncertainty (i.e., volatility) values for the rate of inflation and for
the rate of growth in national home prices, averaged across participants in various SES categories,
as well as objective measures of uncertainty, based on realized volatilies of these variables. These
objective volatility measures are calculated for two time windows: several years prior to the SCE
survey (January 2000 - December 2012), and during the SCE sample period (June 2013 - December
2017). For inflation, the objective volatility is calculated according to a procedure employed by
the Federal Reserve Board, which is detailed in Hulseman and Detmeister (2017). Namely, we
first obtain the 1-month annualized change in the seasonally-adjusted Consumer Price Index, then
calculate the change in the annualized growth rate for a given month t as the rate in the current
month minus the rate in the previous month, and then compute the standard deviation in changes
of the growth rate over the previous 60-months from month t. We average the rolling-window
standard deviations separately for the in-sample and the out-of sample periods. For national
home price growth rates, we calculate the standard deviation of monthly percent changes in the
seasonally-adjusted Case-Shiller Home Price index, for the out-of-sample and for the in-sample
period separately, and then we annualize the monthly standard deviation by multiplying the result
by the square root of 12. Column 1 shows average values for subjective respondent inflation
uncertainty and Column 2 shows average values for subjective national house prices uncertainty,
separately for each income and education category. The bottom two rows of the table show the
objective values for the volatility of inflation and that of the growth rate of national house prices,
for the out-of-sample and the in-sample periods. All values in the table are reported in percent.


                                                   Expectation Uncertainty For:
                                          Inflation Rate (%) National House Prices (%)         N
            SES by Education
                             No College           3.18                     3.27              21924
                                College           2.00                     2.49              29747
              SES by Income
                                   5000           4.84                     4.85               1330
                                  15000           3.89                     4.01               3016
                                  25000           3.47                     3.71               4215
                                  35000           3.12                     3.26               4278
                                  45000           2.75                     2.95               4666
                                  55000           2.58                     2.80               4602
                                  67500           2.24                     2.57               6529
                                  82500           2.08                     2.46               7999
                                 125000           1.89                     2.31               8556
                                 175000           1.75                     2.28               3467
                                 200000           1.63                     2.29               3013
   Objective Uncertainty (2000 - 2012)            1.41                     2.44
   Objective Uncertainty (2013 - 2017)            0.87                     0.62



                                                 43
                                      Table 7: Uncertainty and consumption decisions
The dependent variables in Columns 1-3 are indicators (equal to 0 or 100, for ease of coefficient in-
terpretation) for whether the respondent expects that their total household spending will increase
over the 12 months following time t or whether their everyday spending will increase over that
time frame, respectively. The other dependent variables are the percent chance that in the next
12 months the respondent will purchase home renovations (Column 4), vehicles (Column 5), trips
(Column 6), or home durables (Column 7); consisting of appliances, electronics, and furniture. Val-
ues for the dependent variable in Column 2 come from the SCE Housing module administered only
in February 2014 and February 2015, which reduces the sample size. Values for the dependent vari-
ables in Columns 3 to 7 come from the SCE Household Finance module which is administered only
in August 2014, August 2015, and August 2016. Standard errors are corrected for heteroskedas-
ticity and clustered at the respondent level. t-statistics are shown in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                     W ill      W ill Increase   W ill Increase % Chance P urchase   % Chance P urchase   % Chance P urchase   % Chance P urchase
 Dependent                         Increase      Everyday         Everyday          Home Reno             V ehicles              T rips          Home Durables
 variable                         Spendingit     Spendingit       Spendingit     N ext 12 monthsit    N ext 12 monthsit    N ext 12 monthsit    N ext 12 monthsit
                                   data from      data from                                                 data from
                                  core survey   housing module                                       household finance module
 U ncertaintyit                    -0.651∗∗∗         -0.753        -2.365∗∗∗         -0.788∗∗∗            -0.614∗∗∗             -1.176∗∗∗              -0.202
                                    (-4.37)          (-1.59)         (-3.50)           (-3.19)              (-2.61)               (-4.21)             (-1.17)
 Income/10, 000it                    0.029           -0.174           0.183          1.144∗∗∗               0.238∗              2.199∗∗∗            0.785∗∗∗
                                     (0.39)          (-0.72)          (0.69)           (7.63)               (1.73)               (13.39)               (7.96)
 Collegeit                           -0.092          -3.658           -4.453            2.204                0.066               8.345∗∗∗              0.730
                                    (-0.12)          (-1.54)         (-1.57)           (1.57)               (0.05)                (5.18)               (0.80)
 Is W orkingit                     4.930∗∗∗          -0.820           -0.755           -2.501                1.465                -0.146               -0.268
                                     (5.80)          (-0.31)         (-0.27)           (-1.54)              (0.96)                (-0.08)             (-0.26)
 P(def ault3months)it                -0.025          -0.076           -0.005           -0.026              0.090∗∗∗             -0.157∗∗∗              0.002
                                    (-1.52)          (-1.20)         (-0.08)           (-0.83)              (2.66)                (-4.65)              (0.08)
 County % U nemplit                  -0.280          -0.756           -0.337           -0.529               -0.086                -0.705               0.236
                                    (-1.12)          (-1.08)         (-0.39)           (-1.03)              (-0.18)               (-1.25)              (0.76)
 Ageit                             -0.557∗∗∗        -0.925∗∗        -1.297∗∗          0.580∗∗                0.070              -1.315∗∗∗            -0.456∗∗
                                    (-3.62)          (-2.00)         (-2.55)           (2.12)               (0.29)                (-4.19)             (-2.58)
 Age2it                            0.006∗∗∗         0.010∗∗         0.012∗∗           -0.006∗∗              -0.003               0.012∗∗∗              0.002
                                     (4.12)          (2.26)           (2.36)           (-2.17)              (-1.19)               (3.67)               (0.90)
 F emalei                          -3.243∗∗∗       -5.832∗∗∗         -4.497∗           -1.437             -3.605∗∗∗               -1.610              -1.509∗
                                    (-4.51)          (-2.71)         (-1.79)           (-1.08)              (-2.94)               (-1.07)             (-1.77)
 W hitei                           4.581∗∗∗           2.002           0.550          8.841∗∗∗               2.930∗                4.255∗∗            3.028∗∗
                                     (4.17)          (0.62)           (0.14)           (5.23)               (1.66)                (2.01)               (2.40)
 Income Growth P t Estit           0.412∗∗∗           0.186         0.240∗∗            -0.090                0.015                0.157∗             0.123∗∗
                                    (12.06)          (1.57)           (1.97)           (-1.21)              (0.20)                (1.89)               (2.31)
 Expected Inf lationit             0.181∗∗∗          0.513∗           -0.076           -0.078                0.100               -0.400∗∗           -0.248∗∗∗
                                     (2.72)          (1.86)          (-0.23)           (-0.55)              (0.61)                (-2.21)             (-2.62)
 Expected N atnl Home P ricesit    0.212∗∗∗          -0.241           0.374            -0.037                0.069                 0.175                0.119
                                     (3.67)          (-1.01)          (1.57)           (-0.27)              (0.44)                (1.04)               (1.19)
 Year-Month FEs                       Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes
 County FEs                           Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes
 Adjusted R2                         0.03            0.15            0.04              0.07                 0.03                  0.18                0.11
 Observations                       51512            1802            900               2603                 2603                  2603                2603




                                                                                 44
                              Table 8: Uncertainty and credit decisions
The dependent variable in the first column is a score from 1 to 5, indicating how easy the respondent
believes that it will generally be for people to obtain credit or loans in the 12 months following
the survey (item Q32 in the core survey). The dependent variable in the second column is a
score from 1 to 5 indicating how likely the respondent is to seek an increase in available credit lines
(item N17a1,2,4,5 and 6 from the credit access survey module). The dependent variable in the third
column is a score from 1 to 5 indicating how likely the respondent is to seek credit to either purchase
a car or pay for education (item N17a3 and 7 from the credit access survey module). Standard errors
are corrected for heteroskedasticity and clustered at the respondent level. t-statistics are shown in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                              P erceived F uture    Seeks      Seeks
                                               Credit M arket    Credit Line Credit T o
                                                 Conditionsit     Increaseit Consumeit
             U ncertaintyit                       -0.024∗∗∗        0.020∗∗∗       -0.002
                                                    (-7.55)          (4.70)      (-0.46)
             Income/10, 000it                     0.010∗∗∗         0.007∗∗∗     0.005∗∗
                                                    (6.36)           (3.57)       (2.39)
             Collegeit                            0.090∗∗∗          0.036∗∗     -0.048∗∗
                                                    (5.29)           (1.98)      (-2.45)
             Is W orkingit                           0.029           0.016        0.015
                                                    (1.59)           (0.77)       (0.69)
             P(def ault3months)it                 -0.005∗∗∗        0.002∗∗∗     0.002∗∗∗
                                                   (-14.80)          (4.23)       (4.85)
             County % U nemplit                     -0.004           0.004        -0.000
                                                    (-0.71)          (0.63)      (-0.02)
             Ageit                                -0.028∗∗∗        -0.028∗∗∗     -0.008∗
                                                    (-8.24)         (-6.90)      (-1.89)
             Age2it                               0.000∗∗∗         0.000∗∗∗       -0.000
                                                    (7.75)           (3.67)      (-0.79)
             F emalei                             -0.063∗∗∗        -0.085∗∗∗      -0.029
                                                    (-4.05)         (-4.91)      (-1.63)
             W hitei                              0.092∗∗∗           0.009        -0.044
                                                    (3.78)           (0.32)      (-1.53)
             Income Growth P t Estit              0.004∗∗∗         0.003∗∗∗     0.002∗∗
                                                    (6.46)           (3.23)       (2.46)
             Expected Inf lationit                -0.020∗∗∗         -0.000        -0.002
                                                   (-11.83)         (-0.01)      (-1.17)
             Expected N atnl Home P ricesit       0.007∗∗∗           0.001         0.000
                                                    (5.07)           (0.39)       (0.12)
             Year-Month FEs                           Yes             Yes           Yes
             County FEs                               Yes             Yes           Yes
             Adjusted R2                            0.09             0.10         0.06
             Observations                          51503            11091        11091




                                                  45
                          Table 9: Uncertainty and equity investment decisions
The dependent variable in the first column is an indicator (equal to 0 or 100, for ease of coefficient
interpretation) for whether the value of stock market holdings of the respondent is greater than
zero. In columns two and three, the dependent variable is the respondents’ value of equity holdings,
scaled by the total value of their assets, expressed as percentage points (i.e., up to 100). In the last
two columns the dependent variable is the log of the dollar value of equity holdings (log(1+amount))
of the respondent. Control variables include net worth, which is the difference between the person’s
assets and debt (Columns 1-3), or the log value of assets and the log value of debt (Columns 4-5).
Balance sheet data is only available in the SCE Household Finance Survey. Standard errors are
corrected for heteroskedasticity and clustered at the respondent level. t-statistics are shown in
parentheses.*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                                EquityHoldings/                 Equity
                                                                  Assetsit if    Equity      Holdingsit (log)
                                   Invests in EquityHoldings/     Invests in    Holdingsit   if Invests in
                                   Equitiesit     Assetsit       Equitiesit = 1   (log)      Equitiesit = 1
  U ncertaintyit                   -1.294∗∗∗     -0.646∗∗∗         -0.894∗∗∗     -0.119∗∗∗      -0.120∗∗∗
                                     (-2.79)      (-3.96)            (-2.90)       (-2.80)        (-3.68)
  Income/10, 000it                 1.944∗∗∗      0.477∗∗∗             0.162       0.267∗∗∗      0.080∗∗∗
                                      (8.52)       (4.77)            (1.22)       (11.72)         (7.77)
  Collegeit                         5.217∗∗       1.569∗              0.955        0.481∗∗         0.146
                                      (2.54)       (1.69)            (0.73)        (2.35)         (1.55)
  Is W orkingit                    11.905∗∗∗      2.340∗∗             0.715         0.321         -0.147
                                      (5.00)       (2.46)            (0.47)        (1.38)         (-1.17)
  P(def ault3months)it             -0.169∗∗∗      -0.012              0.036      -0.012∗∗∗        -0.005
                                     (-3.57)      (-0.56)            (0.80)        (-2.68)        (-1.46)
  County % U nemplit                 -1.330∗      -0.186              0.148        -0.093          0.005
                                     (-1.79)      (-0.65)            (0.33)        (-1.29)        (0.15)
  Ageit                               -0.124      -0.001             -0.029         0.039          0.025
                                     (-0.30)      (-0.00)            (-0.11)       (0.97)         (1.29)
  Age2it                              0.001        0.000              0.000        -0.000         -0.000
                                      (0.19)       (0.01)            (0.17)        (-0.74)        (-0.69)
  F emalei                          -3.885∗∗     -2.721∗∗∗          -2.938∗∗     -0.688∗∗∗       -0.188∗∗
                                     (-2.04)      (-3.35)            (-2.52)       (-3.64)        (-2.13)
  W hitei                             -1.443      -0.228              0.191         0.070         0.312∗∗
                                     (-0.53)      (-0.20)            (0.11)        (0.27)         (2.09)
  Income Growth P t Estit             -0.078      -0.048             -0.076         0.006          0.001
                                     (-0.74)      (-1.45)            (-1.31)       (0.57)         (0.27)
  Expected Inf lationit             -0.644∗∗      -0.129              0.004       -0.051∗∗         0.005
                                     (-2.57)      (-1.43)            (0.02)        (-2.06)        (0.37)
  Expected N atnl Home P ricesit      0.116       -0.011             -0.027         0.005          0.011
                                      (0.54)      (-0.13)            (-0.17)       (0.25)         (1.07)
  N etW orthit                      1.560∗∗∗     0.492∗∗∗           0.224∗∗
                                      (8.24)       (5.85)            (2.25)
  Assetsit (log)                                                                  0.609∗∗∗       0.801∗∗∗
                                                                                  (20.34)        (19.90)
  Debtit (log)                                                                     -0.032       -0.034∗∗∗
                                                                                   (-1.22)        (-2.78)
  Year-Month FEs                      Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes
  County FEs                          Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes
  Adjusted R2                        0.21          0.12              0.06          0.36           0.52
  Observations                       2460          2460              1565          2460           1565




                                                     46
                                                         Table 10: Uncertainty in expectations versus risk preferences
     Risk tolerance is measured in the first month of participation in the core survey, as well as in the months when respondents also complete
     the household finance module. We use the former in Columns 1-4 and the latter in Columns 5-6, since the dependent variables there
     are obtained from the Household Finance module. Standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and clustered at the respondent
     level. t-statistics are shown in parentheses.*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                       W ill          P erceived         Invests     Equity Holdingsit if   % Chance P urchase   % Chance P urchase   % Chance P urchase   % Chance P urchase




47
                                                     Increase       F uture Credit         in             Invests in            Home Reno             V ehicles              T rips          Home Durables
                                   U ncertaintyit   Spendingit   M arket Conditionsit   Equitiesit      Equitiesit = 1       N ext 12 monthsit    N ext 12 monthsit    N ext 12 monthsit    N ext 12 monthsit
       U ncertaintyit                                -0.004∗          -0.024∗∗∗         -1.272∗∗∗          -0.117∗∗∗             -0.795∗∗∗            -0.636∗∗∗            -1.192∗∗∗             -0.212
                                                     (-1.88)            (-5.42)          (-2.69)            (-3.53)               (-3.22)              (-2.68)              (-4.34)              (-1.24)
       Risk T olerancei               -0.003          0.003            0.024∗∗∗
       f rom Core Survey              (-0.14)         (0.91)            (3.00)
       Risk T oleranceit                                                                 5.119∗∗∗          0.113∗∗∗               0.778∗               0.425               2.104∗∗∗             0.870∗∗∗
       f rom HH F inance M odule                                                          (8.21)            (3.66)                (1.82)               (1.04)               (4.28)               (3.07)
       Adjusted R2                      0.17           0.04              0.07             0.24               0.52                  0.07                 0.03                 0.19                 0.12
       Observations                    24021          24020             24015             2452               1560                  2568                 2568                 2568                 2568
Appendix
A. Eliciting point estimates and subjective distributions in the SCE
As an example we show the questions used in the SCE to elicit point estimates (first excerpt below) and
subjective distributions (second excerpt) regarding the change in national home prices over the 12 months
following the survey. The questions regarding the point estimates and distributions for personal income
growth, and for the rate of inflation, are constructed similarly to the questions regarding home prices.




                                                     48
B. Income bins
Below are the bins that respondents in the SCE use to report their total annual household income. The
same question is also asked to repeat respondents.




                                                     49
