NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BENCHMARK INCLUSION SUBSIDY
Anil K. Kashyap
Natalia Kovrijnykh
Jian Li
Anna Pavlova
Working Paper 25337
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25337

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018, Revised October 2020
We thank the Editor (Bill Schwert) and two anonymous referees for their excellent comments.
We have also beneﬁted from comments by Jan Bena, Jules van Binsbergen, Andrea Buﬀa, Hui
Chen, Simon Gervais, Denis Gromb, Marcin Kacperczyk, Steve Kaplan, Ralph Koijen, Felix
Kubler, Shohini Kundu, Ailsa Roell, Jeremy Stein, David Thesmar, Dimitri Vayanos, Rob
Vishny, Costas Xiouros, and seminar participants at ASU, Chicago Booth, LBS, NBIM,
Philadelphia Fed, University of Zurich, AFA 2020 Annual Meeting, the 5th BI-SHOF
conference, the 2019 Bank of England Research Forum on Macro-Finance, Cambridge Corporate
Finance Theory Symposium 2019, the 2019 European Winter Finance conference, ISF 2019, the
Macro Financial Modeling (MFM) Winter 2019 Meeting, Fall 2018 NBER Corporate Finance
Program Meeting, the 2019 NBER Long-Term Asset Management Meeting, the 2019 Paul
Woolley Centre conference, and the 2019 UBC Winter Finance conference. We thank Taisiya
Sikorskaya for excellent research assistance. This research has been supported by a grant from the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation to the MFM project at the University of Chicago. The views
expressed here are ours only and not necessarily those of the institutions with which we are
affiliated, nor National Bureau of Economic Research, and all mistakes are our own.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25337.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Anil K. Kashyap, Natalia Kovrijnykh, Jian Li, and Anna Pavlova. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Benchmark Inclusion Subsidy
Anil K. Kashyap, Natalia Kovrijnykh, Jian Li, and Anna Pavlova
NBER Working Paper No. 25337
December 2018, Revised October 2020
JEL No. G12,G23,G31,G32
ABSTRACT
We argue that the pervasive practice of evaluating portfolio managers relative to a benchmark has
real eﬀects. Benchmarking generates additional, inelastic demand for assets inside the
benchmark. This leads to a “benchmark inclusion subsidy:” a ﬁrm inside the benchmark values an
investment project more than the one outside. The same wedge arises for valuing M&A, spinoﬀs,
and IPOs. This overturns the proposition that an investment’s value is independent of the entity
considering it. We describe the characteristics that determine the subsidy, quantify its size (which
could be large), and identify empirical work supporting our model’s predictions.

Anil K. Kashyap
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@chicagobooth.edu
Natalia Kovrijnykh
Department of Economics
W. P. Carey School of Business
Arizona State University
P.O. Box 873806
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
Natalia.Kovrijnykh@asu.edu

Jian Li
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
5757 S. University Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
lijian@uchicago.edu
Anna Pavlova
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
UK
apavlova@london.edu

1

Introduction

The asset management industry is estimated to control more than $85 trillion worldwide.
Most of this money is managed against benchmarks. For instance, S&P Global reports
that in 2017, just under $10 trillion were managed against the S&P 500 alone. Existing
research related to benchmarking has largely focused on its asset pricing implications. Our
contribution is to study the implications of benchmarking for corporate decisions such as
investments, M&A, spinoﬀs, and IPOs. We argue that firms included in a benchmark are
eﬀectively subsidized by asset managers and so should evaluate investment opportunities
diﬀerently.
A familiar proposition states that the value of an investment is independent of the
entity considering it. We show that this result breaks down when some investors use
portfolio (or fund) managers, whose performance is measured against a benchmark. Instead,
the appropriate discount rate for an investment project diﬀers across firms, depending on
whether or not they are part of the benchmark. Specifically, when a firm adds risky cash
flows, say, because of an acquisition or by investing in a new project, the increase in the
stockholder value is larger if the firm is inside the benchmark rather than outside. We call
this the “benchmark inclusion subsidy.” Because of this subsidy, a firm in the benchmark
would accept cash flows with lower mean and/or larger variance than a non-benchmark
firm would.
The reason for this result is that benchmarking induces portfolio managers to hold some
shares of firms in their benchmarks regardless of those firms’ cash-flow characteristics. So
when a firm adds risky cash flows, the market demand for claims on these cash flows is
higher if the firm is inside the benchmark rather than outside. The firm, therefore, should
take this consideration into account in deciding on its investments, acquisitions and spinoﬀs.
These implications diﬀer from related research that identifies the eﬀect of benchmarking on
the value of securities associated with existing assets.
Here is how the model works. We introduce portfolio managers into a standard model,
extended to allow for investment and production. Some investors manage their own portfolios and others use managers. A portfolio manager’s compensation depends on performance
relative to a benchmark portfolio. This assumption, critical for our argument, is in keeping
with prevalent industry practices and evidence such as Ma et al. (2019). We show that
portfolio managers optimally choose to hold a combination of the standard mean-variance
portfolio and the benchmark portfolio—the latter appearing because of benchmarking in

2

their compensation. Specifically, managers hold a fixed part of their portfolio in benchmark firms regardless of their stock prices and cash-flow characteristics—most importantly,
irrespective of cash-flow variance. As a result, the equilibrium stock price of a firm in the
benchmark is less adversely aﬀected by the same cash-flow risk than that of an otherwise
identical firm that is outside the benchmark.
Within our production economy, we show that the same argument applies to risky
investments. Specifically, for a firm in the benchmark, risky investments are subsidized.
The extra variance of its cash flows resulting from the project will be penalized less than
that of an identical non-benchmark firm. This occurs because managers have an inelastic
demand for a fixed number of shares of benchmark firms, regardless of their risk. This
inelastic demand benefits riskier projects more. As cash-flow riskiness decreases, so does
the benchmark inclusion subsidy, converging to zero for risk-free projects.
A testable implication of the model is that because of the subsidy, a firm in the benchmark is more likely to invest. Likewise, a benchmark firm would also accept projects with
riskier cash flows.
To demonstrate these predictions in the most transparent way, we construct the simplest
possible example. In it, there are three firms with uncorrelated cash flows. Absent portfolio
managers, combining firms creates no value. With portfolio managers, a firm inside the
benchmark creates value when it takes over a firm that is outside the benchmark.
We then turn to an extended model with many firms whose cash flows are correlated.
Allowing for correlations brings out additional eﬀects and predictions. In particular, we find
that investments whose cash flows are positively correlated with those of the benchmark
firms are valued more. As in the economy with uncorrelated cash flows, portfolio managers’
excess demand for benchmark stocks raises those stocks’ prices. Now, the stock prices of
firms whose cash flows are positively correlated with those of the benchmark stocks also
rise. This happens because, in seeking exposure to the benchmark’s cash-flow risk, investors
substitute away from expensive benchmark stocks into stocks that are correlated with them.
This same reasoning means that investment projects or acquisitions that are positively
correlated with the benchmark are valued more by all firms (relative to an economy without
portfolio managers).
We show that the main mechanism that delivered the benchmark inclusion subsidy in
the example generalizes. The extended model also features an additional channel, owing
to the correlation of a project’s cash flows with those of the firm’s assets-in-place. We
demonstrate that if this correlation is positive, the value of the new asset to the benchmark
3

firm exceeds the asset’s value were it to join the benchmark as a standalone.
We derive a closed-form expression for the benchmark inclusion subsidy, which turns
out to be very simple, and study the variables that influence its size. We show that the
higher the cash-flow risk of an investment, the larger the benchmark inclusion subsidy.
Furthermore, the benchmark inclusion subsidy is increasing in the correlation of a project’s
cash flows with the existing assets; in particular, the subsidy is the largest for projects that
are clones of a firm’s existing assets. Finally, the size of the subsidy rises with the size of
the asset management sector.
The ability to characterize the exact determinants of the subsidy allows us to predict
the situations when benchmarking is the most and least important. To the best of our
knowledge, other theories do not deliver such cross-sectional predictions. We are able to
tie the size of the subsidy to characteristics of firms, investment opportunities, or potential
acquisitions or divestitures.
For M&A, we stress that a merger of a firm in the benchmark with a firm outside
creates value for stockholders. There are no cash-flow synergies, but there is a financial
synergy that comes from bringing the target into the benchmark. This contrasts with
textbook analyses arguing that such a merger creates no value. For IPOs, we highlight the
implication that an IPO would have a higher value if the stock joins the benchmark. For
spinoﬀs, we demonstrate that if an asset divested by a benchmark firm lands outside the
benchmark, it is stripped of the benchmark inclusion subsidy and hence its value drops.
It is worth noting that our model applies to both active and passive asset management.
We show that the benchmark inclusion subsidy is larger when more managers are passive
rather than active. While active managers in our model invest only a part of their portfolio
in the benchmark, passive managers invest their entire portfolio in it, which amplifies the
inelastic demand for stocks in the benchmark.
Our model also points to the importance of benchmark design for ESG (environmental,
social, and governance) funds. As long as a company with a low ESG score remains part
of the benchmark, it receives the benchmark inclusion subsidy. Dropping such “brown”
companies from the benchmark and replacing them with “green” companies not only gives
a cost-of-capital advantage to the green companies but also encourages other firms in the
economy to mimic the green companies. The latter implication is due to our result that
cash flows that are positively correlated with those of benchmark firms have higher values.
We attempt to quantify the size of the subsidy. Doing so requires us to pin down a
number of model parameters whose values are not obvious. However, the primary determi4

nant of the subsidy’s size is the amount of the inelastic demand that the portfolio managers
have for stocks inside the benchmark. According to the FactSet/LionShares database, in
2017, stocks belonging to the S&P 500 have institutional ownership of 83 percent, whereas
institutional ownership for the overall market is 67 percent. We take this gap to be indicative of the inelastic demand for benchmark stocks. When we ask the model to account for
this demand, as well as the relative size of firms inside and outside the benchmark, and
of estimates of the spread in market beta’s observed in the data, the implied subsidy is
94 basis points. We explore how alternative parameter choices change this number and
conclude that the subsidy could easily be large enough to be important for the kind of
corporate decisions that we have analyzed.
Finally, we briefly review existing empirical work that relates to the model’s predictions.
Past research confirms, to varying degrees, the predictions regarding the propensity to invest
and engage in acquisitions for benchmark vs. non-benchmark firms, the factor structure of
returns, as well as the size of the benchmark inclusion subsidy increasing in assets under
management.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we explain
how our perspective compares to previous work. Section 3 presents the example, and
Section 4 analyzes the general model. Section 5 describes how we quantify the size of the
subsidy. Section 6 reviews related empirical evidence. Section 7 presents our conclusions
and suggestions for future areas of promising research. Omitted proofs and derivations are
in the appendicies.

2

Related literature

Our paper revisits one of the main tenets of corporate finance that the value of an investment is independent of the entity considering it. This point is emphasized in leading
textbooks such as Berk and DeMarzo (2017) (chapter 19), Brealey et al. (2019) (chapter
19), and Grinblatt and Titman (2002) (chapter 13). There is a huge academic and applied
literature on capital budgeting (see, e.g. Stulz, 1999, Jacobs and Shivdasani, 2012, Dessaint
et al., 2018, for a range of representative studies). Finally, there is survey evidence (e.g.
Graham and Harvey, 2001) on how managers make such decisions. In these analyses, asset
management plays no role.
Our analysis shows that the textbook approach’s failure to properly account for the
eﬀects of asset management has important consequences for real corporate decisions. The
5

motivation for taking asset management seriously comes from the index additions and
deletions literature. Harris and Gurel (1986) and Shleifer (1986) were the first to document
that when stocks are added to the S&P 500 index, their prices rise. Subsequent papers
have also shown that firms that are deleted experience a decline in price. The findings have
been confirmed across many studies and for many markets, so that financial economists
consider these patterns to be stylized facts.1 The estimated magnitudes of the index eﬀect
vary across studies, and typically most of the eﬀect is permanent. For example, Chen
et al. (2004) find the cumulative abnormal returns of stocks added to the S&P 500 during
1989-2000, measured over two months post announcement, to be 6.2%.2
Several theories have been used to interpret the index eﬀect. The first is the investor
awareness theory of Merton (1987). Merton posits that some investors become aware of
and invest in a stock only when it gets included in a popular index. It is unclear why
investor awareness declines for index deletions, although there is evidence of a decrease in
analyst coverage. The second theory posits that index inclusions convey information about
a firm’s improved prospects. This theory has diﬃculty explaining the presence of index
eﬀects around mechanical index recompositions (see, e.g., Boyer, 2011, among others). The
third theory is that index inclusion leads to improved liquidity, and this in turn boosts
stock prices. This theory, however, does not explain increased correlations with other index
stocks (documented in, e.g., Barberis et al., 2005 and Boyer, 2011).
The final theory can be broadly described as the price pressure theory, proposed by
Scholes (1972). Scholes’ prediction is that prices of included stocks should rise temporarily,
to compensate liquidity providers, but should revert back as investors find substitutes for
these stocks. Subsequent literature has argued that the price pressure eﬀects could be
(more) permanent, driven by changing compositions of investors. Our model is broadly
consistent with the price pressure view. Our benchmarked managers put permanent upward
pressure on prices of stocks as long as they are in the benchmark. Despite any overpricing,
benchmarking creates a fixed demand for these stocks by a particular clientele, the portfoio
managers. Holding a substitute stock is costly for a manager because this entails a (risky)
deviation from her benchmark.
The index eﬀect literature only considers the average eﬀect of index inclusion. Our
1

See, e.g, Beneish and Whaley (1996), Lynch and Mendenhall (1997), Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002),
Chen et al. (2004), Petajisto (2011), and Hacibedel (2018).
2
Calomiris et al. (2019) find an index eﬀect for emerging market corporate bonds. They trace the rise
of the JP Morgan Corporate Emerging Market Bond Index and show how firms in countries that became
eligible change issuance patterns (to qualify for index inclusion) and pay lower yields on qualifying bond
issues.

6

theory has a host of cross-sectional predictions that one could potentially test. For example,
stocks with larger cash-flow variance should experience a larger index eﬀect. We also stress
that what matters for our channel is whether a stock is in the benchmark, not the index.
One can separate competing theories by studying stocks that are in the index but not the
benchmark (e.g., “sin” stocks, as analyzed in Hong and Kacperczyk, 2009).
Our work is also related to a theoretical literature in asset pricing that explores the eﬀects
of delegated asset management and benchmarking on stock returns and their comovement.
The first paper in this line of research is Brennan (1993), who derives a two-factor CAPM
in an economy with portfolio managers. Cuoco and Kaniel (2011), Basak and Pavlova
(2013), Buﬀa et al. (2014), and Buﬀa and Hodor (2018) show how benchmarking creates
additional demand for stocks included in the benchmark index, generating an index eﬀect.
Basak and Pavlova also derive excess comovement of index stocks, and Buﬀa and Hodor
introduce heterogeneous benchmarks and investigate the resulting rich structure of assetprice comovements within and across benchmarks. Greenwood (2005) considers a model
with passive indexers and arbitrageurs (who are like our direct investors) and shows that
an index reconstitution not only lifts prices of stocks added to the index but also those of
non-index stocks that are positively correlated with them. Kaniel and Kondor (2013) study
equilibrium trading strategies in an environment in which fund managers face a convex
flow-performance relation. This literature considers pure exchange economies and focuses
on the eﬀects on existing assets, while ours is a production economy, in which we study
the eﬀects of benchmarking on new assets that are created through investment and other
corporate decisions.
Kashyap et al. (2020) study the design of optimal (linear) contracts for portfolio managers and the resulting welfare implications. In contrast, this paper takes the contracts as
exogenous and looks at their implications for corporate decisions.
Our paper is perhaps most closely related to Stein (1996). He also studies capital budgeting in situations where the CAPM does not correctly describe expected stock returns.
He assumes, however, that the deviations are temporary and arise because of investor irrationality.3 If market participants fail to appreciate risk and allow a firm to issue mispriced
equity, he explains why rational managers may want to issue equity and invest, even if the
CAPM-based valuation of a project is negative. In our case, the price diﬀerences are not
due to irrationality; instead, they arise because of fundamental diﬀerences in demand from
3

van Binsbergen and Opp (2019) study the eﬀects of other anomalies that are associated with mispricing
on corporate decisions. However, they do not take a stand on the source of these anomalies.

7

diﬀerent types of investors. In Stein’s setup, the horizon that managers use for making
decisions is critical, and those that are short-term oriented will potentially respond to mispricing if it is big enough. In our model, all managers of firms in the benchmark should
account for the subsidy (for as long as the firm remains in the benchmark).4
Stein’s paper led to a number of follow-on studies that look at other potential behavioral
eﬀects that could be associated with inclusion in a benchmark (see Baker and Wurgler,
2013 for a survey). These papers contain much of the empirical work that we cite in
favor of our model. While we share several predictions with Stein (1996) there are some
notable diﬀerences. For instance, Stein’s model connects managerial time horizons and
financial constraints to capital budgeting decisions. Our model has nothing to say about
these considerations. However, we also have many implications that are distinct from his.
For instance, our closed-form expression for the benchmark inclusion subsidy generates a
number of predictions about which factors should lead firms in the benchmark to make
diﬀerent decisions than ones outside. On the whole, we see the behavioral theories and ours
complementing each other.

3

Example

To illustrate the main mechanism, we begin with a simple example with three firms with
uncorrelated cashflows. We first consider an economy populated by identical investors in
these firms who manage their own portfolios. We then modify the economy by introducing
another group of investors who hire portfolio managers to run their portfolios. Portfolio
managers’ performance is evaluated relative to a benchmark. We show that the presence
of portfolio managers changes some familiar corporate valuation principles.

3.1

Baseline economy

Consider the following environment. There are two periods, t = 0, 1. Investment opportunities are represented by three risky assets denoted by 1, 2, and y, and one risk-free bond. The
risky assets are claims to cash flows Di realized at t = 1, where Di ⇠ N (µi , i2 ), i = 1, 2, y,
and these cash flows are uncorrelated. We think of these assets as stocks of all-equity firms.
There is a risk-free bond that pays an interest rate that is normalized to zero. Each of the
4

This stands in contrast to the recent literature on mistakes that managers make in project valuation.
For example, Krüger et al. (2015) document that diversified firms appear to make investment decisions in
non-core businesses by using the discount rate from their core business.

8

risky assets is available in a fixed supply that is normalized to one. The bond is in infinite
net supply. Let Si denote the price of asset i = 1, 2, y.
There is measure one of identical agents who invest their own funds. Each investor has
a constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) utility function over final wealth W , U (W ) =
e W , where > 0 is the coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion. All investors are endowed
with one share of each stock and no bonds. At t = 0, each investor chooses a portfolio
of stocks x = (x1 , x2 , xy )> and the bond holdings to maximize his utility, with W (x) =
P
Si ).
i=1,2,y Si + xi (Di
As is well-known in this kind of setup, the demand xi for risky asset i and the corresponding equilibrium price Si will be
xi =

µi

Si
2
i

S i = µi

,

(1)

2
i

(2)

for i = 1, 2, y, where the second equation follows from setting the number of shares demanded equal to the supply (which is 1).5
When firms i 2 {1, 2} and y merge into a single firm, the demand for the combined
firm’s stock and the corresponding equilibrium stock price are
x0i =

µi + µy
( i2 +

Si0
,
2
y)

Si0 = µi + µy

(

(3)
2
i

+

2
y)

= S i + Sy .

(4)

Notice that the combined value of either firm is exactly equal to the sum of its initial value
plus the value of y. This is the familiar result that says that the owner of a firm does not
determine its value. Instead, the value arises from the cash flows and risks associated with
those cash flows, which are the same regardless of who owns them.

3.2

Adding portfolio managers

Now we extend the example by assuming that some investors hire portfolio managers to
manage their portfolios. There are now three types of agents in the economy, the same
investors as before who manage their own portfolios and whom we refer to as “direct”
5

We omit derivations for this simple example, but the analysis of our main model contains all proofs
for the general case.

9

investors from now on (constituting a fraction D of the population), portfolio (or fund)
managers (a fraction M ), and fund investors who hire those managers (a fraction F ).6
All agents have the same preferences (as in the prior example).
Fund investors can buy the bond directly, but cannot trade stocks; they delegate the
selection of their portfolios to portfolio managers. The managers receive compensation
w from shareholders. This compensation has three parts: one is a linear payout based
on absolute performance of the portfolio x, the second piece depends on the performance
relative to the benchmark portfolio, and the third is independent of performance.7 For
concreteness, suppose that the benchmark is simply the stock of firm 1. Then
w = arx + b(rx

rb ) + c = (a + b)rx

P
where a 0, b > 0 and c are constants, rx = i=1,2,y xi (Di
simplicity, we assume that a, b, and c are set exogenously.8
A direct investor’s demand for asset i continues to be
xD
i =

µi

Si
2
i

brb + c,
Si ) and rb = D1

, i = 1, 2, y.

(5)
S1 . For

(6)

A manager’s demands for stocks inside and outside the benchmark are
1 µ1
a+b
1 µi
=
a+b

xM
1 =
xM
i

S1
2
1

Si
2
i

+

b
,
a+b

, i = 2, y.

(7)
(8)

Managers’ portfolio choices diﬀer from those of the direct investors in two ways. First, they
hold a scaled version of the same mean-variance portfolio as the one held by the direct
investors. The reason for the scaling is that, as we can see from the first term in (5), for
each share that the manager holds, she gets a fraction a + b of the total return. Thus the
manager scales her asset holdings by 1/(a + b) relative to those of a direct investor.
Second, and more importantly, the portfolio managers are penalized by b for underperforming the benchmark. Because of this penalty, the manager always holds b/(a + b) shares
6

For simplicity, we assume that each fund investor employs one manager, so that M = F . (The
generalization to M 6= F is straightforward.) Furthermore, D + M + F = 1.
7
This part captures features such as a fee linked to initial assets under management.
8
Kashyap et al. (2020) endogenize optimal linear contracts for portfolio managers and show that benchmarking emerges as part of the optimal contract.

10

of stock 1 (or more generally whatever is in the benchmark), regardless of its risk-return
characteristics. This consideration explains the second term in (7). This inelastic demand
for the benchmark will be critical for all of our results. In particular, the managers’ incentive
to hold the benchmark portfolio (regardless of the risk characteristics of its constituents)
creates an asymmetry between stocks in the benchmark and all other stocks.
The second implication is very general and extends beyond our model with CARA
preferences. Having a relative performance component as part of her compensation exposes
the manager to an additional source of risk—fluctuations in the benchmark—which she
optimally decides to hedge. The manager would, therefore, hold a hedging portfolio that is
(perfectly) correlated with the benchmark, i.e., the benchmark itself.
Given the demands, we can now solve for the equilibrium prices. Using the marketD
clearing conditions, M xM
i + D xi = 1, i = 1, 2, y, we find
2
1

✓

S1 = µ1

⇤

S2 = µ 2

⇤ 22 ,

Sy = µy

⇤ y2 ,

1

b
M
a+b

◆

,

(9)
(10)
(11)

where ⇤ = [ M /(a + b) + D ] 1 modifies the market’s eﬀective risk aversion.
For concreteness, suppose that µ1 = µ2 and 1 = 2 so that the return and risks of
stocks 1 and 2 are identical. Our first noteworthy finding is that the share price of firm
1 that is inside the benchmark is higher than that of its twin that is not. This happens
because portfolio managers automatically tilt their demand towards the benchmark, eﬀectively reducing the supply of this stock by b/(a + b). The lower the supply of the stock (all
else equal), the higher must be its equilibrium price. Another way to understand the result
is that the managers’ inelastic demand for the benchmark means that the adverse eﬀects
of variance that typically reduce the demand for any stock, are less relevant for the assets
in the benchmark.9
Next, consider potential mergers. Suppose first that firm y is acquired by the nonbenchmark firm (firm 2). The new demands of direct investors and portfolio managers for
9

Notice that in this model the asymmetry between benchmark and non-benchmark stocks cannot be
arbitraged away. The direct investors are unrestricted in their portfolio choice and therefore can engage in
any arbitrage activity. However, as the managers permanently reduce the supply of the benchmark stock,
direct investors simply reduce their holdings of the benchmark stock and hold more of the non-benchmark
stock. As long as managers represent a meaningful fraction of the market (i.e., M is non-negligible), there
are always diﬀerences in prices of stocks inside and outside the benchmark.

11

the stock of firm 2 are
µ2 + µy S20
,
2
2
2 + y
1 µ2 + µy S20
.
=
2
2
a+b
2 + y

x0D
2 =

(12)

x0M
2

(13)

The new equilibrium price of firm 2’s stock is
S20 = µ2 + µy

2
2

⇤

+

2
y

(14)

= S 2 + Sy .

As before, the combined value of firm 2, continues to be the sum of the initial value plus
the value of y.
Suppose instead that y is acquired by firm 1, which is in the benchmark. Re-normalizing
the combined number of shares of firm 1 to one, the demands for the stock of the combined
firm are
µ1 + µy S10
,
2
2
1 + y
b
1 µ1 + µy S10
.
+
=
2
2
a+b
a+b
1 + y

x0D
1 =

(15)

x0M
1

(16)

Our next major finding is that there is a benchmark inclusion subsidy. Specifically, the
new price of firm 1’s shares is
S10

= µ1 + µy

⇤

2
1

+

2
y

✓

1

b
M
a+b

◆

= S 1 + Sy + ⇤

2
y M

b
,
a+b

(17)

which is strictly larger than the sum of S1 and Sy . So when a firm inside the benchmark
acquires y (which had been outside the benchmark), the combined value exceeds the sum of
the initial value plus the value of y.10 We refer to the increment as the benchmark inclusion
subsidy. This subsidy exists because portfolio managers’ demand for the benchmark is
partially divorced from the risk and return characteristics of the benchmark, and thus, this
kind of acquisition raises the value of the target firm. You can see this by noting that the
last term in (17) is proportional to the variance of y, y2 . This is because when y is acquired
by firm 1, a portion of managers’ demand for y becomes inelastic and independent of its
10

This result does not depend on the firm being entirely equity financed. We assume no debt financing
here just for simplicity.

12

variance. Hence, the market penalizes the variance of y’s cash flows less when they are
inside firm 1 rather than firm 2.
In contrast, notice that if firm y had started out inside the benchmark, then S10 would
be exactly equal to the sum of prices of stocks 1 and y. In that case, the inelastic demand
for the stock would already have been embedded in its price before the merger. So, the
extra value of acquisition that accrues to firm 1 relative to firm 2 arises from the increase
in the price of y when it becomes part of the benchmark.
To put this more formally, let Sy0 denote the price of y if it were inside the benchmark.
Then Sy0 Sy = ⇤ y2 M b/(a+b), which is precisely the extra term in equation (17). Notice
that this is directly related to the “index eﬀect” estimated in the literature, which is the
percentage change in a firm’s stock price when it joins the benchmark, and in our model is
Sy0

Sy
Sy

⇤ y2
=
Sy

M

b
,
a+b

(18)

where Sy is given by (11).
Thus, in this simple example, the benchmark inclusion subsidy reduces to the index
eﬀect for the target firm. As we will show in the general model in Section 4, if we allow for
any correlation between the acquirer’s and the target’s cash flows, the benchmark inclusion
subsidy will have an additional term accounting for the correlation. When the correlation
is positive, the subsidy exceeds the index eﬀect for the target firm.
It is worth noting that our model predicts that the index eﬀect is larger for firms with
riskier cash flows. This can be seen from equation (18), where the index eﬀect is increasing
in y2 , even after controlling for the stock price before the inclusion. The literature so far has
focused on estimating the average index eﬀect. In contrast, our model makes cross-sectional
implications about how the index eﬀect varies with firms’ risk characteristics.
Finally, the impact of portfolio managers can also work in the other direction, reducing
valuations of spinoﬀs and divestitures. If y had been part of a firm inside the benchmark
and is sold to a non-benchmark firm, the value of y would drop when it is transferred.
In the next section, we consider a richer version of the setup that allows us to analyze
several additional questions. Based just on this extremely simplified example, however, we
already have seen two empirical predictions. First, consistent with the existing literature
on index inclusions, we see that there should be an increase in a firm’s share price when
it is added to the benchmark. We view this as a necessary condition for the existence of
the benchmark inclusion subsidy. In our framework, the stock price increase would remain
13

present for as long as the firm is part of the benchmark.
The other, more novel, prediction is related to acquisitions (and spinoﬀs). If a firm
that has not previously been part of the benchmark is acquired by a benchmark firm,
its value should go up purely from moving into the benchmark. This breaks the usual
valuation result which presumes that an asset purchase that does not alter any cash flows
(of either the target or acquirer) should not create any value. Alternatively, if a firm were
spun-oﬀ so that it moves out of the benchmark, its value should drop even though its cash
flows are unchanged. Furthermore, these kinds of transactions also have non-trivial welfare
implications, see Subsection 4.6 and Appendix C.
Our results in this paper depend on the compensation contract having a non-zero value
of b. There is both direct empirical evidence and strong intuitive reasons for why this
assumption should hold. For instance, U.S. mutual funds are required to include a “Statement of Additional Information” in the prospectus that describes how portfolio managers
are compensated. Ma et al. (2019) collect this information for active U.S. equity mutual
funds and find more than three quarters of the funds explicitly base compensation on performance relative to a benchmark. To see why these results are expected, consider any
portfolio manager that runs multiple funds with diﬀerent characteristics, for instance, a
bond fund and an equity fund. To compensate the portfolio managers of each fund, the
simple returns cannot be meaningfully compared because of the diﬀerences in risk. However, if each fund’s performance is adjusted for a benchmark for its type, then the relative
performances can be compared. So, it is hardly surprising that the use of benchmarks is so
pervasive and our assumption concerning b is not controversial.

4

The general model

We now generalize the example studied in Section 3 in several directions. All results from
the previous section hold in this richer model. To analyze a new implication for investment,
we will assume that y is not traded initially. So our economy becomes a production economy
in which y is interpreted as a potential project.
We will only describe elements of the environment that diﬀer from those described in the
previous section. There are n risky stocks, whose total cash flows D = (D1 , . . . , Dn )> are
jointly normally distributed, D ⇠ N (µ, ⌃) , where µ = (µ1 , . . . , µn )> , ⌃ii = Var(Di ) = i2 ,
and ⌃ij = Cov(Di , Dj ) = ⇢ij i j . We assume that the matrix ⌃ is invertible. Stock prices
are denoted by S = (S1 , . . . , Sn )> . For simplicity of exposition and for easier comparison
14

to Section 3, we normalize the total number of shares of each asset to one. However, for
generality, all of our proofs in Appendix A are written for the case when asset i’s total
number of shares is x̄i .
Some stocks are part of a benchmark. We order them so that all shares of the first k
stocks are in the benchmark, and none of the remaining n k stocks are included. Thus,
the ith element of the benchmark portfolio equals the total number of shares of asset i
times 1i , where 1i = 1 if i 2 {1, . . . , k} and 1i = 0 if i 2 {k + 1, . . . , n}. Denote further
1b = (11 , . . . , 1n )> = (1, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0)> .
| {z } | {z }
k

n k

We follow the convention in the literature (see, e.g., Buﬀa et al., 2014) by defining
S)
rx = x> (D S) to be the performance of portfolio x = (x1 , . . . , xn )> and rb = 1>
b (D
to be the performance of the benchmark portfolio. Then the compensation of a portfolio
manager with contract (a, b, c) is w = arx + b(rx rb ) + c.11
D >
M
M >
Denote by xD = (xD
= (xM
1 , . . . , xn ) and x
1 , . . . , xn ) the optimal portfolio choices
of a direct investor and a portfolio manager, respectively.
Lemma 1 (Portfolio Choice). Given asset prices S, the demands of a direct investor
and a portfolio manager are given by
xD = ⌃
xM =

1µ

1
⌃
a+b

S

(19)

,

1µ

S

+

b
1b .
a+b

(20)

The demands generalize those from the example exactly as would be expected. In particular, the direct investors opt for the mean-variance portfolio and the portfolio managers
choose a linear combination of that portfolio and the benchmark. The fact that part of the
managers’ portfolio is invested in the benchmark regardless of prices or other characteristics
of these assets will again be crucial for our results below.
An extreme form of our manager is a passive manager—someone who faces a very high
b, which incentivizes her to hold just the benchmark portfolio and severely punishes any
deviations from it. All of our results hold in this special case, which we discuss in Subsection
4.5.
Using (19) (20) and the market-clearing condition M xM + D xD = 1 ⌘ (1, . . . , 1)> ,
11

In Appendix B we repeat all of the analysis for the case where a portfolio manager’s compensation is
tied to the per-dollar return on the benchmark rather than the per-share return (performance) and confirm
that our key results continue to hold.

15

we have the following result:
Lemma 2 (Asset Prices). The equilibrium asset prices are
S = µ

✓

◆
b
1b .
M
a+b

⇤⌃ 1

(21)

Equation (21) is a generalization of equations (9) (10). As before, the price of a benchmark firm is higher than it would be for an otherwise identical non-benchmark firm. The
reason is that, as Lemma 1 shows, managers demand a larger amount of the stock in the
benchmark.

4.1

Investment

Suppose there is a project with cash flows Dy ⇠ N (µy , y2 ), and Corr(Di , Dy ) = ⇢iy for
i = 1, . . . , n. Investing in this project requires spending I. If firm i (whose cash flows are
⇣
⌘>
(i)
(i)
denote
Di ) invests, its cash flows in period 1 become Di + Dy . Let S (i) = S1 , . . . , Sn
the stock prices if firm i invests in the project. The firm finances investment by issuing
equity.12 That is, we assume that if firm i invests in the project, it issues i additional
(i)
shares to finance it, where i Si = I. If firm i is in the benchmark, then the additional
shares enter the benchmark.
To proceed, suppose firm i (and only firm i) invests in the project. Then the new cash
flows are D(i) = D + (0, ..., 0, Dy , 0, ..., 0)> , distributed according to N µ(i) , ⌃(i) , where
|{z}
i

µ(i) = µ + (0, ..., 0, µy , 0, ..., 0)> and
|{z}
i
0
⌃(i)

B
B
B
B
=⌃+B
B⇢1y
B
B
@

⇢1y

0

1 y

0

...

2
y

..
.

1 y

+ 2⇢iy
..
.

⇢ny

Denote I (i) = (0, ..., 0, |{z}
I , 0, ..., 0)> .

n y

1

0
i y

... ⇢ny

0

n

C
C
C
C
C
yC .
C
C
A

(22)

i

12

As in the example, the results that follow hold even if the firm uses some debt financing. For instance,
the size of the benchmark inclusion subsidy is literally identical even if the firm has risk-free debt.

16

Lemma 3 (Post-Investment Asset Prices). The equilibrium stock prices when firm i
invests in the project are given by
S

(i)

(i)

= µ

I

(i)

⇤⌃

(i)

✓

◆
b
1b .
M
a+b

1

The change in the stockholder value of the investing firm i,
S i = µy

I

2
y

⇤
⇤

+ ⇢iy

n
X

⇢jy

j=1

i y

j y

✓

1

✓

1

(i)

Si ⌘ Si

◆
b
1i
M
a+b
◆
b
1j .
M
a+b

(23)
Si , is

(24)

The first two terms in the first line of (24) are the expected cash flows of the project
net of the cost of investment, and the remaining terms reflect the penalty for risk. It is
evident from (24) that this penalty diﬀers if i is part of the benchmark, so it will turn out
to be subject to the benchmark inclusion subsidy that we have already seen in the example
in Section 3.
Notice that the terms on second line of (24) are the same regardless of the identity
of the investing firm. When any firm invests in a project positively correlated with the
benchmark, this firm’s cash flows become more correlated with the benchmark. The presence of managers makes stocks that covary positively with the benchmark more expensive
relative to what they would have been in the economy with only direct investors.13 This
happens because the investors substitute from the expensive stocks in the benchmark to
stocks that are correlated with it. A similar logic applies to new investment projects that
are correlated with the benchmark: relative to the economy without portfolio managers,
firms have a higher valuation for projects whose cash flows are positively correlated with
cash flows of benchmark firms. This force, not present in Section 3, applies to all firms contemplating investment, including the non-benchmark ones. We comment further on how it
aﬀects firms’ investment incentives at the end of this subsection.
We are now ready to derive the benchmark inclusion subsidy in this generalized setting.
Consider incentives of firm i to invest in a project. It will do so if its stockholder value
goes up as a result of the investment, that is, if Si > 0. Consider two firms, iin and
13

See also Lemma 4 in Appendix A that formally derives the two-factor CAPM in our environment, where
the stock’s expected returns depend on the covariance with the market portfolio as well as covariance with
the benchmark.

17

iout , one in the benchmark and the other is not (i.e., iin  k and iout > k). Suppose that
their cash flows with and without the project are identical; specifically, iin = iout =
and ⇢iin y = ⇢iout y = ⇢y . The diﬀerence in the incremental stockholder value created by the
investment for the two firms is
Siout = ⇤(

Siin

2
y

+ ⇢y

y) M

b
.
a+b

(25)

The right hand side of (25) is the analytical expression for the benchmark inclusion subsidy.
Assumption 1.

2
y

+ ⇢y

y

> 0.

So long as Assumption 1 holds, the benchmark inclusion subsidy is positive, and the
increase in the stockholder value for the firm in the benchmark is larger than that for the
firm outside the benchmark.
In practice one would expect Assumption 1 to hold for most investments. A typical
project that a firm undertakes is similar to its existing activities. Even if a project is
diversifying, it is still typically positively correlated with the firm’s original cash flows.
The more general structure that we consider in this section allows us to fully characterize
the benchmark inclusion subsidy in (25) and to derive additional implications relative to
Section 3. Notice that the subsidy is the sum of two terms. The first term, ⇤ y2 M b/(a+b),
is the one that we have already seen in Section 3. It essentially captures the “index eﬀect”
for project y, since the investment eﬀectively moves y’s cash flows in the benchmark.14 The
second term, ⇤⇢y y M b/(a + b), is new. (Recall that ⇢y = 0 in the example in Section 3
with uncorrelated cash flows, so this term was missing in the example.) It is proportional to
the covariance between the existing and new cash flows, ⇢y y , and so we refer to this term
as the “covariance subsidy.” Intuitively, when the existing and new cash flows are positively
correlated, the covariance increases the overall variance of post-investment cash flows. And
because the cash-flow variance is penalized less for firms that are inside the benchmark, the
subsidy increases in the covariance. If ⇢y is positive, the covariance subsidy is positive and
hence, the benchmark inclusion subsidy exceeds the index eﬀect. The covariance subsidy is
the largest when ⇢y = 1, so that y is a clone of the existing assets. Moreover, assuming that
14

Technically speaking, if firm y were to join the index as a standalone firm and firm k gets pushed
Sy =
out from the index as a result, then the index eﬀect (in absolute terms) for firm y would be Sy0
⇤( y2 ⇢ky k y ) M b/(a + b). (We discuss this in more detail in the context of IPOs in Subsection 4.3.)
Since in our setup the eﬀective “index inclusion” of y happens as a result of investment or merger, no other
firm is removed from the index, and hence the expression for the benchmark inclusion subsidy does not
include the ( ⇢ky k y ) term.

18

the correlation ⇢y is large enough and the variance of existing cash flows exceeds that of the
new cash flows, i.e., > y (both are empirically reasonable assumptions), the covariance
subsidy exceeds the index eﬀect.
Keeping in mind that the benchmark inclusion subsidy arises from taking a diﬀerencein-diﬀerences, we can further explain the terms that comprise it. The managers subsidize
the variance of a benchmark firm’s post-investment cash flow, which is i2 + y2 + 2⇢iy i y .
The first term, i2 , washes out of the first diﬀerence given by equation (24) because it
is present for the benchmark firm pre- and post-investment. Furthermore, the subsidy
includes only one covariance term ⇢iy i y , not two. This is because any firm, either inside
the benchmark or not, receives a subsidy for the covariance with the benchmark (one can
see this from the second line of (24), which is the same for all firms). That is, projects with
a positive covariance with the benchmark are more valuable, even if a non-benchmark firm
undertakes them. This is because prices of benchmark stocks are inflated by the inelastic
demand from portfolio managers, which leads direct investors (and managers through their
mean-variance portfolios) to substitute into assets that provide exposure to the benchmark
without being in the benchmark itself. Consequently, of the two covariances that enter the
extra variance, one is subsidized regardless of which firm invests and the other is subsidized
only when the investing firm is a benchmark firm. Hence, one of the two covariances drops
out from the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences.
The presence of the benchmark inclusion subsidy translates into diﬀerent investment
rules for firms inside and outside the benchmark. We formalize this result in Proposition 1.
Proposition 1 (Project Valuation). A firm in the benchmark is more likely to invest
in a project than a firm outside the benchmark if and only if Assumption 1 holds. More
precisely, all else equal, a firm in the benchmark accepts projects with a lower mean µy ,
larger variance y2 , and/or larger correlation ⇢y than an otherwise identical firm outside the
benchmark if and only if Assumption 1 holds.
Proposition 1 is at odds with the textbook treatment of valuation taught in basic corporate finance courses. The usual rule states that a project’s value is independent of
which firm undertakes it, and is simply given by the project’s cash flows discounted at
the project-specific (not firm-specific) cost of capital.15 In a world with benchmarking, the
proper discount rate for a project depends on whether the firm undertaking it belongs to
the benchmark.
15

See for example Jacobs and Shivdasani (2012) or Berk and DeMarzo (2017), chapter 19.

19

The reason why a project is worth more to a firm in the benchmark than to one outside
it is because when the project is adopted by the benchmark firm, it is incrementally financed
by portfolio managers regardless of its variance. So, the additional overall cash-flow variance
that the project generates is penalized less for a firm inside the benchmark.
To further understand the importance of the variance, consider a special case where the
project is risk free, i.e., y2 = 0. Then Assumption 1 fails and we can see that the project
would be priced identically by all firms.
Remark 1 (Risk-Free Projects). If y2 = 0, then a firm’s valuation of project y is
independent of whether this firm is included in the benchmark or not.
We can build further intuition about the model by considering what happens when the
inequality in Assumption 1 is reversed. This happens if the project is suﬃciently negatively
correlated with the cash flows of assets in place, that is, if ⇢y 
y / . In this case, a
project is a hedge because it reduces the variance of a firm’s cash flow. Firms inside the
benchmark benefit less from this reduction because their cash-flow variance is subsidized
by managers and they lose some of that subsidy.16 Consequently, a benchmark firm will
value such a project less than a non-benchmark firm would.
Finally, as we mentioned earlier, our model also implies that projects correlated with
assets inside and outside the benchmark are valued diﬀerently (by firms both inside and
outside the benchmark). Projects that are positively correlated with the benchmark provide alternative cheaper exposure to the benchmark firms’ cash flows. This is reflected
in equation (24), which shows that for any firm, investing in a project that is positively
correlated with a component of the benchmark is more beneficial than if the project has
the same degree of correlation with an asset outside of the benchmark.
To illustrate this insight graphically, Figure 1 plots the change in the stockholder value
Si given by (24) as a function of ⇢jy , where the solid line corresponds to some asset j
inside the benchmark, and the dashed line to some j outside the benchmark. In the figure,
for concreteness, the investing firm i is in the benchmark. If i were outside the benchmark,
these lines would shift down in parallel.
The figure shows that the change in stockholder value, Si , is decreasing in the correlation coeﬃcient ⇢jy . If j is in the benchmark, then the downward sloping line is flatter.
Moreover, the solid line is above the dashed line for positive correlations and below for
negative correlations. This is because positive (negative) correlation of the project with an
16

Notice that when
 ⇢y 
y/
y /(2 ), although the investment reduces the firm’s cash-flow
variance, the benchmark inclusion subsidy is positive.

20

asset in the benchmark is penalized (rewarded) less than the same correlation with an asset
outside the benchmark.

Figure 1: Change in the stockholder value, Si , as a function of correlations of
project y’s cash flows with cash flows of assets inside and outside the benchmark,
⇢jy for some j  k and some j > k.
Parameter values: n = 5, k = 3, µy = 1.2, I = 1,
horizontal axis, ⇢j` = 0, ` 6= j, j = 1, . . . , n, = 2,
Solid line: j = 2. Dashed line: j = 4.

j

= 0.15, y = 0.1, ⇢jy = 0 unless it is plotted on the
M = 0.3, a = 0.008, b = 0.042. Investing firm: i = 1.

Remark 2 (Relevance for ESG investing). Because of the impact of benchmarks on
investment decisions, our model also speaks to the ongoing debate over the eﬃcacy of ESG
(environmental, social, and governance) benchmarks. First, the model suggests a direct
eﬀect: an exclusion of companies with poor ESG characteristics in the benchmark denies
such companies the benchmark inclusion subsidy, and therefore these companies would not
be able to grow as much. Second, there is an indirect eﬀect: having a company with poor
ESG characteristics (e.g., highly polluting) in the benchmark encourages all firms to make
investments in projects whose cash flows are positively correlated with those of the poor ESG
company in the benchmark (i.e., highly polluting). In contrast, replacing such company
in the benchmark with a firm with a higher ESG score (e.g., with low emissions) would
encourage firms outside the benchmark to mimic such a firm instead.
Discussions about benchmarking often revolve around the possibility that it leads to
more correlation in risk exposures for the people hiring portfolio managers. Our model
points to an additional source of potential correlation generated by benchmarking. Because
21

benchmarking leads to higher valuations of stocks that are correlated with the benchmark, it
induces firms—both inside and outside the benchmark—to take on more fundamental risk
that is correlated with the benchmark (relative to the economy without benchmarking).
Thus, our model predicts that cash flows in the economy with managers endogenously
become more homogeneous/correlated with each other.
In practice, the criterion for equity benchmark inclusion is often based on firms’ market
capitalization. In our model, firms that are already in the benchmark benefit from the
benchmark inclusion subsidy and invest more than their twins outside the benchmark.
Firms in the benchmark, therefore, grow faster than their peers outside. This would make
the benchmark composition persistent.
4.1.1

Cost of capital

Notice that the benchmark inclusion subsidy is directly related to the project-specific cost of
capital for an investment. Define firm i’s cost of capital, applied to the investment project
y, ri , by Si = I + µy /(1 + ri ), where Si , defined in (24), measures the increase in
stockholder value from adopting the project. Then the diﬀerence in the cost of capital for
firms outside and inside the benchmark is
rout

rin =

µy
Sout + I

µy
µy ( Sin
Sout )
=
.
Sin + I
( Sin + I)( Sout + I)

(26)

Notice that unlike (25), which is measured in dollars, (26) is unit-free (or can be expressed
in percent). For that reason, we will use (26) for the quantitative analysis in Section 5.

4.2

Mergers and acquisitions

As we have seen in the example considered in Section 3, the model can also be used to
think about mergers and acquisitions.
Proposition 2 (Mergers and Acquisitions). Suppose firm i considers acquiring firm y
that is outside the benchmark, and y2 + ⇢iy i y > 0. Then firm i is more likely to acquire y
if firm i is inside the benchmark than if it is outside. More precisely, all else equal, a firm
in the benchmark will acquire an asset with a lower mean µy , larger variance y2 , and/or
larger correlation ⇢y than a firm outside the benchmark if and only if y2 + ⇢iy i y > 0 holds.
The logic behind this statement is identical to the reasoning that leads to the bias in
investment. If a benchmark firm acquires y, it gets the benchmark inclusion subsidy. Again,
22

this result is in contrast to the direct wisdom about the role of financing synergies in the
evaluation of potential acquisitions. For example, if a firm has unused debt capacity, it
might choose to use more debt financing than otherwise to buy another firm. The usual
view is that the discount rate used to value the cash flows of the target firm should not be
altered by the availability of the extra debt funding. The case for not adjusting the discount
rate is that the same additional debt funding could have been used for any other potential
acquisition. So, it would be a mistake to say that any particular target company is a more
attractive firm to acquire just because some low-risk debt could be issued to finance the
purchase.
In our setup, there is a more fundamental synergy that is responsible for lower financing
costs. Because the managers will want to purchase part of any stock that is issued to undertake the transaction, those savings should be accounted for. The size of the subsidy will
depend on the parameters that appear in Assumption 1. Thus, for example, all else equal,
the higher the correlation of the cash flows of the target firm with the acquiring benchmark firm, the larger the financing advantage associated with that acquisition. Conversely,
a hedging acquisition by a firm in the benchmark, where the target firm’s cash flows are
negatively correlated with acquirer’s, always comes with a lower subsidy.
Proposition 2 works in reverse for spinoﬀs and divestitures. Specifically, assuming that
the condition y2 + ⇢iy i y > 0 is satisfied, a division y is worth more if it is part of a
firm inside the benchmark than if it is spun oﬀ and trades as a separate entity outside the
benchmark or is sold to a firm outside the benchmark.
Finally, if firms i and j are both in the benchmark and i > j , then the subsidy will
be bigger for i than for j. The diﬀerence arises because the subsidy for the variance of the
cash flows added in the merger depends on the variance of existing cash flows.

4.3

IPOs and incentives to join the benchmark

Suppose y is now a standalone firm, which is held privately by direct investors and is
considering an IPO. We demonstrate that y’s incentive to go public depends on whether it
will be included in the benchmark.
We consider two scenarios. In the first scenario, when firm y becomes public and gets
included in the benchmark, no other firm leaves the benchmark. Most of the best known
stock indices in the world have a fixed number of firms. Thus in the second scenario, if y
joins the benchmark, then firm k is removed, so that the number of firms in the benchmark
remains constant.
23

Proposition 3 (IPOs and Benchmarks). Consider a privately-held firm y contemplating
an IPO.
(i) It is more profitable for firm y to proceed with an IPO if it gets included in the
benchmark and no other firm leaves the benchmark, than if it is does not get included
in the benchmark.
(ii) It is more profitable for firm y to proceed with an IPO if it gets included in the
benchmark and firm k is removed from the benchmark, than if it does not get included
in the benchmark, if and only if y2 ⇢ky k y > 0.
The argument for the result in part (i) is the same as for other results in the paper—firm
y gets the benchmark inclusion subsidy if it joins the benchmark. In part (ii) where y pushes
another firm out of the benchmark, there is an additional consideration, as firm y loses part
of the benchmark subsidy coming from its correlation with that firm. In other words, when
firm y is included in the benchmark and firm k is pushed out, firm y’s correlation with
the benchmark increases by y2 because firm y is correlated with itself (and it enters the
benchmark), and is reduced by ⇢ky k y because firm k drops out of the benchmark. The
net subsidy is therefore proportional to y2 ⇢ky k y .
One could apply the above argument to any firm, not just a newly listed one. A firm
is worth more inside the benchmark rather than outside. So, there is an added benefit to
any corporate action that results in the firm’s benchmark inclusion—for example, aimed at
increasing the firm’s size or meeting other criteria for benchmark inclusion. The costs of
taking such action of course have to be outweighed by the benchmark inclusion subsidy, but
a clear empirical prediction emerging from this discussion is that firms with good prospects
of benchmark inclusion have an incentive to alter their behavior in order to gain membership
in the benchmark. Similarly, benchmark firms that are close to the threshold for exclusion,
have incentives to engage in potentially costly corporate actions that ensure that they retain
their benchmark membership.
Remark 3 (Subsidy and Stock Return Volatility). While past research (e.g. Basak
and Pavlova, 2013) have found that benchmarking alters volatilities of stock returns, that
channel is absent in our main model. One question that might arise is whether accounting
for this eﬀect would change the analysis. In Appendix D, we extend our model to three
periods and adopt a discrete-time square-root specification for the dividend process from
Buﬀa et al. (2014), which delivers nontrivial second-moment implications in the presence
24

of benchmarking.17 We show that volatilities and correlations of per-share returns of stocks
inside the benchmark are higher than those outside the benchmark. We also show that if
benchmark inclusion increases stock return volatility, this force in isolation dampens the
benchmark inclusion subsidy. Intuitively, since investors are risk averse, the higher the
stock return volatility, the lower the stock price. Therefore, in the presence of portfolio
managers, stock prices are inflated but not as much as in our baseline model. Following
the same logic, when two firms adopt the same project, the firm inside the benchmark also
experiences a larger increase in stock return volatility. As a result, this channel (in isolation)
contributes to a smaller subsidy.18 However, volatility also aﬀects the subsidy in other ways,
for instance, because it also changes the level of stock prices, so the total eﬀect of volatility
on the subsidy is diﬃcult to sign.

4.4

Comparative statics with respect to

M

In this subsection we analyze the benchmark inclusion subsidy as a function of the size
of the asset management sector. Consider (25), and rewrite it recognizing that ⇤ =
[ M /(a + b) + D ] 1 and D = 1 2 M :
Siin

Siout =



1+

1

2
M

M

1

(a + b)

b

2
y

+ ⇢y

y

.

(27)

Notice that this expression is strictly increasing in M . This means that the eﬀects described
in this paper related to the diﬀerence in valuations by a firm inside the benchmark relative
to a firm outside the benchmark become larger as the size of the asset management sector
increases. Similarly, the diﬀerence in the cost of capital for new investments of a firm
outside the benchmark relative to one inside it becomes larger as M rises.

4.5

Passive asset management

As we mentioned earlier, a limiting case of our setup when b ! 1 corresponds to having
passive asset management. In this case, it is easy to see that managers hold only the
benchmark portfolio, i.e, xM = 1b . A generalization of our model would be to include both
active and passive managers. If we denote the fractions of them in the economy by A
M and
17

While the model is tractable and delivers closed-form expressions for the quantities of interest, the
complexity of the expressions rises significantly relative to our main model.
18
In practice, however, stocks inside the benchmark (e.g., the S&P 500) have higher liquidity, which
lowers their return volatility. This eﬀect works in the opposite direction to the one we identified above.

25

P
M,

then the equilibrium stock prices would be
✓

⇤⌃ 1

S=µ
where ⇤ =

⇥

A
M /(a

+ b) +

D

⇤

1



A
M

b
+
a+b

P
M

◆

1b ,

(28)

.

All of our results extend to this case. Passive managers hold benchmark stocks irrespective of their characteristics, and they invest nothing in the mean-variance portfolio. Therefore, with passive managers the benchmark inclusion subsidy becomes even
larger.19 In particular, instead of the expression in (25), the subsidy becomes ⇤( y2 +
⇤
⇥
P
⇢y y ) A
M b/(a + b) + M . The following proposition shows that this value is increasing
if more managers are passive.
Proposition 4 (Passive Asset Managment). The benchmark inclusion subsidy is larger
P
A
when PM / A
M is larger, holding M + M constant.
An analogous comparative-statics statement applies to the diﬀerence in the cost of
capital for new investments of a firm outside vs. inside the benchmark—this diﬀerence is
P
A
increasing in PM / A
M holding M + M constant.
One could argue that an increase in passive management comes not only from a (relative)
decrease in active managers, but also from a reduction in agents who previously did not
participate in the market, but now invest through passive funds. It is straightforward to
incorporate such a dimension in our above extension. Specifically, denote the measure of
the non-participating group (or “outsiders”) by O , and let O + PM + A
M + F + D = 1. As
everywhere above, we maintain the assumption that the measure of managers of each type is
A
equal to the measure of investors of the same type. Replacing PM with (1
D
O )/2
M
in the above expressions, it is straightforward to show that more participation in the riskyasset market through passive investment increases the subsidy.20

4.6

Welfare considerations

A natural question that arises from our analysis is what are the welfare implications of
the benchmark inclusion subsidy? A short answer is that welfare eﬀects of the benchmark
19

In a recent paper, Buss and Sundaresan (2020) propose an interesting complementary channel, based
on information acquisition, through which passive ownership aﬀects firms’ investment.
20
As the measure of non-participants O decreases, half of them are moved to passive fund managers
and half are moved to passive fund investors.

26

inclusion subsidy are ambiguous. The details of our analysis are in Appendix C, here we
provide a brief summary.
First, note that due to the subsidy, agents who are initially endowed with a large (small)
amount of the benchmark firm’s stock benefit (lose) from the subsidized increase in the price
of this stock following an investment or merger. However, this eﬀect is purely distributive,
representing movement along a Pareto frontier, so it washes away in the aggregate.
Second, the question of whether the aggregate social welfare increases or decreases as a
result of the subsidy is much more subtle. Appendix C illustrates the issues using a simple
version of our model with uncorrelated assets and mergers considered in Section 3. We
show that when a non-benchmark firm 2 acquires firm y, the agents’ utilities (and hence
the aggregate welfare) remain unchanged. However, when the benchmark firm 1 makes
the acquisition, part of cash-flow risk is reallocated from the direct investors and managers
to fund investors. The impact of changing the risk-sharing in this way depends on the
parameters of the compensation contract and, depending on those parameters, this could
raise or lower overall welfare.
The above results are derived for mergers, where the total cash flows in the economy
are kept unchanged. With investment, total cash flows change as a result of an investment,
and a benchmark firm will invest in projects that a non-benchmark firm will not. This will
introduce an additional consideration into the analysis that further clouds the ability to
determine the aggregate eﬀect on welfare.

5

Quantitative analysis

One obvious question is whether the benchmark inclusion subsidy is quantitatively relevant
for corporate actions? While the CARA-normal framework is widely used because of the
tractable formulas that it delivers, it is well-understood that using it for quantitative analysis is challenging. Recognizing these issues, here is an indicative calculation of the potential
eﬀect of the subsidy on the cost of capital.
We intend to measure the diﬀerence in the cost of capital for a project undertaken by
a firm in the benchmark and a firm outside the benchmark, as computed in equation (26).
In practice, criteria for benchmark inclusion are typically based on market capitalization,
and we will construct our benchmark that way too. From Ken French’s website, we obtain
10 portfolios formed on size, which consist of U.S. stocks sorted into the NYSE size deciles.
We set n = 10, with each asset representing a corresponding size portfolio. In what follows,
27

the properties of each of the 10 assets are computed using equal weights for the constituent
stocks that the asset represents. We assume the benchmark is the S&P 500, which includes
only a subset of U.S. stocks. The three largest NYSE deciles contain about 500 stocks, and
we therefore set k = 3, i.e., the first three assets are in the benchmark and the remaining
ones are outside. The ten assets diﬀer not only in terms of their market capitalization, but
also in terms of their market betas. We therefore specify the cash flow process so that it
will generate both types of heterogeneity. In particular, we assume that

where Z ⇠ N (0,

⇥
Di = ↵i0 µ̄ + ↵i1 Z + 1

⇤
↵i1 "i ,

i = 1, . . . , 10,

(29)

is a common factor and "i ⇠ N (0, "2 ) is an idiosyncratic shock.
The parameter ↵i0 captures asset i’s size and ↵i1 governs its exposure to systematic vs.
0
1
) and ↵1 = (↵11 , . . . , ↵10
).
idiosyncratic risk. We define ↵0 = (↵10 , . . . , ↵10
Table 1 reports the parameter values that we use along with the intuition for how they
2
z)

were chosen. Of course, all the parameters interact to determine the model outcomes, so
the rationale listed in the table for how each is chosen is subject to that caveat.
The size of the subsidy depends only on the relative sizes of the various assets. So we
normalize the size of the market capitalization of the largest asset to be 1, i.e. ↵10 = 1. We
then calibrate the remaining ↵i0 , i = 2, . . . , 10, so that the relative market capitalizations of
the other nine assets (compared to the first asset) match the December 2018 data on their
relative market capitalizations.
To infer the relative importance of aggregate and idiosyncratic risk we proceed as follows.
We set ↵11 = 0.1.21 We then calibrate the remaining ↵i1 , i = 2, . . . , 10, so that the market
betas of assets 2 10 in the model match the estimated market betas of the nine portfolios
(based on monthly data from 1926-2018). The regressions that are used to estimate the
betas also give us estimates of each asset’s idiosyncratic risk, which on average is 3.5%. We
use this average to choose the variance of the idiosyncratic risk in (29).
We infer the market’s eﬀective risk aversion, ⇤, and the standard deviation of common
factor, z , in (29) by choosing values that will match the market risk premium and the
volatility of returns on the market portfolio of 7.7% and 19.7%, respectively, that are
reported by Brealey et al. (2019), Chapter 7 (for the period 1900-2017). In the CARAnormal setup, the level of the cash-flow mean µ̄ in (29) does not make a diﬀerence for the
estimated cost of capital.
21

For the calculations, choosing any number between 0 and 1 would be make no diﬀerence. This normalization simply pins down the level of "2 .

28

Table 1: Parameter Values
Parameter
↵0

Value

Explanation
0.1024,

For the largest asset, ↵10 is normalized to be

0.0605, 0.0382, 0.0251,

1; the other 9 are chosen to match data for

0.0165, 0.0104, 0.0053,

estimates of size ratios of deciles 2-10 relative

0.0011)

to decile 1: (0.1914, 0.1008, 0.0594, 0.0373,

(1,

0.1936,

0.0245, 0.0161, 0.0101, 0.0051, 0.0011)
↵1

0.1224,

↵11 is set to be 0.1; the other 9 are chosen to

0.1269, 0.1317, 0.1342,

match estimates of market betas for deciles

0.1386, 0.1442, 0.1510,

2-10: (1.0914, 1.1407, 1.1852, 1.2339, 1.2600,

0.1504)

1.3047, 1.3634, 1.4344, 1.4280 )

(0.1,

⇤

0.1174,

Chosen to match the market risk premium of

0.2789

7.7%
2
z

Chosen to match the standard deviation of

316.33

return on the market of 19.7%
2
"

Chosen to match the average idiosyncratic

0.0957

risk of the average asset (across the size portfolios), 3.5%
M /(a

+ b)

0.302

Chosen to match the equally-weighted institutional ownership of all stocks in the market,
67%

b⇣

1.9

Chosen to match the equally-weighted institutional ownership of benchmark stocks, 83%

A critical determinant of the subsidy is the level of inelastic demand from the portfolio
managers. To quantify this we turn to data on institutional ownership from the FactSet/LionShares database, available from WRDS for 2000-2017. Consistent with our model,
in the data the institutional ownership of stocks in the benchmark (the S&P 500) exceeds
that of stocks outside the benchmark. The (equally-weighted) ownership of the stocks in the
benchmark (deciles 1-3) as of December 2017 is 83% while that of the whole market is 67%.
P
Pn M
1
In the model, these two quantities correspond to k1 ki=1 xM
i and n
i=1 xi , respectively
(recall that we normalized the total supply of each stock to one).
A well-known issue with the CARA utility is that it implies that there are no wealth
eﬀects. The standard solution to this problem in this kind of exercise is to adjust the risk
29

aversion of agents so that an agent with higher wealth (e.g., a large fund manager) has
a lower risk aversion and therefore buys more risky assets. This approach appropriately
adjusts the first term in the manager’s demand for risky assets in (20), the mean-variance
portfolio, but not the second term, the inelastic demand due to benchmarking. The latter
does not scale with wealth (or assets under management) simply because, as is standard in
CARA models, we define relative performance as a per-share measure. In Appendix B, we
define relative performance as a per-dollar return and show that it implies that the inelastic
demand does scale with assets under management, as it would in practice. We introduce
this type of wealth eﬀect by multiplying the inelastic demand by a parameter ⇣.22 Then
the manager’s demand and the asset prices become
1
⌃
a+b

xM =
S=µ
In light of this, we set b⇣ and

1µ

✓

⇤⌃ 1

M /(a

b⇣
1b ,
a+b
◆
b⇣
1b .
M
a+b

S

+

(30)
(31)

+ b) so that we match the data on institutional

ownership.
We imagine a hypothetical firm, which does not belong to the benchmark, but has the
same characteristics (size and beta) as firms represented by asset 3, i.e., the bottom of the
S&P 500. We think of this experiment as contrasting similar firms, where one is in the
S&P 500 and its twin is not. We assume that the investment project under consideration
is a clone of the investing firm, ⇢y = 1, as would be the case if a firm opened a new plant,
and that the size of the project µy / y is 1% of the firm’s expected cash flows. Under these
assumptions, the diﬀerence in the cost of capital for new investments for the hypothetical
outside firm and the one inside the benchmark as measured by (26) is 94 basis points.23 Our
model implies that if the asset management sector is larger (the institutional ownership of
stocks in the benchmark is higher), the subsidy will be larger. In the data, we see a steady
increase in the institutional ownership of U.S. stocks over the past three decades. Table 2
explores how our diﬀerences in the cost of capital estimates vary with the institutional
ownership of the benchmark and the market. Our baseline estimate is at the center of the
table. The diﬀerence in the cost of capital is the highest when the diﬀerence between the
P
The parameter ⇣ corresponds to W0M / i 1i x̄i Si in Appendix B—see, e.g., equation (B.1) —which is
the value of assets under management divided by the benchmark market capitalization.
23
This number is in line with Calomiris et al. (2019), who estimate the yield discount for emerging
markets investment grade corporate issues eligible for index inclusion to be between 76 to 99 basis points
in recent data.
22

30

Table 2: The benchmark inclusion subsidy and institutional ownership. This table
presents a sensitivity analysis of the diﬀerence in the cost of capital for new investments (in basis points)
for identical firms outside vs. inside the benchmark, as institutional ownership varies. Each of the identical
firms has the characteristics of asset 3. The top 3 size deciles of stocks are in the benchmark.

Institutional ownership of the market
59%

67%

75%

Institutional

75%

67

35

0

ownership of

83%

133

94

51

the benchmark

91%

260

215

159

institutional ownership of the benchmark and the market is the highest (because this gap
reflects the managers’ inelastic demand). The other limiting case is when the institutional
ownership of the benchmark and the market are the same, in which case the subsidy is
zero. This can happen in our model if the benchmark and the market portfolios coincide
or if the manager’s contract does not include a relative performance component (b = 0).
In unreported analysis, we perform similar experiments assuming that the hypothetical
firm is a twin of asset 1 or asset 2 instead of asset 3. In those experiments, the diﬀerence in
the cost of capital is higher than our baseline estimate, and it is larger for bigger firms. This
is because bigger firms have larger cash flow volatility, and from the previous analysis we
know that larger volatility firms enjoy a higher benchmark inclusion subsidy. Conversely,
if the project under consideration is not a clone of the investing firm’s assets, then the
subsidy will be smaller. This follows from the earlier discussion in Subsection 4.1 about the
magnitude of the covariance subsidy.
As a robustness check, we explore how the subsidy changes if the benchmark is broader
than the S&P 500 and closer to the market portfolio. To do so, we consider the Russell 1000
as the benchmark instead of the S&P 500. It turns out that the (equally-weighted) institutional ownership of the Russell 1000 stocks is the same as that for the S&P 500, which
is 83%.24 We recalibrate the model and target the same moments as in the original calibration, except the top 5 size deciles of stocks are now in the benchmark instead of top 3
(k=5). We find that in the Russell 1000 calibration, the diﬀerence in the cost of capital for
24

The estimate is as of December 2017. We again use data on institutional ownership from the FactSet/LionShares database, available from WRDS for 2000-2017.

31

the firm just outside the benchmark relative to that just inside is lower, amounting to 60
basis points in the baseline case (compared to 94 basis points in the S&P 500 calibration).
The reason is that the smallest firm included in the Russell index is smaller than that for
the S&P 500 index—has a lower cash-flow variance—and the lower the variance, the lower
the subsidy.
In our calibration we have assumed there is only one benchmark. The key driver of the
results, however, is the empirical diﬀerence in the level of institutional ownership between
the S&P 500 firms and the non-S&P 500 firms. That gap reflects the inelastic demand
from portfolio managers created by membership in the S&P 500. Our calibration strategy
is valid even if there are other benchmarks that firms belong to. In particular, if there
were a second benchmark, the total market index, to which all firms belonged, then our
calibration would be literally identical. All that would change is the interpretation of the
results. In this case, we would have the incremental subsidy that the smallest S&P 500 firm
receives relative to a twin firm that is in the total market index but not in the S&P 500.
We recognize that there is a fair bit of uncertainty about many of the objects that
we would need to know in order to accurately estimate the subsidy. We consider this
quantification to merely be indicative and to show that it is reasonable to think the subsidy
could be quantitatively relevant for corporate decisions.

6

Related empirical evidence

We now turn to the empirical evidence that is related to the predictions of our model.
In keeping with the presentation in Section 4, we organize the discussion around three
predictions of the model. The first implication of our model is that upon inclusion in a
benchmark, there should be an increase in a firm’s stock price. This prediction is not original, but our theory does imply that there is an important distinction between a benchmark
and an index. The second one is that firms inside the benchmark should be more prone to
invest and to engage in mergers. Third, the subsidy should be higher when there are more
assets under management.

6.1

Benchmark eﬀect

Consistent with the empirical evidence, our model generates an index eﬀect. Stock price
changes are symmetric for index additions and deletions and the eﬀect persists for as long
32

as the stock is in the index. We also have a more subtle prediction: the share price response
should depend on becoming part of a benchmark and not just because of being added to
an index. In most cases, separating the eﬀect of being in the index and benchmark is
challenging. One exception arises for firms that operate in so-called “sin” industries, such
as alcohol, tobacco and gaming. Large firms in these industries would be included in indices
such as the S&P 500, Russell 1000 or FTSE 100, but are deemed odious by some investors
and hence excuded from their benchmarks. Hong and Kacperczyk (2009) study the returns
of these sin firms and find that sin firms earn higher expected returns than comparable
firms by about 26 basis points per month—i.e. roughly 3% per year. They also estimate
the diﬀerences in the levels of stock prices for sin stocks and a matched sample of non-sin
stocks and find that sin firms are valued between 15 to 20 percent lower.
Hong and Kacperczyk’s results about sin stocks have also subsequently been confirmed
in several studies.25 As noted in Remark 2, these studies also have implications for the
construction of ESG benchmarks.

6.2

Changes in corporate actions following benchmark inclusion

There are some papers that attempt to assess whether the model predictions regarding
investment and mergers hold for benchmark firms versus non-benchmark firms. This is
challenging because ideally one wants to control for both the selection into the benchmark
and all the other factors that influence these kinds of expenditures.26
There are five papers that we are aware of that attempt to measure these eﬀects and
all find some evidence in favor of our model’s predictions. Massa et al. (2005) compare
222 firms that were added to the S&P 500 with a control set of firms that were not and
find that inclusion is associated with higher levels of equity issuance and more investment,
with a substantial portion of the investment coming via increased mergers. Vijh and Yang
25

See Fabozzi et al. (2008), Statman and Glushkov (2009), and Kim and Venkatachalam (2011) for
evidence of superior performance of sin stocks, as well as Blitz and Fabozzi (2017) who caution that the
performance of sin stocks can be explained by two new quality factors.
26
For example, consider the evidence in Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017). They document that higher
institutional ownership accompanies lower investment. They stress, however, that it is diﬃcult to establish
causality without any plausibly exogenous movement in ownership. Their preferred interpretation is that
investment is crowded out by higher payouts, though they admit this could be due to a preference by
institutional firms to find firms with high payouts. In Gutiérrez and Philippon (2018) they attempt to
isolate variation in payout variation that can be ascribed to ownership structure. They find that controlling
for cash flows (and other firm-specific variables), the higher ownership induced payouts are associated with
lower investment. Of course, the sources and uses of funds accounting identity may also lead to this kind
of pattern in the data.

33

(2008) also document that firms in the S&P 500 undertake significantly more acquisitions,
in line with our model’s predictions. These findings hold after they account (as much as
they can) for observable diﬀerences in target and acquirer characteristics, though it is hard
to know whether the controls are truly adequate.
Third, there are a pair of papers that investigate how inclusion in the Morgan Stanley
Capital International (MSCI) All Country World Index—a benchmark for many international equity funds—alters the behavior of firms that join the index. Luong et al. (2017)
show that higher foreign ownership shares that are related to index inclusion are associated
with higher levels of research and development (as measured by patents). It is common
to use research and development indicators as a proxy for corporate risk-taking (see, e.g.
Coles et al., 2006 and Gormley et al., 2013). This evidence is consistent with the model
prediction that a firm inside the benchmark would accept riskier projects than an otherwise
identical firm outside the benchmark would. Kacperczyk et al. (2019) also show that firm
investment rates rise upon being included in the MSCI benchmark. They find that measures of corporate governance do not seem to change when ownership changes, casting some
doubt on that potential explanation for the eﬀect. This result is also consistent with the
predictions of our theory, but a skeptic might argue that index inclusions are not entirely
exogenous events.
Finally, further evidence comes from Bena et al. (2017). They study diﬀerences in
investment and employment for firms across 30 countries between 2001 and 2010. Their
basic regression relates capital expenditures relative to assets (or the number of employees)
to institutional ownership by foreign investors and a host of firm-level controls (including
sales, Tobin’s Q, and cash holdings). Like the previous two papers, they instrument for
the ownership variable using additions to the MSCI ACWI index. They find a large,
statistically significant eﬀect of the benchmark additions on investment, employment and
R&D. Importantly, the results are also present when they restrict the analysis to firms
that are close to the cutoﬀ for inclusion in the index and when they estimate the eﬀects of
inclusion using a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence experimental design.

6.3

Variation in the subsidy size

A number of well-known empirical results can be reinterpreted as evidence that the benchmark inclusion subsidy increases with the size of the asset management sector, M . There
are two types of studies that are relevant. One set studies index eﬀects, which we reviewed
in Section 2. By and large, this literature finds that the index eﬀect (and hence the subsidy)
34

has been rising over time (e.g., Chen et al., 2004). Since the asset management sector has
also been growing, this evidence is consistent with our predictions. Much of this evidence,
however, is for the S&P 500 index inclusions, and there is a confounding problem that there
may be changes to cash flows or stock liquidity associated with the S&P 500 membership
(see Denis et al., 2003).
The second set of papers exploit the cutoﬀ between the Russell 1000 and Russell 2000
indexes to identify price pressure from index funds and ETFs following these indices.27 The
Russell 1000/2000 cutoﬀ separates firms with very similar market values and stock liquidity.
Chang et al. (2015) study firms that transition between the Russell 1000 and 2000. As they
note, when a firm’s fortunes improve, the company will move from the Russell 2000 to
the Russell 1000, but when this happens, the institutional demand for the stock will drop
(because more managers are benchmarked against the Russell 2000). The authors find
that despite the improved fundamentals, their share price drops by about 5% from the
rebalancing. Conversely, firms that fall into the Russell 2000 see price increases by about
5%.
Finally and most importantly, Pavlova and Sikorskaya (2020) test a version of our theory
that accounts for the fact that there are multiple benchmarks.28 One of their objectives is
to show that stocks with higher inelastic demand from fund managers have lower expected
returns. Pavlova and Sikorskaya’s measure of funds’ inelastic demand for a stock is the
cumulative weight of the stock in all benchmarks, weighted by assets under management
following each benchmark. They refer to it as the benchmarking intensity (BMI), and
construct it using a dataset of 33 U.S. equity indices. Exploiting the discontinuity in the
BMI of stocks at the Russell 1000/2000 cutoﬀ, they show that an increase in a stock’s BMI
leads to lower long-run returns. This is direct evidence in favor of our theory.

7

Concluding remarks

We have seen that for firms that are part of a benchmark, the inelastic demand for their
shares by portfolio managers lowers their cost of capital for investments, mergers, and IPO
decisions. We have specific cross-sectional predictions for the size of this eﬀect. While there
27

Our model implies that the price pressure comes not just from passive funds and ETFs, but, importantly, also from active funds, which control a larger fraction of assets under management benchmarked to
these indices.
28
See also Cremers et al. (2012) for a multi-benchmark model that explains the cross-section of mutual
fund returns.

35

is empirical evidence that speaks to some of these predictions, there are others that have
yet to be tested. One obvious direction for future work would be to fill in these gaps.
For instance, there are many claims by practitioners (e.g. McKinsey on Finance, 2004)
that a strong motive for undertaking an IPO is to become part of a benchmark. We believe
no one has tested this hypothesis. Despite the practitioner attention, this implication is
not part of the very long list of commonly cited reasons by economists that are usually
considered.29 So there would be some novelty value to confirming the model prediction.
More importantly, international diﬀerences create variation in IPO incentives that would
make it possible to cleanly uncover the predicted eﬀect. Specifically, not only do diﬀerent
exchanges have diﬀerent requirements about how many shares have to be floated, but the
relevance of benchmarks also varies across markets. So, the ease of qualifying for a public
listing across markets will diﬀer from the size of the subsidy implied by our theory. This
should make it feasible to test the theory.
It would also be interesting to test the model’s predictions about how the presence
of benchmarks can alter the incentives regarding mergers. We saw that the benchmark
inclusion subsidy is larger (smaller) for targets whose cash flows are more positively (negatively) correlated with the acquiring firm. While there is a large literature studying merger
patterns, we believe this somewhat unusual prediction of our theory has not been investigated. Furthermore, our model may suggest an alternative explanation for the rise in the
industry concentration (“monopolization”) in the U.S. over the past 15 years.30 A significant driving force behind this phenomenon is mergers. According to our model, firms in
prominent benchmarks (e.g., the S&P 500) value targets outside the benchmark above their
standalone values, and the valuation gap increases with the size of the asset management
sector. Perhaps the rapid growth of the asset management industry over the last 15 years
has contributed to the increased merger activity.
Another model prediction is that firms—both inside and outside the benchmark—are
rewarded for taking on more fundamental risk that is correlated with the benchmark (relative to the economy without benchmarking). Thus, our model predicts that cash flows in
the economy with portfolio managers endogenously become more homogeneous/correlated
29

For example, Celikyurt et al. (2010) observe that “in theory, an IPO creates liquidity for the firm’s
shares, provides an infusion of capital to fund growth, allows insiders to cash out, provides cheaper and
ongoing access to capital, facilitates the sale of the company, gives founders the ability to diversify their
risk, allows venture capitalists and other early stage investors to exit their investment, and increases the
transparency of the firm by subjecting it to capital market discipline.”
30
See David Leonhardt, “The Monopolization of America”, The New York Times, November 25, 2018,
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/25/opinion/monopolies-in-the-us.html.

36

with each other. This force could eventually subtly change business-cycle dynamics. However, this eﬀect will take time to play out, so finding an empirical strategy to identify it
will be challenging.

Appendix A
In the main text, for simplicity of exposition we normalize the total supply of shares of
each asset to one. Here, to show that this is innocuous, we suppose that stock i has a total
supply of x̄i shares. The per-share cash flow of asset i is then Di /x̄i .
Proof of Lemma 1. Denote by x̂`i the fraction of shares of asset i that agent ` 2 {D, M }
>
holds, i.e., x̂`i = x`i /x̄i . Let x̂` = x̂`1 , . . . , x̂`n , ` 2 {D, M }, and x̄ = (x̄1 , . . . , x̄n )> .
Then the maximization problem of a direct investor with x̂D = z is the same as that of a
portfolio manager with (a + b)x̂M b1b = z and can be written as maxz E exp{ (z(D
x̄ · S))}, where x̄ · S = (x̄1 S1 , . . . , x̄n Sn )> . It is well known that when asset returns are
normally distributed, the optimization of an agent with CARA preferences is equivalent to
the following mean-variance problem:
max z > (µ
z

The optimal solution is z = ⌃ 1 (µ

2

(32)

z > ⌃z.

x̄ · S)/ . Thus we have

x̂D = ⌃
x̂M =

x̄ · S)

1µ

1
⌃
a+b

x̄ · S
1µ

(33)

,
x̄ · S

+

b
1b .
a+b

(34)

When x̄ = 1 ⌘ (1, . . . , 1)> , x̂` = x` for ` 2 {D, M } and we have equations (19) and (20).
⇤
Proof of Lemma 2. Using the market-clearing condition M x̂M +
the vector of the total share value of the firms
◆
✓
b
1b ,
x̄ · S = µ
⇤⌃ 1
M
a+b

D x̂

D

= 1, we have

(35)
⇤

This gives us (21) when x̄ = 1.

Proof of Lemma 3. Suppose firm i adopts the project. Then the total number of shares
37

(i)

(i)
i Si

of asset i becomes x̄i = x̄i + i , where
From (35) we know that
(i)

x̄

·S

(i)

=µ

(i)

(i)

= I, and x̄j = x̄j for j 6= i.

(i)

✓

⇤⌃

(i)

⇤⌃

◆
b
1b .
M
a+b

1

(36)

Finally, using the definition of x̄(i) , we have
x̄ · S

(i)

=µ

(i)

(i)

I

✓

1

◆
b
1b ,
M
a+b

✓

1

b
1j
M
a+b

(37)

which simplifies to (23) when x̄ = 1.
The ith element of x̄ · S is
x̄i Si = µi

⇤

n
X

⇢ij

i j

j=1

and the ith element of x̄ · S (i) is
(i)
x̄i Si

= µi + µy

I

⇤

n
X

2
y

⇤
[⇢ij

i j

⇤

2
y

+ ⇢iy

+ ⇢jy

✓

1

i y

j y]

j=1

✓

1

◆

◆
b
1i
M
a+b
◆
b
1j .
M
a+b

(38)

(39)

Subtracting (38) from (39) yields
x̄i Si = µy

I

⇤

+ ⇢iy

n
X

⇢jy

✓

1

i y

j y

j=1

✓

1

◆
b
1i
M
a+b
◆
b
1j ,
M
a+b

(40)

which is (24) when x̄i = 1. For iin 2 {1, . . . , k} and iout 2 {k + 1, . . . , n} we have
x̄iin Siin

x̄iout Siout = ⇤(

2
y

+⇢

y) M

b
.
a+b

(41)
⇤

Proof of Proposition 1. The result follows immediately from (25) (or its analog (41)).
⇤
38

Proof of Proposition 2. The only essential diﬀerence with the proof of Lemma 3 that
implies Proposition 1 is that when firm y is traded before the merger, then (38) becomes
x̄i Si = µi

⇤

"

n
X

⇢ij

i j

j=1

✓

b
1j
M
a+b

1

◆

+ ⇢iy

i y

#

(42)

.

Subtracting this from (39) (and removing the explicit cost of investment), obtain
x̄i Si = µy

⇤
n
X

⇤



2
y

⇢jy

+ ⇢iy
j y

j=1

= µy

⇤
n
X

⇤

2
y

✓

1
2
y

+ ⇤

⇢jy

j=1

j y

i y

✓

b
1
1i
M
a+b
◆
b
1j
M
a+b

◆

⇢iy

i y

b
1i
a+b
◆
b
1j .
M
a+b

+ ⇢iy

✓

1

i y

M

(43)

Thus (41) in this case is
x̄iin Siin

x̄iout Siout = ⇤

2
y

+ ⇢iin y

iin y

M

b
,
a+b

(44)

and x̄iin Siin > x̄iout Siout () y2 + ⇢iin y iin y > 0. Notice that unlike in Proposition 1,
⇤
we do not need to assume that iin = iout and ⇢iin y = ⇢iout y .
Proof of Proposition 3. (i) Suppose firm y issues x̄y shares when it goes public (in the
main text we normalized x̄y to one). The stock price of firm y if it is not included in the
benchmark is
"
✓
◆#
n
X
b
1i
.
(45)
⇤ y2 +
⇢iy i y 1
x̄y Syout = µy
M
a
+
b
i=1
The price of firm y if it enters the benchmark and no other firm leaves it, is
x̄y Syin = µy

⇤

(

Taking the diﬀerence, x̄y Syin

2
y



n

1

X
b
+
⇢iy
M
a+b
i=1

Syout = ⇤

2
y M b/a

39

i y



+ b > 0.

1

b
1i
M
a+b

)

.

(46)

(ii) The price of firm y if it replaces firm k in the benchmark is
x̄y Ŝyin = µy

⇤

("

2
y

+

k 1
X

⇢iy

i y

i=1

⇣
Taking the diﬀerence, x̄y Ŝyin
Syout () y2 ⇢ky k y > 0.

#✓

⌘
Syout = ⇤

1

2
y

◆

b
M
a+b
⇢ky

+

n
X

M b/(a

k y

⇢iy

i y

i=k

)

.

(47)

+ b) > 0. Thus Ŝyin >
⇤

Proof of Proposition 4. The subsidy is
Siout = ⇤(

Siin
Using ⇤ =

⇥

A
M /(a

+ b) +

Siin

D

⇤

1

2
y

+ ⇢y

and expressing

Siout = (

2
y

+ ⇢y

= (

2
y

+ ⇢y

y)

A
M



A
M

= (1

b
((1
a+b
y) 1
((1
a+b
b
(1
a+b
y) 1
(1
a+b

b
+
a+b
D )/2

D )/2
D )/2
D )/2

+

D )/2

+

(48)

P
M

.

P
M,

the subsidy becomes

P
P
M) + M
P
M) + D
b
P
1 a+b
M
1
P
D
a+b M

The numerator is increasing and the denominator is decreasing in
constant.

P
M

.

(49)

while holding

D

⇤

Lemma 4 below demonstrates, the standard CAPM does not hold in our environment.
The standard CAPM applies only in the special case in which no managers are present
( M = 0 and D = 1). Otherwise, the stocks’ expected returns depend on two factors, the
usual market portfolio and the benchmark.31
Lemma 4 (Two-Factor CAPM). Asset returns Ri = Di /Si , i = 1, . . . , n, can be
characterized by32
b
E(Ri ) 1 = im m
(50)
i b , i = 1, . . . , n,
where
m
i

=

Cov(Ri , Rm )
,
V ar(Rm )

b
i

=

Cov(Ri , Rb )
, i = 1, . . . , n,
V ar(Rb )

31

(51)

This result has been obtained in Brennan (1993).
The left-hand side of equation (50) contains the return in excess of the (gross) return on the risk-free
bond, where the latter is normalized to one in our model.
32

40

and m > 0 and b > 0 are the market and benchmark risk premia, and Rm and Rb are
the market and benchmark returns, respectively,
Pn
Dj
j=1 Dj
= Pn
,
Rm =
x̄j Sj
j=1 x̄j Sj
j=1
Pk
n
X
D
j
j=1 Dj
!jb
= Pk
,
Rb =
x̄
S
j
j
x̄
S
j
j
j=1
j=1
n
X

(52)

!jm

(53)

P
where !im = x̄i Si / nj=1 x̄j Sj , i = 1, . . . , n, denote the market portfolio weights and !ib =
P
1i x̄i Si / nj=1 1j x̄j Sj , i = 1, . . . , n, denote the benchmark portfolio weights.

Proof of Lemma 4. To show (50), recall that E(Ri ) = µi /(x̄i Si ). Take the i-th row of
(21), divide both sides by x̄i Si and rearrange terms to get
E(Ri )

1= ⇤

n
X

k

x̄j Sj Cov(Ri , Rm )

j=1

n

b X
⇤ M
x̄j Sj Cov(Ri , Rb )
a + b j=1

X
Cov(Ri , Rm )
=
Var(Rm ) ⇤
x̄j Sj
Var(Rm )
j=1
Cov(Ri , Rb )
Var(Rb ) ⇤
Var(Rb )

=

m
j m

where m = Var(Rm ) ⇤

Pn

j=1

b
j b ,

x̄j Sj , b = Var(Rb ) ⇤

41

k

b X
x̄j Sj
M
a + b j=1
Pk

j=1

x̄j Sj

(54)
M b/(a

+ b).

⇤

References
Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2013. Behavioral corporate finance: an updated survey. Handbook
of the Economics of Finance 2, 357–424.
Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Wurgler, J., 2005. Comovement. Journal of Financial Economics
75, 283–317.
Basak, S., Pavlova, A., 2013. Asset prices and institutional investors. American Economic
Review 103, 1728–1758.
Bena, J., Ferreira, M., Matos, P., Pires, P., 2017. Are foreign investors locusts? The
long-term eﬀects of foreign institutional ownership. Journal of Financial Economics 126,
122–146.
Beneish, M., Whaley, R., 1996. An anatomy of the “S&P Game”: the eﬀects of changing
the rules. Journal of Finance 51, 1909–1930.
Berk, J., DeMarzo, P., 2017. Corporate Finance. Pearson Education, 4th Edition.
van Binsbergen, J. H., Opp, C. C., 2019. Real anomalies. Journal of Finance 74, 1659–1706.
Blitz, D., Fabozzi, F. J., 2017. Sin stocks revisited: resolving the sin stock anomaly. Journal
of Portfolio Management 44, 105–111.
Boyer, B. H., 2011. Style-related comovement: fundamentals or labels? Journal of Finance
66, 307–332.
Brealey, R., Myers, S., Allen, F., 2019. Principles of Corporate Finance. McGraw-Hill Irwin,
13th Edition.
Brennan, M., 1993. Agency and asset pricing, UCLA Working Paper.
Buﬀa, A., Vayanos, D., Woolley, P., 2014. Asset management contracts and equilibrium
prices, NBER Working Paper 20480.
Buﬀa, A. M., Hodor, I., 2018. Institutional investors, heterogeneous benchmarks and the
comovement of asset prices, Working Paper.
Buss, A., Sundaresan, S., 2020. More risk, more information: how passive ownership can
improve informational eﬃciency, Working Paper.
42

Calomiris, C., Larrain, M., Schmukler, S., Williams, T., 2019. The search for yield in large
international corporate bonds: investor behavior and firm responses, NBER Working
Paper 25979.
Celikyurt, U., Sevilir, M., Shivdasani, A., 2010. Going public to acquire? The acquisition
motive in IPOs. Journal of Financial Econonimcs 96, 345–363.
Chang, Y.-C., Hong, H., Liskovich, I., 2015. Regression discontinuity and the price eﬀects
of stock market indexing. Review of Financial Studies 28, 212–246.
Chen, H., Noronha, G., Singal, V., 2004. The price response to S&P 500 index additions
and deletions: evidence of asymmetry and a new explanation. Journal of Finance 59,
1901–1929.
Coles, J., Daniel, N., Naveen, L., 2006. Managerial incentives and risk-taking. Journal of
Financial Economics 79, 431–468.
Cremers, M., Petajisto, A., Zitzewitz, E., 2012. Should benchmark indices have alpha?
Revisiting performance evaluation. Critical Finance Review 2, 1–48.
Cuoco, D., Kaniel, R., 2011. Equilibrium prices in the presence of delegated portfolio management. Journal of Financial Economics 101, 264–296.
Denis, D. K., McConnell, J. J., Ovtchinnikov, A. V., Yu, Y., 2003. S&P 500 index additions
and earnings expectations. Journal of Finance 58, 1821–1840.
Dessaint, O., Olivier, J., Otto, C., Thesmar, D., 2018. CAPM-based company
(mis)valuations, Rotman School of Management Working Paper No. 3050928.
Fabozzi, F. J., Ma, K., Oliphant, B. J., 2008. Sin stock returns. Journal of Portfolio Management 35, 82–94.
Gormley, T., Matsa, D., Milbourn, T., 2013. CEO compensation and corporate risk: evidence from a natural experiment. Journal of Accounting and Economics 56, 79–101.
Graham, J., Harvey, C., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: evidence from
the field. Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187–243.
Greenwood, R., 2005. Short- and long-term demand curves for stocks: theory and evidence
on the dynamics of arbitrage. Journal of Financial Economics 75, 607–649.
43

Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., 2002. Financial Markets and Corporate Strategy. McGraw-Hill
Irwin, 2nd Edition.
Gutiérrez, G., Philippon, T., 2017. Investmentless growth: an empirical investigation.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall 2017, 89–190.
Gutiérrez, G., Philippon, T., 2018. Ownership, concentration, and investment. AEA Papers
and Proceedings 108, 432–437.
Hacibedel, B., 2018. Index changes in emerging markets, Swedish Institute for Financial
Research Working Paper.
Harris, L., Gurel, E., 1986. Price and volume eﬀects associated with changes in the S&P 500
list: new evidence for the existence of price pressures. Journal of Finance 41, 815–829.
Hong, H., Kacperczyk, M., 2009. The price of sin: the eﬀects of social norms on markets.
Journal of Financial Economics 93, 15–36.
Jacobs, M., Shivdasani, A., 2012. Do you know your cost of capital? Harvard Business
Review July-August issue, https://hbr.org/2012/07/do-you-know-your-cost-of-capital.
Kacperczyk, M., Sundaresan, S., Wang, T., 2019. Do foreign institutional investors improve
market eﬀciency?, Imperial College London Working Paper.
Kaniel, R., Kondor, P., 2013. The delegated Lucas tree. Review of Financial Studies 26,
929–984.
Kashyap, A., Kovrijnykh, N., Li, J., Pavlova, A., 2020. Is there too much benchmarking in
asset management?, University of Chicago Working Paper.
Kim, I., Venkatachalam, M., 2011. Are sin stocks paying the price for accounting sins?
Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance 26, 415–442.
Krüger, P., Landier, A., Thesmar, D., 2015. The WACC fallacy: the real eﬀects of using a
unique discount rate. Journal of Finance 70, 1253–1285.
Luong, H., Moshirian, F., Nguyen, L., Tian, X., Zhang, B., 2017. How do foreign institutional investors enhance firm innovation? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
52, 1449–1490.

44

Lynch, A., Mendenhall, R., 1997. New evidence on stock price eﬀects associated with
changes in the S&P 500 index. Journal of Business 70, 351–383.
Ma, L., Tang, Y., Gómez, J.-P., 2019. Portfolio manager compensation in the U.S. mutual
fund industry. Journal of Finance 72, 587–638.
Massa, M. M., Peyer, U., Tong, Z., 2005. Limits of arbitrage and corporate financial policy,
INSEAD Working Paper.
McKinsey on Finance, 2004. What is stock index membership worth? Perspectives on
Corporate Finance and Strategy 10, 14–16.
Merton, R., 1987. A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information. Journal of Finance 17, 483–510.
Pavlova, A., Sikorskaya, T., 2020. Benchmarking intensity, London Business School Working
Paper.
Petajisto, A., 2011. The index premium and its hidden cost for index funds. Journal of
Empirical Finance 18, 271–288.
Scholes, M., 1972. The market for securities: substitution versus price pressure and the
eﬀects of information on share prices. Journal of Business 45, 179–211.
Shleifer, A., 1986. Do demand curves for stocks slope down? Journal of Finance 41, 579–590.
Statman, M., Glushkov, D., 2009. The wages of social responsibility. Financial Analysts
Journal 65, 33–46.
Stein, J., 1996. Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world. Journal of Business 69,
429–455.
Stulz, R., 1999. What’s wrong with modern capital budgeting? Financial Practice and
Education Fall/Winter, 5–9.
Vijh, A., Yang, K., 2008. The acquisition performance of S&P 500 firms, University of Iowa
Working Paper.
Wurgler, J., Zhuravskaya, E., 2002. Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for stocks? Journal of Business 75, 583–608.
45

Online Appendices for
“The Benchmark Inclusion Subsidy”
by Anil Kashyap, Natalia Kovrijnykh, Jian Li, and Anna Pavlova

Appendix B
In this appendix we explore the robustness of our model to an alternative specification
where a manager’s compensation is tied to the per-dollar returns on the fund and on the
benchmark portfolio as opposed to the performance measure used in the main text.
Define Ri = Di /(x̄i Si ), i = 1, . . . , n, and let R = (R1 , . . . , Rn )> be the vector of (perdollar) returns. It is distributed normally with mean µR = (µ1 /(x̄1 S1 ), . . . , µn /(x̄n Sn )) and
variance ⌃R , where (⌃R )ij = ⇢ij

i j /(x̄i Si x̄j Sj ),

i = 1, . . . , n, j = 1, . . . , n.

It is now more convenient to specify investors’ portfolio optimization problem in terms
of fractions 'i of wealth under management invested in stock i, i = 1, . . . , n, with the
Pn
>
remaining fraction 1
i=1 'i invested in the bond. Denote ' = ('1 , . . . , 'n ) .
Let us start by considering the problem of a direct investor. Let W0D denote the ini-

tial wealth of each direct investor. Let 1 = (1, . . . , 1)> be a vector of ones. As in main
model, CARA preferences with normal returns are equivalent to mean-variance preferences. Then the direct investor’s problem can be written as max' '> µR + 1
( /2)'> ⌃R ' W0D

2

. The optimal solution is 'D W0D = ⌃R1 µR

1> ' W0D

1/ .

Now consider fund managers. Suppose each manager is given W0M amount of money to
manage, which is all or part of the fund investor’s initial wealth. The manager’s compensation is w = [aR' +b(R' Rb )]W0M +c, where R' = '> R+1 1> ' is the return on the manager’s portfolio, and Rb = ! > R is the benchmark return. The benchmark weights (defined
P
as in Lemma 4 in Appendix A) are !i = 1i x̄i Si / nj=1 1j x̄j Sj , and ! = (!1 , . . . , !n )> . Then
⇤
⇥
the manager’s compensation can be written as w = (a + b)('> R + 1 1> ') b! > R W0M +

c, and the manager’s problem is
⇥
max (a + b)('> µR + 1
'

1> ')

⇤
b!µR W0M

2
1

[(a + b)'

b!]> ⌃R [(a + b)'

b!] W0M

2

.

⇥
The optimal solution is (a + b)'M

with total supply,

M'

M

W0M +

D'

D

⇤
b! W0M = ⌃R1 (µR

1)/ . Equating total demand

W0D = x̄ · S, and rearranging terms, we arrive at the

following representation of the stocks’ expected returns:
0
B
B
@

µ1
x̄1 S1

..
.

µn
x̄n Sn

1
1

1

0

B
C
C = ⇤B
B
A
@

2
1

...

x̄21 S12

..
.

⇢1n 1 n
x̄1 S1 x̄n Sn

...

1 00

1
x̄1 S1
B . C
CB
B .. C
CB
A
A @@
x̄n Sn

⇢1n 1 n
x̄1 S1 x̄n Sn C

..
.

2
n

2
x̄2n Sn

W0M

Mb

a+b

1

C
!C
A.

Simplifying further, we have
0

µ1

B
B
@
µn

1
0 2
1
x̄1 S1
...
x̄1 S1
C
B
..
.
C = ⇤ B ..
.
A
@
⇢1n 1 n
x̄n Sn
...
x̄1 S1

⇢1n 1 n
x̄n Sn

..
.

2
n

x̄n Sn

1 00

1
x̄1 S1
C BB . C
C BB .. C
A @@
A
x̄n Sn

W0M

Mb

a+b

1

C
!C
A,

which after plugging in
0

1
11 x̄1 S1
B . C
1
B .. C
! = Pn
@
A
1
x̄
S
i
i
i
i=1
1n x̄n Sn
gives us an implicit expression for share values:
x̄ · S = µ

✓
⇤⌃ 1

◆
W0M
P
1b .
a + b i 1i x̄i Si
Mb

(B.1)

Notice that (B.1) is identical to our expression for share values (35) in the main model with
P
1b W0M / i 1i x̄i Si instead of 1b .

Here, the value of assets under management, W0M , depends on asset prices. In general,

(B.1) cannot be solved in closed form. Consider a special case when W0M consists only of
P
the benchmark stocks, i.e., W0M = i 1i x̄i Si . Then (B.1) becomes exactly (35).

Lemmas 1 and 2 from the main text extend straightforwardly. The extensions of Lemma

3 and Propositions 1 3 are a bit more tricky in general, so we consider special cases.
P
First, start again with the case where W0M = i 1i x̄i Si . In this case, if firm i invests,
2

then x̄·S (i) and x̄i Si are given exactly by (37) and (40), respectively. So Lemma 3 extends
to this case. Performing the same analysis as in the main text, we get Proposition 1 3.
P
Somewhat more generally, suppose that W0M = ⇠ i 1i x̄i Si + B0 so that the initial
portfolio of the fund consists of the benchmark portfolio scaled by ⇠

0 and bond (or

cash) holdings B0 . Assume for simplicity we assume that investment is financed by internal
funds (or, equivalently, with the risk-free bond). Then the cost of investment to any firm
is I (which is also true in our original model). We discuss at the end of this appendix what
happens if investment is financed by equity instead.
Then equation (B.1) becomes


Mb

⇤⌃ 1

x̄ · S = µ

a+b

✓

B0
⇠+P
i 1i x̄i Si

Multiplying both sides by 1>
b and denoting by T =

P

◆

1b .

1i x̄i Si the total value of firms

i

that are in the benchmark, we have that T is the positive root of the following quadratic
equation:
>

⇤1>
b ⌃1

T = µ 1b

⇤1>
b ⌃1b

+

Mb

a+b

✓

B0
⇠+
T

◆

.

This delivers an explicit expression for asset prices:


Mb

⇤⌃ 1

x̄ · S = µ

a+b

✓

B0
⇠+
T

◆

1b .

If firm i invests,
x̄ · S
where T (i) =
T

P

(i)

(i)

=µ

(i)

I

(i)

⇤⌃

(i)



1

Mb

a+b

✓

B0
⇠ + (i)
T

◆

1b .

(i)

j

1j x̄j Sj is given by the positive root of

= µ

(i)

I

(i) >

1b

(i)
⇤1>
b⌃ 1

3

+

(i)
⇤1>
b ⌃ 1b

Mb

a+b

✓

B0
⇠ + (i)
T

◆

.

(B.2)

The corresponding change in firm i’s value is
x̄i Si = µy

I

⇤

n
X
⇥

⇢jy

j y

+(

j y

+(

2
y

2
y

+ ⇢iy

i y )Ij=i

j=1

⇤

n
X
⇥

⇢jy

+ ⇢iy

i y )Ij=i

⇤

+ ⇢ij

j=1



◆
B0
1
⇠+
1j
a+b
T

⇤ Mb M
B0
B0
W 0 1j
,
i j
a+b
T
T (i)
Mb

✓

where Ij=i = 1 if j = i and Ij=i = 0 otherwise.

/ B that are otherwise identical,
Suppose we have two firms iin and iout , iin 2 B, iout 2

i.e.,

iin

=

iout

= , ⇢iin y = ⇢iout y = ⇢ and ⇢iin j = ⇢iout j = ⇢j for j 6= iin , iout . The expression

for the benchmark inclusion subsidy is
x̄i1 Siin

x̄i2 Siout

✓

◆
B0
⇠ + (iin )
=
+⇢ y ⇤
a+b
T

n
X
B0
B0
Mb
⇤
(⇢jy
T (iin ) T (iout )
a + b j=1
⇥

2
y

⇤

Mb

j y

+ ⇢j

j ) 1j .

The term in the first line is positive by Assumption 1. The term in the second line is new,
and appears because the sum of benchmark weights is diﬀerent depending on whether the
investing firm is inside or outside the benchmark. It captures the fact that by investing, the
firm grows and eﬀectively reduces importance of other firms in the benchmark. It is natural
to expect that this term in the second line is small. Formally, this term is proportional
to T (iin )

T (iout ) = o(T ) when project y is small relative to T (T (iin ) , T (iout ) , and T are
1/T (iout ) is O(1/T 2 ). The rest of the second

all of the same order). So the term 1/T (iin )
P
term, ⇤ M b/(a + b)B0 nj=1 (⇢jy j y + ⇢j

j ) 1j ,

is of the same order as x̄iin S (iin ) T . So

the second term is O x̄iin S (iin ) /T , i.e., of the order of the benchmark weight !iin .
The subsidy is still zero for risk-free projects. Indeed consider a special case when

project y is risk free, i.e.,

y

= 0. It is easy to show that T (iout ) = T for iout 2 {k +

1, . . . , n}. Moreover, suppose that I = µy so that there are no arbitrage opportunities.
Then µ(iin )

I (iin ) = µ and ⌃(iin ) = ⌃, and thus T (iin ) = T for iin 2 {1, . . . , k}. Hence for the

risk-free project with µy = I we have

Siout = 0, i.e., both firms value it equally.

Siin

In our main model, whether investment is financed by debt or equity is irrelevant. In
P
this specification, it is true if W0M = i 1i x̄i Si , but not in general. To see why, consider
4

again the case with W0M = ⇠

P

i 1i x̄i Si + B0 and suppose that investment I is financed
P
(i)
(i)
we have
by issuing i = I/Si additional shares. Then instead of T (i) =
i 1 j xj Sj
P
P
0
(i)
(i)
(i)
T (i) = j6=i 1j x̄j Sj + 1i Si (x̄i + i ) = j 1j x̄j Sj + 1i I, which is the positive root of

T

(i)0

=µ

(i)>

1b

(i)
⇤1>
b⌃ 1

+

(i)
⇤1>
b ⌃ 1b

Mb

a+b

✓

B0
⇠ + (i)0
T

◆

.

0

Comparing this equation to (B.2), one can see that T (i) = T (i) if i is outside the benchmark,
0

0

and T (i) > T (i) if i is inside the benchmark. Using T (iout ) = T (iout ) , the diﬀerence in the
subsidies using debt vs. equity financing can be written as
(x̄i1 Siin

x̄i2 Siout )debt (x̄i1 Siin x̄i2 Siout )equity =
(

n
X
1
1
Mb
2
B0
(⇢jy j y + ⇢j
= ⇤
y +
y +⇢
a+b
T (iin ) T (iin )0
j=1

j ) 1j

)

.

0

Using T (iin ) > T (iin ) , the expression in the square brackets is strictly positive. Therefore
the subsidy is larger with debt financing than with equity financing if and only if
B0

(

2
y

+⇢

y

+

n
X

(⇢jy

j=1

j y

+ ⇢j

j ) 1j

)

> 0.

In particular, assuming that the expression in the curly brackets is strictly positive, the
benchmark firm prefers financing investment with debt rather than equity if and only if the
funds’ initial portfolio includes positive bond holdings (in addition to the risky portfolio
proportional to the benchmark portfolio). Notice that in the special case considered earlier
P
in which W0M = i 1i x̄i Si so that B0 = 0, risk-free debt and equity financing are equivalent,
i.e., deliver the same level of the benchmark inclusion subsidy. (The same result holds in
our original model in the main text.) Empirically, B0 is small, so we would expect the
diﬀerence between risk-free debt vs. equity financing to be of second order.
In the most general case where W0M is the value of a general initial portfolio, the analysis
is more complicated, but the overall message remains the same—whether risk-free debt or
equity financing is cheaper depends on the composition of W0M .1
1

We do not analyze risky debt, because the CARA framework with risky debt involves truncated normal

5

Appendix C
The goal of this appendix is to discuss how one would approach investigating the welfare
implications of the benchmark inclusion subsidy. We will argue that within the current
model, such implications are ambiguous even in the simplest case. To do a proper analysis,
one would need to endogenize optimal contracts between fund investors and their managers.
To illustrate the ambiguity of welfare eﬀects of the benchmark inclusion subsidy, consider
a simple version of our model, where the setup is similar to the one in Section 3, but there
are no direct investors—only fund investors and fund managers (direct investors can be
easily incorporated, as discussed at the end of this appendix). We will consider potential
mergers of firms 1 and 2 with firm y. In this case, total cash flows in the economy would
not change after a merger, and neither will the total holdings of the fund, since there are
no direct investors and the fund has to hold the total supply of shares. Therefore, the
only diﬀerence in the social welfare (which we will measure as sum of utilities of the fund
manager and fund investor) might come from a change in the risk sharing between these
two parties. We will show that when a non-benchmark firm 2 acquires y, there is no change
in the utilities of each agent and hence no change in the social welfare. However, when the
benchmark firm 1 makes the acquisition, part of the risk will be moved from the manager
(who wants to hold less of the more expensive asset) to the fund investor.
Let us introduce some notation. Denote by xM1,i and xF 1,i the initial endowments of risky
asset i by managers and fund investors, respectively. Also, let z1M = (a + b)xM
1

b, ziM =

(a + b)xM
i , i = 2, y, denote the eﬀective asset holdings of the manager. The corresponding
ziM , i = 1, 2, y, where xM
i is the

eﬀective asset holdings of the fund investors are ziF = xM
i

manager’s demand for asset i given by equation (2) in the paper.
Prior to a merger, the utilities of managers and fund investors (in the mean-variance
form) are
UM =

X h

xM1,i

ziM Si + ziM µi

i=1,2,y

distributions, which makes the analysis intractable.

6

2

ziM

2

2
i

i

+ c,

UF =

X h

xF 1,i

ziF Si + ziF µi

2

i=1,2,y

ziF

2

2
i

i

c.

We construct a social welfare function which applies equal weights to the (mean-variance)
utilities of diﬀerent agents:
UM + UF =

X n

µi

2

i=1,2,y

h

ziM

2

+ ziF

Notice that such choice of weights make the terms xM1,i

2

i

2
i

o

.

ziM Si and xF 1,i

ziF Si wash

out of the social welfare function (due to market clearing), and the terms ziM µi and ziF µi sum
up to a constant. These terms capture simple redistribution of (expected) resources across
the agents, so they represent movement “along the frontier,” while changes to U M + U F
will represent movement inside or outside the frontier. The direction of this redistribution
eﬀect depends (in part) on the agents’ initial endowments. If an agent is endowed with a
large (small) amount of the benchmark firm’s stock, s/he is going to benefit (lose) from the
subsidized increase in the price of this stock following an investment or merger.
As for the (aggregate) eﬀect of the subsidy on the social welfare, in this example it
only comes from the shift of risk from one group of agents to the other, as captured by the
second term in the above expression for U M + U F . In what follows, we will explore how
this term changes depending on which firm acquires y.
It will be useful to note that in this simple example without direct investors (so that
M

=

F

= 1/2), the equilibrium allocations are very simple, and are given by xM
i = 2,

i = 1, 2, y, and z1M = 2(a + b)
2(1

a

b, z2M = zyM = 2(a + b), z1F = 2(1

a

b) + b, z2M = zyM =

b).

We will now consider the eﬀects of a merger on the social welfare. Suppose first that
firm 2 (outside the benchmark) acquires firm y. It is easy to verify that the equilibrium
holding of assets (1 and 2, since asset y has been acquired) do not change, i.e., vi0 = vi for
v 2 {xM , z M , z F }, i = 1, 2, in particular,
z10M = 2(a + b)
z10F = 2(1

a

(C.1)

b, z20M = 2(a + b),

b) + b, z20M = 2(1
7

a

b).

It is easy to see that in this case, the utilities of the manager and fund investor after the
merger are the same as before the merger. The sum of the two utilities is also the same as
before, and is equal to
0
2

UM + UF

= U M + U F = µ1 + µ2 + µy

2
2

b]2 + [2(1

[2(a + b)

[2(a + b)]2 + [2(1

b) + b]2

a
b)]2

a

2
2

+

2
1
2
y

.

Now suppose that firm 1 (inside the benchmark) acquires y. In this case, (C.1) above
still holds, but the sum of utilities changes to
UM + UF

0
1

= µ1 + µ2 + µy

2
2

[2(a + b)

b]2 + [2(1

[2(a + b)]2 + [2(1

a

a

b) + b]2

b)]2

2
1

+

2
y

2
2.

What changes is how the risk associated with y’s cashflows gets allocated between the
manager and the fund investor. Before the merger, the corresponding utility terms for the
manager and investor are proportional to

[2(a + b)]2 and

After the acquisition by firm 1, those terms change to

[2(1

a

[2(a+b) b]2 and

b)]2 , respectively.
[2(1 a b)+b]2 ,

so part of the risk is shifted from the manager to the fund investor.
To see if the social welfare increases or decreases as a result, compute
UM + UF
=
=

2
y

2

0
1

UM + UF =

[2(a + b)]2 + [2(1

2
y b {4 [2(a

+ b)

1]

a

b)]2

[2(a + b)

b]2

[2(1

a

b) + b]2

b} .

The sign of the above expression is uncertain, and depends on the parameters of the compensation contract.2 To assess the eﬀect of the benchmark inclusion subsidy on welfare
even in this simplest case, we would need to model how the fund investors optimally design
compensation contracts for the fund managers. Intuitively, to provide incentives to the
2

Kashyap et al. (2020) show that in the optimal contract, a + b > 1/2 and b > 0. Notice, however, that
this is not enough to sign the above expression.

8

manager (given an incentive problem that we do not model here), risk sharing between
her and the fund investor would be distorted away from perfect risk sharing. Whether the
shift of risk from the manager to fund investor due to acquisition helps or aggravates the
incentive problem in unclear without explicitly modeling it.3
Next, suppose we add direct investors to the above analysis. The main diﬀerence is
that the fund’s risky asset holdings are no longer equal to the fixed net supply of the stock.
However, just as in the previous case, it is easy to show that when the non-benchmark firm
2 acquires y, the equilibrium asset holdings of the agents remain the same as before the
merger, and thus so do their utilities.
Suppose instead that the benchmark firm 1 acquires y. The stock price of firm 2 does
not change, and neither do the agents’ equilibrium holdings of asset 2. The price of asset1 goes up (above the sum of S1 and Sy , due to the benchmark inclusion subsidy), and
in equilibrium, the asset 1 holdings of direct investors, xD
1 (because of the price eﬀect),
M
F
decrease, while the total fund asset 1 holdings, xM
1 = z1 + z1 , increase (because of the

inelastic demand component). Thus we have the shift of risk from the direct investors to
the fund as a whole. Moreover, we show in our main analysis (see the proof of Lemma
M
for all i, and thus the risk component of the manager’s utility always
1) that xD
i = zi

coincides with that of the direct investor, while the extra risk borne by the fund is carried
by the fund investor. So, after the merger of firm 1 and y, the risk is shifted from the direct
investor and fund manager to the fund investor. (Notice that it does not mean that the
fund investor is worse oﬀ, as his utility also has the expected component part, which washes
out from the social welfare function through the redistribution eﬀect.) As before, it is hard
to sign the total eﬀect on social welfare without knowing more about the contract.
We have illustrated ambiguity of welfare implications of the benchmark inclusion subsidy
in a simple setting with mergers, where the total cash flows remain unchanged after a
merger. The analysis with investments into new projects would have an additional layer of
complexity.

3

Kashyap et al. (2020) analyze the optimal contract design in a similar setting, but do not consider
corporate decisions. That environment is much more complicated than what we study here. So properly
doing welfare analysis would require imposing a lot more additional structure.

9

Appendix D
In this appendix we analyze the benchmark inclusion subsidy in a setting in which benchmarking aﬀects second moments of equity returns.
Consider a generalization of our model to three periods, t = 0, 1, 2. Direct investors
derive utility from terminal wealth at the end of period 2. Fund managers derive utility
from the compensation, which is paid at the end of period 2. Both have CARA preferences
with the risk aversion coeﬃcient .
There is a riskless asset (paying an interest rate that is normalized to zero), and n risky
assets. Risky assets pay dividends at the end of period 2, but there is cash-flow news that
arrives in period 1. This news and the terminal dividends are given by Di,t = ci zt +"i,t , i =
1, . . . , n, t = 1, 2, where zt is aggregate shock, "i,t is an idiosyncratic shock and ci is the
loading on the aggregate shock. We follow Buﬀa et al. (2014) and assume that the variables
zt and "it follow square-root processes:4

"i,t+1

p

zt ⌘t+1 , ⌘t ⇠ N (0, 1), t = 0, 1,
p
= µ",i "i,t + ",i "i,t ⌘i,t+1 , ⌘i,t ⇠ N (0, 1), t = 0, 1, i = 1, ..., n,

zt+1 = µz zt +

z

where ⌘i,t+1 are i.i.d. and independent of the aggregate shock ⌘t , and µz ,
",i ,

z,

z0 , µ",i ,

"i,0 , i = 1, ..., n, are positive scalars. At t = 2, the risky stocks pay oﬀ terminal

dividends given by D2 = (D1,2 , . . . , Dn,2 ), which is an n ⇥ 1 vector. With this specification,
Di,t+1 ⇠ N ci µz zt + µ",i "i,t , c2i

2
z zt

+

2
",i "i,t

and Covt (Di,t+1 , Dj,t+1 ) = ci cj

2
z zt ,

t = 0, 1,

i = 1, . . . , n.

It is convenient to introduce the notation ⌃t ⌘ ⌃z zt + ⌃",t for the variance-covariance

matrix of Dt+1 , conditional on information available at time t, where the n ⇥ n matrix ⌃z

has the (i, j)-th element equal to ci cj
has the (i, i)-th element equal to
and "i,t , i = 1, . . . , n, respectively.

2
z,

and the n ⇥ n matrix ⌃"t is a diagonal matrix that

2
",i "i,t .

Also, denote by c and "t the n ⇥ 1 vectors of ci

4

The usual caveat about the quantity inside the square root potentially becoming negative applies. See
Backus et al. (2001), who use a similar square-root process in discrete time, for a discussion. The problem
goes away in a continuous-time version of this model, as in Buﬀa et al., which is tractable, but takes us too
far away from our baseline setting.

10

The asset prices in period 1 are given by
✓
⇤ (⌃z z1 + ⌃",1 ) 1

S1 = µz c z1 + µ" ✏1

Mb

a+b

◆

1b .

The diﬀerence in return volatilities for firms inside and outside the benchmark comes from
the term highlighted in red.
The asset price of asset i in period zero is given by


Si,0 = µz ci


+ µ",i

ci c
✓

1

>

✓

1

M b1b

a+b
◆
M b1bi
⇤
a+b

◆

2
z

⇤

2
",i

(

"✓

1

µz

⇢
µ",i

✓

1

M b1b

◆>

#

2
z

)

⇤µz c Bz
z0
a+b
◆
M b1bi
2
⇤µ",i B",i ",i
"i,0 ,
a+b

where
✓
1
Bz =
2
✓
B",i =
1
2

b1b
M
a+b

◆>

b1bi
M
a+b

✓

b1b
M
a+b

⌃z 1

◆2

◆

⇤2 ,

2
2
",i ⇤ ,

and 1b i is the i-th component of vector 1b =

1, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0 . As before, the red
| {z } | {z }
k

n k

terms trace the eﬀects of the diﬀerence in return volatility of firms inside and outside the
benchmark.

It is straightforward to show that the variances and the absolute value of covariances
of per-share returns, V ar(Sj,1

Sj,0 ) and |Cov(Si,1

Si,0 , Sj,1

Sj,0 )|, i, j = 1, . . . , n, are

higher for stocks in the benchmark.

Next, we will investigate the valuation of an investment project by diﬀerent firms. Consider a project y that requires initial investment I. We assume that if firm j adopts the
project, then firm j’s cash flows become
(j)

(j)

Dj,t = (cj + cy )zt + "j,t ,
(j)
"j,t+1

= (µ",j + µ",y )ˆ
"j,t + (

11

",j

q
(j)
+ ",y ) "j,t ⌘j,t+1 .

(j)

Denote ci

(j)

(j)
",i

= ci 1i6=j + (ci + cy )1i=j , µ",i = µ",i 1i6=j + (µ",i + µ",y )1i=j ,

=

",i 1i6=j

+

(j)
(j)
( ",i + ",y )1i=j , "i,t = "i,t 1i6=j + "j,t 1i=j , where 1 is the indicator function. Also let
(j)
(j)
(j)
(j)
⌃t ⌘ ⌃z zt + ⌃",t , where ⌃z is an n ⇥ n matrix with the (i, k)-th element equal to
(j) (j)
(j)
ci ck z2 , and ⌃",t is the n ⇥ n matrix diagonal matrix that has the (i, i)-th element equal
⌘2
⇣
(j)
(j)
(j)
to ",i "i,t . Also, denote by c(j) the n ⇥ 1 vector of ci . Finally, denote

Bz(j)
(j)

B",i

✓
1
=
2
✓
1
=
2

◆>
✓
b1b
(j)
⌃z 1
M
a+b
◆2 ⇣
⌘2
b1bi
(j)
⇤2 ,
M
",i
a+b

b1b
M
a+b

Using these notations, the change in the stockholder value,
Sj,0 =
(
⇥

µz



I + µz cy
"✓
1

cy c

>

M b1b

a+b

✓

1

◆>

M b1b

a+b
⇤µz c(j)

◆

⇤

2
z

Bz(j)

#

✓

2
z

cy c j 1
)

◆

⇤2 ,

(j)

Sj,0 , is

Sj,0 = Sj,0
M b1b j

a+b

◆

⇤

2
z

⇥

z0

"✓
#
◆
◆>
⇣
⌘
b1
b1
M
M
b
b
⇤ z2
1
+ µz c j
cj c > 1
⇤µz c c(j)
Bz + Bz(j)
a+b
a+b
◆

✓
M b1bj
2
⇤ ",y
+ µ",y
1
+ 2 ",j ",y ⇥
a+b
⇢
◆
✓
M b1bj
(j)
⇥ µ",j + µ",y
⇤(µ",j + µ",y ) B",j ( ",j + ",y )2 "j,0
1
a+b

✓
◆
M b1bj
2
+ µ",j
1
⇤ ",j
⇥
a+b
◆
✓
n
M b1bj
(j)
⇥ µ",y
⇤(µ",j + µ",y ) B",j ( ",j + ",y )2
1
a+b
◆
✓
o
M b1b j
2
⇤µ",j B",j ",j
+
1
"j,0 .
a+b


✓

2
z z0

Consider two otherwise identical firms, one of which is in the benchmark and the one is

12

outside. The benchmark inclusion subsidy is given by
SiIN ,0

SiOU T ,0 =
(
# )
"✓
◆>
Mb
M b1b
2
i(IN )
(iIN )
2
⇤
µz
1
⇤µz c
Bz
= cy ciIN
z z0
a+b z
a+b
✓

◆
M b1b
>
1
+ µz c y
cy c
cy ciIN ⇤ z2 ⇥
⇤ z2
a+b

◆
◆
✓
✓
b
Mb
Mb
Mb >
M b1b
2
2
⇥
⇤µz cy
⇤2 c2y 2
⇤
c
1
c
y
M
z z0
a+b
2
a+b a+b
a+b
a+b
◆
✓

M b1b
>
⇤ z2 ⇥
1
+ µz ciIN
ciIN c
a+b

◆
◆
✓
✓
Mb
Mb
Mb
Mb >
M b1b
2 2
2
2
⇥
cy ⇤µz
⇤ cy 2
⇤ cy
c
1
z z0
a+b
2
a+b a+b
a+b
a+b
Mb
2
⇤⇥
+
",y + 2 ",iIN ",y
a✓
+b
◆
⇢
(i )
Mb
⇤(µ",iIN + µ",y ) B",iIN
( ",iIN + ",y )2 "iIN ,0
1
⇥ µ",iIN + µ",y
IN
a+b
+ µ",y
⇥
+
+



2
",y

(

+2

",iIN ",y )⇤

Mb

⇥

Mb

✓

Mb

◆

⇤(µ",iIN + µ",y )
2
( ",iIN + ",y )2 ( ",iIN + ",y )2 "iIN ,0
a+b
2a+b
a+b
⇢
◆
✓
(i )
Mb
Mb
2
⇤ µ",y
⇤(µ",iIN + µ",y ) B",iIN
( ",iIN + ",y )2 "iIN ,0
1
",iIN
IN
a+b
a+b
✓✓
◆
◆
Mb
Mb
2
2
⇤
1
⇤µ",iIN B",iIN
",iIN
",j "j,0
a+b
a+b

2
+ (µ",iIN
",iIN ⇤)⇥
✓
⇢
Mb
Mb
⇤µ",y
2
⇥
a+b
2a+b

Mb

a+b

◆

⇥

(

",iIN

+

",y )

2

+

2
",y

⇤

2

",iIN ",y

+

2
",y

"iIN ,0 .

Again, the red terms are parts of the subsidy coming from the fact that firms inside and
outside the benchmark have diﬀerent return volatility. They are derived from the terms
(i

Bz IN

)

(i

)

Bz OU T , B",iIN

(i

)

B",iOU T and B",iIN
IN

(i

)

T
B",iOU
. When adopting a new project, a firm
OU T

inside the benchmark would face a larger increase in return volatility than a firm outside
the benchmark; this reduces its period-0 price and reduces the subsidy size. Hence this
eﬀect of return volatility lowers the benchmark subsidy.5
5

Note that empirically we typically observe a decrease in volatility in response to index/benchmark
inclusion (e.g., for the S&P 500 additions). This is because index inclusion often coincides with an improvement in a stock’s liquidity, which lowers the volatility of the stock’s returns. This eﬀect works in the

13

However, there are other eﬀects of volatility. In particular, the period-0 return volatility
also aﬀects the level of prices and hence the subsidy. For example, as in the main model,
part of the subsidy comes from the fact that benchmark firms are penalized less for the
cash-flow variance. The return volatility impacts the strength of this channel too. The
corresponding terms that are highlighted in blue. These terms would be present even if the
two firms, one inside and the other outside the benchmark, had the same period-zero return
volatility. The overall eﬀect of return volatility, is, therefore, too complicated to sign.

References
Backus, D. K., Foresi, S., Telmer, C. I., 2001. Aﬃne term structure models and the forward
premium anomaly. The Journal of Finance 56, 279–304.
Ben-David, I., Franzoni, F., Moussawi, R., 2018. Do ETFs increase volatility? The Journal
of Finance 73, 2471–2535.
Buﬀa, A., Vayanos, D., Woolley, P., 2014. Asset management contracts and equilibrium
prices, NBER Working Paper 20480.
Kashyap, A., Kovrijnykh, N., Li, J., Pavlova, A., 2020. Is there too much benchmarking in
asset management?, University of Chicago Working Paper.

opposite direction to the one we identified above. We abstract away from liquidity considerations in our
model, and hence our analysis of the second moment eﬀects on the subsidy is subject to that important
caveat. One paper that disentangles the liquidity and index membership eﬀects is Ben-David et al. (2018),
who document that ETF membership increases stock return volatility.

14

