NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REVEALING STEREOTYPES:
EVIDENCE FROM IMMIGRANTS IN SCHOOLS
Alberto Alesina
Michela Carlana
Eliana La Ferrara
Paolo Pinotti
Working Paper 25333
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25333

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

We acknowledge useful comments from seminar participants at Harvard University, BRIQ-Bonn,
Mannheim University, Collegio Carlo Alberto, Uppsala University, University of Vienna, and
University of Milan. We are grateful to the schools and teachers that took part in our project and
to Gianna Barbieri and Lucia De Fabrizio from MIUR and Patrizia Falzetti and Paola
Giangiacomo from INVALSI for giving us access to the administrative data used in this paper.
Elena De Gioannis and Giulia Tomaselli provided invaluable help with data collection. Carlana
acknowledges financial support from the “Policy Design and Evaluation Research in Developing
Countries” Initial Training Network (PODER), which is financed under the Marie Curie Actions
of the EU’s Seventh Framework Programme (Contract no. 608109). La Ferrara acknowledges
financial support from the ERC Advanced Grant “Aspirations, Social Norms and
Development” (ASNODEV, Contract no. 694882). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Alberto Alesina, Michela Carlana, Eliana La Ferrara, and Paolo Pinotti. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Revealing Stereotypes: Evidence from Immigrants in Schools
Alberto Alesina, Michela Carlana, Eliana La Ferrara, and Paolo Pinotti
NBER Working Paper No. 25333
December 2018
JEL No. F5,I24
ABSTRACT
If individuals become aware of their stereotypes, do they change their behavior? We study this
question in the context of teachers’ bias in grading immigrants and native children in middle
schools. Teachers give lower grades to immigrant students compared to natives who have the
same performance on standardized, blindly-graded tests. We then relate differences in grading to
teachers’ stereotypes, elicited through an Implicit Association Test (IAT). We find that math
teachers with stronger stereotypes give lower grades to immigrants compared to natives with the
same performance. Literature teachers do not differentially grade immigrants based on their own
stereotypes. Finally, we share teachers’ own IAT score with them, randomizing the timing of
disclosure around the date on which they assign term grades. All teachers informed of their
stereotypes before term grading increase grades assigned to immigrants. Revealing stereotypes
may be a powerful intervention to decrease discrimination, but it may also induce a reaction from
individuals who were not acting in a biased way.
Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 210
Cambridge, MA 02138
and IGIER
and also NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Michela Carlana
Harvard Kennedy School
79 John F. Kennedy St.
Taubman Bldg
Cambridge, MA 02138
and IZA
michela_carlana@hks.harvard.edu

Eliana La Ferrara
Universita' Bocconi
Dept. of Economics and IGIER
via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano
Italy
eliana.laferrara@unibocconi.it
Paolo Pinotti
Bocconi University
Via Rontgen 1
20136 Milan
Italy
and and fRDB
and also BAFFI-CAREFIN Centre
paolo.pinotti@unibocconi.it

1

Introduction

Stereotypes are over-generalized representations of characteristics of certain groups (Bordalo et al.,
2016). They allow for easier and efficient processing of information, but they may cause biased
judgment or even discrimination against particular groups. In addition, discrimination may lead to
self-fulfilling prophecies by influencing the behavior of discriminated groups in the direction of the
stereotypes. For example, individuals exposed to bias toward their own group may reduce effort,
self-confidence, and productivity (Carlana, 2018; Bordalo et al., 2018; Glover et al., 2017).
We consider the case of immigrants in contemporary societies. Alesina et al. (2018) report
robust evidence of anti-immigrant stereotypes in several receiving countries, including Italy. The
problem is especially important in the case of possible discrimination experienced by young generations in schools. In the short-run, young immigrants who feel discriminated against may become
discouraged and work less, with consequences for their careers and job placement. Eventually,
they may also develop a belief that effort does not pay off for an immigrant, not only in school
but also in the workplace and in society in general.1 Thus, if negative stereotypes are internalized by individuals at a time when they are making long-term investments in their future, they may
make suboptimal decisions that will impact their future careers and well-being. Making stereotypes
known to those who interact with young generations may help address these problems.
In this paper, we study the behavior of teachers toward immigrant and native students in Italian middle schools.2 This is an interesting context for two reasons. First, mass immigration is a
relatively recent phenomenon in Italy. In fact, after Spain, Italy has experienced the second largest
increase in the share of immigrants received among European countries over the last decade. Second, in the Italian education system -like in most European countries- middle school is a critical
juncture at the end of which students get tracked into different education paths that affect their
future education and work prospects.
We begin by showing that, holding constant performance on standardized, blindly-graded tests,
immigrant students receive lower grades when graded by their teachers in a non-blind way compared to natives. Lower grades may of course reflect factors other than stereotypes, such as statistical discrimination or differential performance of non-native speakers on multiple choice tests.
In order to isolate the role of stereotypes, we administer a survey to teachers including an Implicit
Association Tests (IAT) to capture stereotypes against immigrants. The IAT is a computer-based
tool developed by social psychologists, designed to minimize the risk of social desirability bias in
1

In turn, the perception of effort put in by the needy significantly affects the propensity of society to help the poor
(Alesina and Glaeser, 2004; Fong, 2001; Alesina et al., 2018).
2 Immigrant students are defined according to their citizenship. They include first generation students born abroad
and second generation students born in Italy from both parents who are not Italian citizens.

2

self-reported answers, and it is widely used in several contexts (e.g., Greenwald et al., 2009). As we
explain in detail in Section 3.1, our IAT measures stereotypes using the difference in reaction times
when teachers are asked to associate positive and negative attributes with immigrant-sounding and
native-sounding names.
The results of our IAT show that teachers generally hold strong, negative stereotypes towards
immigrant students. According to the metrics for IAT scores proposed by Greenwald et al. (2009),
two thirds of teachers in our sample exhibit ‘moderate to severe’ stereotypes, and as much as 91
percent exhibit some stereotypes against immigrants. Additional evidence on the correlates of IAT
score suggests that teachers’ stereotypes against immigrants – and the resulting bias in grading –
mainly reflects discriminatory beliefs. Negative stereotypes about immigrants do not reflect worse
past experiences with this group, as measured by the immigrant-native gap in standardized test
scores across previous cohorts of students met by each teacher. Furthermore, teachers’ IAT scores
correlate with their own self-reported prejudice against immigrants in other contexts, as measured
by specific questions we adapted from the World Values Survey.
We find that math teachers with higher IAT score (indicating more negative stereotypes against
immigrants) give lower grades to immigrant students compared to native ones with the same performance on blindly-graded tests. This provides suggestive evidence that at least part of the grade
penalty in math reflects bias, and is not purely due to statistical discrimination or unobserved student characteristics. Stereotypes of literature teachers do not affect grades assigned to immigrants
on average, potentially reflecting different teachers’ expectations and standards applied in literature
for immigrants who are less familiar with Italian.3
After showing that there is a link between discrimination in grading and teachers’ stereotypes,
we evaluate the effectiveness of a simple intervention aimed at reducing bias. The intervention
consists of revealing own stereotypes to teachers. Specifically, we allow a randomly selected sample of teachers to see their IAT score shortly before the end of semester grading, while the other
teachers were allowed to do so only shortly after. We find that both math and literature teachers
who received their IAT score before the date when they submitted grades gave higher grades to immigrants relative to native students, compared to teachers who received their IAT scores afterwards.
This result is driven by teachers who do not report explicit views against immigrants in answer to
the World Values Survey question on labor market access for immigrants. In other words, the effect
of revealing own IAT score holds only for those teachers who did not appear as biased in explicit
3 In

fact, higher implicit stereotypes of literature teachers have negative effects on grading for second generation
immigrants and positive effects for first generation immigrants, with the latter being the least familiar with the language.
In other words, literature teachers appear to internalize the need to help first generation immigrants because of language
difficulties, regardless of their stereotypes. That is, even a biased teacher may acknowledge language problems of recent
immigrants and be lenient although still biased.

3

survey questions.
The results of our experiment tell us three things. The first is that teachers who did not express
explicit anti-immigrant views were not aware of (or had not fully internalized) their stereotypes,
otherwise our communication would not have contained any new information based on which they
could update their behavior. The second is that the intervention was effective for the set of teachers
whose grading varied systematically with their IAT score (i.e., math teachers). The last is that
this intervention may also induce reactions by people who may not act upon their stereotypes in a
discriminatory way: literature teachers’ grading of immigrants does not vary with their IAT score,
yet they respond to receiving a message that tells them that they hold negative implicit stereotypes
against immigrants.
Our work is related to several strands of literature. Within the broad area of empirical studies
of discrimination, we contribute to the recent economics literature emphasizing the benefits of
considering implicit bias (Van den Bergh et al., 2010; Guryan and Charles, 2013; Lowes et al.,
2015; Burns et al., 2016; Bertrand and Duflo, 2017).4 Exploiting data from French grocery stores,
Glover et al. (2017) provide evidence that exposure to managers with stronger implicit bias, as
measured by an IAT similar to ours, negatively affects performance of minorities in the workplace.
In the context of gender bias, Reuben et al. (2014) show in a lab experiment that the gender IAT
predicts employers’ biased expectations against females and a suboptimal update of expectations
after ability is revealed. Carlana (2018) shows that teachers’ stereotypes affect the gender gap in
math, track choice, and self-confidence in own mathematical abilities for girls in middle school.
Research in social psychology and medicine has examined individuals’ emotional responses
when provided feedback about their own implicit associations, showing that people tend to react
defensively – for instance, by questioning the validity of the IAT – when provided with evidence
about tensions between their own explicit and implicit bias (O’Brien et al., 2010; Howell et al.,
2015; Sukhera et al., 2018). However, none of these papers investigates whether revealing own
stereotypes to people has an impact on discriminatory behavior toward others. This is precisely the
contribution of the present paper.
We also add to the literature that analyzes bias of teachers against minority children. This literature finds that teacher expectations are often biased against minority students. This may lead to a
self-fulfilling prophecy with students ultimately behaving in the direction predicted by biased expectations (Papageorge et al., 2018; Jussim and Harber, 2005; Rosenthal and Jacobson, 1968). In a
4 Economists have widely studied discrimination at least since Becker et al. (1957) (for a review of theoretical and
empirical issues, see Altonji and Blank, 1999). Evidence of discrimination include that by employers (Bertrand and
Mullainathan, 2004), police officers (Fryer Jr, 2016; Coviello and Persico, 2015; Knowles et al., 2001), courts (Dobbie
et al., 2018; Alesina and La Ferrara, 2014), and teachers (Figlio, 2005).

4

lab experiment, Gilliam et al. (2016) track teachers’ eye gazes while watching a video and find that,
when expecting challenging behaviors, teachers gazed longer at black children, even if all children
were behaving similarly. A few previous papers compare teacher-assigned (non-blind) grades and
standardized (blind) test scores across minority and non-minority students (Botelho et al., 2015;
Burgess and Greaves, 2013; Hanna and Linden, 2012; Van Ewijk, 2011) and across genders (Lavy
and Sand, 2018; Lavy, 2008). Those papers cannot distinguish between the role of teachers’ biases
and unobserved student characteristics, which we are able to do using the IAT as a direct measure
of teachers’ stereotypes. Furthermore, none of the above papers test the effectiveness of remedial
interventions.5
Finally, our results speak to recent studies that investigate how to reduce bias towards immigrants and affect people’s inclination towards immigration policy. A first group of studies has
analyzed the impact of providing information about immigrants on attitudes towards them (Grigorieff et al., 2017; Hopkins et al., 2018) and towards immigration policy (Facchini et al., 2016).
A second group has focused on the contact hypothesis, i.e., the idea that promoting inter-group
contact may help reduce prejudice (Allport, 1958). For instance, Burns et al. (2016) show that
exposure to a roommate of a different race affects stereotypes (measured by the IAT), attitudes, and
academic performance of students. As suggested also by a recent meta-analysis by Paluck et al.
(2018), contact “typically reduces prejudice [but] (...) the absence of studies addressing adults’
racial or ethnic prejudices [is] an important limitation for both theory and policy”.
We consider a novel intervention that targets adults and consists of providing information to
teachers on their own stereotypes. Our intervention has clear policy relevance given the increasing
trend among institutions and corporations, especially in the U.S., to administer the IAT to their employees as an educational tool to increase awareness about race and gender implicit associations.6
Our paper contributes to understanding the causal effect of providing this information to people.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we provide some background
information about the grading system in Italian middle schools. Section 3 describes our data and
the experimental design. In section 4 we present our results, and the last section concludes.
5 Figlio

et al. (2018) study the performance of immigrant children in Florida and relate it to some aspects of their
home country cultural traits, in particular long-term orientation.
6 Among others, Harvard University strongly encourages “every search committee member to take at least one Implicit Association Test (IAT)” (https://faculty.harvard.edu/recruitment-best-practices) and Starbucks
has recently promoted a “racial bias training” for all employees (https://twitter.com/starbucks/status/
997528229593280513).

5

2

Institutional background

In the Italian schooling system, the share of immigrant children, defined as children without Italian
citizenship, has substantially increased in the last two decades, moving from less than 1 percent in
1998 to 10 percent in 2018. Immigrant students come from diverse geographic backgrounds, with
the most represented nationalities being Romanian, Albanian, Moroccan, Chinese, Filipino, and
Indian (see Appendix Table A.1).
Middle school is the analog of grades 6 to 8 in the US system. Students during those years are
assigned to the same class for all subjects, with an average class size of 24. Students are usually
taught by the same teachers for all three years of middle school, and they spend at least 6 hours with
the math teacher and 5 hours with the literature teacher per week. Teachers are assigned to schools
by the Italian Ministry of Education and their allocation is determined by seniority: teachers with
more experience can get schools that are higher in their preference ranking, and tend to move close
to their home town and away from disadvantaged areas (Barbieri et al., 2011).
Grades received by students in Italian middle schools typically range from 3 to 10; 6 is the minimum passing grade. Students are assessed continuously, but they receive an official grade for each
subject twice a year: at the end of the first semester (in January) and at the end of the second (in
June). These two sets of ‘final’ grades mostly reflect their performance on exams, but also incorporate a broader evaluation of their diligence in doing homework and attention during lectures. In the
questionnaire we administered to teachers, we ask them to describe the relative weights they assign
to these various factors. Both math and literature teachers reported that they assign significant importance to attention in the classroom. Thus, end of semester grades may include a non-negligible
component of subjective evaluation by teachers. While the final (possibly subjective) grades are
given each year, standardized test scores in math and reading are administered only at the end of
middle school (grade 8) to all Italian students. These are mainly multiple choice exams prepared by
the National Institute for the Evaluation of the Italian Education System (INVALSI). Importantly,
for the purposes of our study, INVALSI tests are blind graded following a precise evaluation grid,
and the grading is not done by students’ own teachers.
The Italian schooling system is characterized by tracking at the end of grade 8. Students are
free to choose between academic high-school (liceo), technical high-school, and vocational highschool. Academic and technical schools offer much better educational and employment prospects
than vocational schools (Carlana et al., 2018).

6

3

Data and empirical strategy

3.1

Teachers survey and the IAT

Our sample includes 65 schools in five cities of Northern Italy: Milan, Brescia, Padua, Genoa and
Turin. We invited these schools to take part in our research project, describing the scope of our
research as being about “The role of teachers in high-school track choice”. A sizeable part of the
questionnaire was indeed devoted to understanding the criteria used by teachers to advise students
on high school choice for a different project. We intentionally avoided mentioning immigrants
when describing our research, because we did not want teachers to select into participating based
on their sensitivity to the topic of immigration or their bias. From September 2016 to March
2017, we administered the survey to all math and literature teachers in the 102 schools in our
sample. However, only 65 schools were surveyed before the end of January 2017, which is when
the mid-term grades are assigned, so these are the schools included in the main analysis of this
paper. We show below that the remaining 38 schools are not different in terms of most observable
characteristics.
The survey was conducted by enumerators using tablets during meetings held in school buildings with all math and literature teachers of each school. Enumerators gave each teacher one tablet
to complete the survey independently and were available in the room to answer questions or help
with the tablet if requested. Teachers who agreed to take part in the survey gave written informed
consent. The time to complete the survey was around 30 minutes, and participants did not receive
any compensation. Among all math and literature teachers working in the schools included in the
final sample, around 80 percent completed our survey, yielding a sample of 1384 teachers for our
analysis.
The first part of our survey involved an IAT aimed at measuring implicit stereotypes toward
immigrants. This was followed by a series of questions on teachers’ demographic characteristics,
teaching experience, and explicit beliefs about immigrants. The idea underlying the IAT is that the
easier the mental task, the faster the response production. Therefore, the test requires categorizing
words to the left or to the right of a computer or tablet screen and measures the strength of the
association between two concepts based on response times.7 Specifically, the IAT that we administered associates immigrant/native children with words related to good/bad in the specific schooling
context. Teachers were presented with two sets of stimuli. The first set included typical Italian
names (e.g., Francesca or Luca) and common names among immigrant children in Italy (e.g., Fatima or Alejandro). The second set consisted of positive adjectives (e.g., smart) and negative ones
7 This

concept was initially developed by Donders (1868).

7

(e.g., lazy). One word at a time (either a name or an adjective) appears at the center of the screen,
and individuals are instructed to categorize it to the left or to the right according to different labels
displayed on the top of the screen. For instance, the right label might say “Immigrant” and the left
one might say “Italian”. Names and adjectives randomly appear at the center of the screen, and
subjects are asked to categorize the words as quickly as possible. In one type of round, subjects are
asked to categorize native-sounding names and negative adjectives to the same side of the screen,
whereas in another, they are asked to categorize immigrant-sounding names and negative adjectives
to the same side. The order of the two types of rounds is randomly selected at the individual level.
To the extent that teachers are biased against immigrant students, they should react more slowly
when the label “Immigrant” (“Italian”) is associated with positive (negative) adjectives, because
those associations are more difficult for their minds to process. The IAT thus measures stereotypes
by the difference in reaction times between rounds in which native-sounding names and negative
adjectives appear on the same side of the screen and rounds in which immigrant-sounding names
and negative adjectives are on the same side. It is hard to fake the IAT, as this would require
strategically speeding up or slowing down in certain blocks, and the improved scoring algorithm
(Greenwald et al., 2003) discards observations in which reaction times are abnormally slow or fast.
Also, faking is quite unlikely within our sample of teachers, as the IAT is not widely known in Italy.
IATs have the great advantage of (i) avoiding social-desirability bias in the response and (ii)
capturing implicit associations that may be unknown to the individual, but may nevertheless affect
his or her interaction with the stigmatized group. For this reason, the IAT is a widely-used tool in
social psychology. Although there is some mixed evidence on its predictive validity (Blanton et al.,
2009; Oswald et al., 2013; Olson and Fazio, 2004), implicit bias has been found to correlate with
outcomes in the real world and in laboratory experiments (Nosek et al., 2007; Greenwald et al.,
2009; Burns et al., 2016), including, e.g., call-back rates of job applicants (Rooth, 2010).
[Insert Figure 1]
Figure 1 shows the distribution of IAT scores for the teachers in our sample. A positive score
means a stronger association between foreign-sounding names and negative attributes, while a negative score suggests a stronger association between foreign-sounding names and positive attributes.
Using the typical thresholds in the literature (Greenwald et al., 2009), an IAT score between −0.15
and 0.15 indicates no bias, a score between 0.15 and 0.35 (in absolute value) a slight association between the two concepts, and a score higher than 0.35 (in absolute value) a moderate to
severe association. According to this metric, the IAT scores in Figure 1 suggest that teachers
are generally biased against immigrants. The mean IAT score is 0.47, which is slightly higher
8

than the mean of 0.41 in the sample of Italians who decided to take the IAT online on the website https://implicit.harvard.edu, and substantially higher than the mean of most European
countries (see Figure A.1). Over 67 percent of the teachers exhibit moderate to severe bias, i.e., a
score greater than 0.35.
[Insert Table 1]
Table 1 (columns 1 to 5) shows the correlation between a number of teachers’ characteristics
and their IAT scores. Female teachers are less biased than male teachers, and so are teachers born
in northern Italy compared to those born in southern Italy, although in both cases the difference is
very small. We find no relevant differences along other characteristics such as having children or
parental background. On the other hand, IAT scores are correlated with beliefs about immigrants,
as elicited by a question we included in the survey. In particular, column 5 shows that teachers who
believe that immigrants and natives should have equal opportunities of accessing available jobs on
average have weaker implicit stereotypes against immigrants.8
In columns 6 and 7 of Table 1, we test whether teachers’ stereotypes reflect the relative average ability or variation in the ability of the native and immigrant students to whom teachers were
previously exposed. We collected the standardized test scores (INVALSI) of the students taught by
the teachers in our sample during the five years prior to our analysis. We could recover previous
students’ test scores for 779 out of 1384 teachers, which explains the reduction in the sample in
columns 6 to 9.9 We find no meaningful correlation between teachers’ IAT and the relative average test scores (column 6) or the standard deviation difference in test score (column 7) of native
and immigrant students they taught in the past. Therefore, stronger stereotypes toward immigrant
students do not seem to reflect statistical discrimination based on objective information on average
group ability.
The last two columns show that the results remain basically unchanged when we introduce all
regressors at the same time (column 8) and when we include school fixed effects (column 9). Overall, the evidence in Table 1 is consistent with the IAT capturing negative beliefs against immigrants.
In the Appendix Table A.2, we show the correlation between teachers’ implicit stereotypes and
beliefs about factors affecting the different high-school choice of native and immigrant children
(the detailed questions are reported in Appendix B.2). Teachers with a higher IAT score are more
likely to believe that the lower ability is a crucial explanation of why immigrants are more likely to
go to vocational high schools, rather than academic oriented ones, while belief in the importance
8 We
9 We

took the wording of this question from the World Value Survey.
include teachers who had at least three immigrant (and native) students.

9

of other factors that may determine the choice of high-school track, such as economic reasons, are
not correlated with IAT scores.

3.2

Student performance

To measure students’ academic performance, we obtained administrative data on the grades received by students at the end of grade 8 for schooling years between 2011-12 and 2015-16 from
all schools in our sample. We have two separate measures of performance for each student: grades
received from teachers on non-blindly graded tests, and blindly-graded, standardized test scores
from INVALSI. Appendix Figure A.2 shows the distribution of grades assigned by teachers (Panel
A) and of standardized test scores (Panel B) separately for native and immigrant students. In both
cases, the distribution for natives first order stochastically dominates that for immigrants. This fact
may reflect differences in ability between native and immigrant students as well as differences in
the grading policy of teachers toward the two groups. As a first step to isolate the latter, we compare
grades received from teachers by native and immigrant students with comparable standardized test
score.
[Insert Figure 2]
Figure 2 plots the average grades given by teachers to immigrant and native students (on the vertical axis) by quintiles of the standardized test score (on the horizontal axis), with the associated 95
percent confidence intervals. Conditional on obtaining the same standardized test score, immigrant
students receive significantly lower grades from teachers along the whole distribution. The average
gap is 0.13 points for math and 0.20 points for literature, comparable to the difference in grades
by mother’s education. In fact, controlling for the quintiles of the standardized test score, students
whose mothers have a university degree receive a grade that is on average 0.15 points higher for
math and 0.21 for literature, compared to children of mothers with a high-school diploma.
While this gap in grades could be due to bias against immigrants, it may also be explained
by the ability of teachers to assess aspects of multidimensional competence (e.g., oral expression,
behavior in class, etc.) that are not easily captured by multiple choice, standardized tests. We
address this point in section 4.1.

3.3

The experiment

We administered the survey with the IAT test in 102 schools, but, due to logistical constraints, we
only managed to complete the data collection for 65 of them before the end of semester grading
10

in January.10 Only these 65 schools are thus included in our experiment, so that our sample for
the evaluation of the experimental intervention contains 6, 031 students in grade 8 in the school
year 2016-2017 and their 533 teachers, 262 in math and 271 in literature. We have information on
student grades and their math teachers for 5, 141 pupils, and on student grades and their literature
teachers for 5, 138.
Balance in the characteristics of teachers surveyed before the end of January (hence included in
our analysis) and after the end of January (not included) is shown in Appendix Table A.3. Balance
in the characteristics of their students is shown in Appendix Table A.4. In both cases the two groups
are comparable in terms of the characteristics we care about. Importantly, the sample of teachers is
perfectly balanced in terms of implicit bias against immigrants (first row in Appendix Table A.3).
For the few characteristics that differ across samples (e.g., gender or place of birth), the normalized
difference never exceeds the cutoff of 0.25 suggested by Imbens and Rubin (2015).11 Overall, the
sample of schools used for the intervention is representative of the original population we started
from.
We offered the possibility of receiving feedback on the IAT score to all teachers in our sample
and more than 80 percent of teachers chose to have it. The timing of feedback was randomized
across schools. Teachers in half of the schools (the treated group) received the feedback before the
end-of-semester grading, which took place at the end of January 2017. Teachers in the remaining
schools (the control group) received the feedback within two weeks. We chose to randomize at
the school level rather than at the teacher level in order to avoid contamination between teachers
who received the early feedback and those who received the feedback after term grading. The
teachers were not aware that we could observe the grades they gave to their students. We obtained
this information directly from the National Evaluation Center, substantially reducing the risk of
experimenter demand effects in teachers’ grading (De Quidt et al., 2018).
The feedback was provided over e-mail. Each teacher received his/her IAT score and a brief
description of the test explaining whether in their case the association between immigrant names
10 The

difference in the times when the survey was administered depended on logistical constraints on our side (e.g.,
availability of tablets and enumerators) and on the schools’ side. In particular, the principals needed to agree on the
data collection and needed to consent to share administrative data on teachers’ grades and standardized test scores of
all their students.
11 The normalized difference we show in column 4 is the formula recommended by Imbens and Wooldridge (2009):
X1 − X2
∆= q
S12 + S22
where X 1 and X 2 are the means of covariate X in the two sub-groups that are being compared, and S12 and S22 are
the corresponding sample variances of X. Imbens and Rubin (2015) recommend as a rule of thumb that ∆ should not
exceed 0.25.

11

and good/bad adjectives was “slight”, “moderate” or “strong”based on the thresholds typically
used in the literature (Greenwald et al., 2009) and represented also in Figure 1. They were also
reassured that these results would not be shared with anyone. The detailed text of the e-mail
is reported in Appendix B.3. Appendix Table A.5 provides evidence on the correlation between
several teacher characteristics and the decision to receive the feedback. Interestingly, there is no
significant correlation with either implicit or explicit biases against immigrants – respectively, IAT
scores and answers to the World Value Survey question on immigrant rights to jobs – nor are there
significant correlations with the subject taught or own gender.12
[Insert Table 2 and 3]
Tables 2 and 3, respectively, show the average characteristics of teachers and students in treated
and control schools. As should be expected by virtue of randomization, teachers and students
in the two groups are balanced in terms of observable characteristics. None of the variables are
statistically different at conventional levels between the two groups. The share of female teachers
is slightly higher in the treatment group (only significant at the 10 percent level), but even in this
case the standardized difference is below the critical threshold of 0.25 suggested by Imbens and
Rubin (2015).
[Insert Figure 3]
Figure 3 shows the timeline of the survey and experiment, as well as the periods covered by the
data on standardized test scores and teacher-assigned grades. The top part of the figure shows the
sample of students used to analyze whether teachers with more implicit bias actually discriminate
against immigrants. For this exercise, we exploit cohorts of students graduating from middle school
between June 2012 and June 2016 for whom we have the standardized test score (INVALSI) in June
of grade 8 and teacher-assigned grades in exactly the same period. In other words, the analysis
of bias in grading is done using end-of-year grades because this is the only time at which two
independent measurements of achievement exist. Importantly, knowledge of our study could not
affect the behavior of teachers toward these cohorts of children given that they graduate from middle
school before our data collection.
12 Instead,

there is a significant correlation with the time employed to complete the survey: completion time one
standard deviation or more than the mean value is associated with a 5 percentage point higher probability of consenting
to receive the feedback. In addition, those who completed only the IAT and not the survey were almost 10 percentage
points less likely to consent to receive the email about own stereotypes. These correlations do not survive when
including school fixed effects, which explain a substantial share of the variation in the choice of receiving feedback as
shown by the R-squared.

12

The bottom part of the figure shows the timeline for the survey and experiment. During the first
semester of school year 2016/17 (October-January), we administered the survey and the IAT to all
teachers in our sample. During the last week of January 2017, before end of semester grading, we
sent feedback about own IAT score to teachers in a random group of schools. All other teachers
were allowed to see their score after the mid-term grading (i.e., first week of February 2018). The
impact of the intervention is tested by looking at the end-of-semester grades given by teachers to
the cohort of students in grade 8, who eventually graduated from middle school in June 2017. No
standardized test scores exist for evaluations at the end of the first semester, which implies that in
analyzing the impact of our experiment we cannot control for the INVALSI score (but this does
not affect our ability to estimate the impact of the intervention, given randomization). Data on
teacher-assigned grades at the end of the first semester are collected by INVALSI only for students
in grade 8. This is why we restrict our analysis to students in grade 8.

4
4.1

Results
Implicit biases and grading

Table 4 investigates the relationship between teachers’ implicit bias and grading of immigrant vs.
native students. The sample includes all students enrolled in grade 8 in our schools between school
years 2011-12 and 2015-16. The dependent variable is end-of-year grade received from the math
(Panel A) and literature (Panel B) teacher. Note that this grade differs from the mid-term grade
given at the end of January, which we use to evaluate the impact of our experiment. The advantage
of considering end-of-year grades for this part of the analysis is that students take the INVALSI
standardized test at the same time, which allows us to compare students’ performance on blindly
and non-blindly graded tests. All specifications in columns 1-6 of Table 4 include teacher fixed
effects. We include class fixed effects as a robustness check in the last column.
[Insert Table 4]
Column 1 shows that immigrant children receive on average half a grade less than natives in
both math and literature (on a scale going from 3 to 10, where 6 is the passing grade). The gap is
slightly larger for literature compared to math: indeed, we should expect language to be a stronger
barrier for immigrants in the former subject than in the latter. After controlling for student ability,
as measured by a cubic polynomial of the standardized test score (INVALSI), the gap decreases to
about 0.1 points, or a tenth of a standard deviation, in both math and literature (column 2).

13

In column 3 of Panel A, we interact the dummy for immigrant student with math teacher’s IAT.
We find that math teachers with stronger implicit stereotypes against immigrants give them lower
grades, holding constant students’ ability (as measured by the standardized test score). A one standard deviation increase in teacher’s IAT score (0.26, equivalent to moving from an unbiased teacher
to a slightly biased one) is associated with a 0.033 decrease in immigrants’ grades in math on average, or half of the average gap between immigrants and natives with identical performance on
standardized tests. Therefore, negative (implicit) attitudes towards immigrants systematically correlate with the way in which math teachers evaluate student performance. These biases in teachers’
minds may operate in an unconscious way, without any intention to directly harm the stigmatized
group (Gilliam et al., 2016; Van den Bergh et al., 2010).
The remaining columns of Table 4, Panel A, show that the relationship between teachers’ IAT
scores and immigrants’ grades in math is robust to including additional covariates. In column 4, we
control for student characteristics (gender, first vs. second generation immigrant, and mother’s education), and in column 5 we add teacher characteristics (age, gender, place of birth, and whether the
teacher holds an advanced STEM degree). We also interact all these variables with the immigrant
dummy to make sure that our main explanatory variable of interest does not capture the effect of
other teacher characteristics correlated with the IAT score. Note that after including all interactions
of the immigrant dummy with student and teacher characteristics (i.e., in columns 4 to 7 of Table
4), we can no longer interpret the coefficient of the standalone immigrant dummy.13 We find that
the estimated effect of the IAT score on the grading of immigrant students remains unaffected. In
column 6, we add the grade received by students at the end middle school for their behavior in the
classroom. This grade is decided jointly by all teachers of the class, with a stronger weight given
to the math and literature teachers. Although the variable Behavior may be endogenous, so we
cannot interpret the resulting coefficients in a causal way, it is reassuring that the inclusion of the
variable does not affect the coefficient on Immigrant*Teacher’s IAT, suggesting that our results are
not driven by worse behavior in the classroom of immigrants compared to natives. Our coefficient
of interest is also unchanged by replacing teacher fixed effects with class fixed effects (last column
of the table).
The evidence in Panel A of Table 4 confirms that math teachers with stronger implicit stereotypes, as measured by higher race IAT scores, give lower grades on average to immigrant students
than to native students with the same performance on blindly-graded, standardized tests. Panel B
of Table 4 shows that this is not true for literature teachers, as there is no relationship between IAT
scores and immigrants’ grades in literature (Columns 3-7). We propose two non-mutually exclu13 For

this reason, at the bottom of each panel we report the mean of the native-immigrant gap in grades when
including all control variables but not their interaction with the immigrant dummy.

14

sive explanations for the different results for math and literature teachers. First, multiple choice,
standardized tests in literature may be ill-suited to measure skills that are considered important
by literature teachers (e.g., language proficiency), while the problem may be less severe in math
(Bettinger, 2012). If this is the case, misalignment between the skills measured by standardized
tests and by teacher evaluations may hamper the identification of subjective biases in the latter.
Second, taking into account the additional difficulties faced by non-native speakers in their subject,
literature teachers may impose lower standards on immigrant than on native students. Indeed, literature teachers with stronger stereotypes may expect less from non-native speakers and this effect
may offset any negative impact of (implicit or explicit) biases on grading of immigrant students.
Appendix Table A.6 provides supporting evidence for the latter explanation using the generation
of immigration of children. First generation immigrants are less likely to be proficient in the native
language than second generation immigrants. In line with our proposed explanation, we find that
literature teachers with stronger stereotypes give relatively higher grades to first generation than to
second generation immigrants (coefficients on First Generation*Teacher’s IAT in columns 8-10),
although statistical power is an issue when detecting effects within specific subgroups. By contrast, the effect of teacher stereotypes on grades in math, for which language proficiency is less of
an issue, does not vary between first and second generation immigrants (coefficients on the same
variable in columns 3-5).

4.2

Revealing implicit stereotypes

Figure 4 shows the effect of our treatment on the grades given by math (top panel) and literature
(bottom panel) teachers, to immigrant (left) and native (right) students in January 2017. The sample
includes 8th graders during the school year 2016-2017. Teachers are not aware that we observe the
grades they give to their students, substantially reducing the risk of experimenter demand effects.
The grade distribution, on the horizontal axis, goes from 3 to 10. Colored bars represent the grade
distribution of students whose teachers received the feedback before the end-of-semester grading,
while black lines represent the grades of students whose teachers received the feedback after. The
figure shows that receiving the feedback on the IAT before grading shifts the grade distribution to
the right for immigrant students and to the left for native ones.
[Insert Figure 4]
Table 5 quantifies the average effects in Figure 4. The variable ‘Early Feedback’ in Panel A is
an indicator for whether the school was randomized into the treated group. We are thus comparing
grading by teachers eligible for receiving the feedback in time to adjust their grades (i.e., before
15

end of January) and teachers who could receive the feedback only after end-of-semester grading.
The coefficient in the first row of Panel A is therefore an intention-to-treat effect. Math teachers
eligible for treatment (i.e., ‘Early Feedback’ taking value 1) give on average 0.4 points more to
immigrants and 0.15 points less to natives compared to teachers randomized into the control group
(columns 1-3). The effect on grading of immigrant students in literature is qualitatively similar, but
only about 3/4 as large in magnitude (columns 4-6).
[Insert Table 5]
In Panel B of Table 5 we rescale the intention-to-treat effect by the take-up rate of the early
feedback, which was above 80 percent, in order to compute the treatment effect of bias revelation.
The variable ‘Email’ in Table 5 takes value 1 if the teacher actually received the feedback and 0
if he/she did not receive any feedback. The effect on the interaction between the treatment and
immigrant students’ grades increases in magnitude to about +0.5 for math and +0.4 for literature,
while the effect for natives is around −0.2 points for both subjects.
It should be stressed that the magnitude of the treatment effect in Table 5 is not comparable to
the magnitude of the bias in grading (i.e., the difference between teacher grades and standardized
test scores) shown in Table 4. The experiment was done at the end of the first semester (when
no standardized test scores exist), while the bias in grading is measured at the end of the second
semester (when we have information on both standardized test scores and teacher-assigned grades).
Also, the grading policy of teachers likely differs between the first and the second semester, especially around the pass grade. In both semesters, students fail if they obtain a grade lower than 6, but
failing has very different consequences in the first and second semester. Failing in the first semester
represents a ‘warning’ with no immediate consequences, while students may be retained if they fail
more than one subject in the second semester. For this reason, teachers may be more hesitant to
fail students in the second than in the first semester. Indeed, the average fraction of students failing
either literature or mathematics (or both) is 21 percent in the first semester, but only 2 percent in the
second semester. Among immigrant students, failure rates in the first and second semester reach 31
and 4 percent, respectively. Lower propensity to fail students in the second semester sets a floor to
teacher grades – and, possibly, to penalties for immigrant students – compared to the first semester.
For this reason, stereotypes likely induce larger effects on relative grades of immigrant and native
students in the first than in the second semester.
[Insert Table 6]
Visual evidence in Figure 4 suggests that treatment effects may be particularly large around the
margin between passing and failing students (i.e., between grades 6 and 5), especially for math
16

teachers. This is confirmed in Table 6, in which we estimate the effect of the early feedback on
the probability of failing immigrant and native students, respectively. For math teachers (columns
1-3), early IAT feedback decreases the probability of failing immigrants by around 10 percentage
points, whereas failing rates of native students remain unaffected. There is no significant effect for
literature teachers.
Overall, we document large effects of revealing own stereotypes to math teachers on both grades
and failure rates of immigrant students in math. As for literature teachers, the effect on grading is
smaller, and there is no effect on the probability of failing immigrant students in math. These
findings dovetail nicely with the evidence in Table 4 that teacher stereotypes are less relevant for
grading in literature than for grading in math – with the caveat, discussed above, that standardized
test scores may be a noisy measure of student ability in literature.

4.3

Heterogeneous effects

In Table 7, we explore how changes in teacher behavior induced by our intervention vary with
teacher and student characteristics. For comparison, columns 1 and 5 report the baseline estimated
effects in math and literature, respectively, according to the most stringent specifications in columns
3 and 6 of Table 5.
[Insert Table 7]
We first examine heterogeneity in the (intention-to-treat) effect by the initial level of teacher
explicit bias against immigrants. If being revealed one’s own (implicit) bias is more informative
for teachers unaware of such bias, we should expect a greater reaction from teachers who reported
no explicit bias in the initial survey. To test this hypothesis, in columns 2 and 6 of Table 7 we
interact the indicator variables for immigrant students and teachers’ early feedback with the dummy
variable WVS, which is equal to 1 for teachers who in our survey agree that “immigrants and
natives should have equal opportunities of accessing available jobs”. Not only are these teachers
slightly less biased to begin with (see the previous Table 1), they are also more responsive to our
intervention, as demonstrated by the positive coefficient of the triple interaction term in columns 2
and 6. This suggests that teachers actually react to being revealed a bias they were unaware of.
In the remaining columns of Table 7, we turn to heterogeneity by student characteristics. In
columns 3 and 7 we explore the role of the generation of immigration. Revealing stereotypes to
teachers does not lead them to differentially adjust the grades they give to first or second generation
immigrants. In column 4 and 8, we estimate the differential effect by area of origin of immigrant

17

students: Eastern Europe, Africa, Latin America, and Asia. Math teachers receiving the early feedback increase grades more for students who are geographically or linguistically closer to natives –
respectively, Eastern Europeans (the excluded category) and Latin Americans. Math teachers do
not respond to the treatment when they grade African or Asian students. The pattern is less clear
for literature teachers. The heterogeneous effects by region of origin observed for math teachers are
suggestive of a role of cultural or linguistic proximity as mediators in the impact of our treatment.
Finally, we also explored heterogeneity of the effect with the timing of when teachers took
the survey or were informed of the IAT: before/after Christmas, and number of days before/after
end-of-semester grading. However, we could not detect any significant differences along these
dimensions.

5

Conclusions

Immigrant children receive lower teacher-assigned grades than natives after controlling for their
performance on anonymously graded standardized tests. This result per se is not a proof of bias,
since there may be characteristics that differentiate immigrants from natives that are observable
to teachers, but unobservable to the econometrician (e.g., disciplinary problems or differences in
performance on standardized multiple choice questions versus open ended ones). However, by administering an Implicit Association Test (IAT) to teachers, we are able to show that the difference
in grading of natives and immigrants is correlated with teachers’ stereotypes against immigrants
for math, potentially the most objective among teacher-assigned grades. The effect is not statistically significant for literature teachers, although this masks interesting heterogeneous effects,
with second (first) generation immigrants receiving lower (higher) grades from teachers with more
stereotypes. Literature teachers with stronger stereotypes may expect less from children who are
less familiar the language and, thus, they may be positively surprised when such students perform
well.
We also show that informing the teachers about their own stereotypes may be an effective
policy to reduce discrimination in grading. Both math and literature teachers randomized into a
treatment that consists of receiving feedback on their IAT before end-of-term grading react to this
information by increasing the grades they give to immigrants and decreasing the grades they give
to natives. Only teachers with positive explicit views toward immigrants react to the treatment.
Our results speak to a new policy debate, particularly to recent efforts by corporations and
institutions in the U.S. and Canada to increase awareness about implicit bias by encouraging every
search committee member or new employee to take an IAT. In the context of schooling, the IAT

18

test is simple to implement and it would not cost much to ask every teacher to take it, say at the
beginning of every academic year. Our results suggest that this may help counteract implicit bias
that teachers hold towards negatively stereotyped groups. However, we also want to stress that the
implications of such a policy are not straightforward. By making teachers aware of their ‘implicit’
biases, their evaluation of students becomes more fair if they were acting upon their stereotypes
by giving lower grades to immigrants (i.e. math teachers). But it is possible that teachers whose
negative stereotypes do not translate into discriminatory behavior may also react, thus inducing
positive discrimination toward immigrant children. Further research is needed to assess efficient
and equitable ways to de-bias individuals.

References
Alesina, A. and Glaeser, E. (2004). Fighting poverty in the US and Europe: A world of difference.
Oxford University Press.
Alesina, A. and La Ferrara, E. (2014). A test of racial bias in capital sentencing. The American
Economic Review, 104(11):3397–3433.
Alesina, A., Miano, A., and Stantcheva, S. (2018). Immigration and redistribution. NBER Working
Paper No. 24733.
Allport, G. W. (1958). The nature of prejudice: Abridged. Doubleday.
Altonji, J. G. and Blank, R. M. (1999). Race and gender in the labor market. Handbook of labor
economics, 3:3143–3259.
Barbieri, G., Rossetti, C., and Sestito, P. (2011). The determinants of teacher mobility: Evidence
using Italian teachers’ transfer applications. Economics of Education Review, 30(6):1430–1444.
Becker, G. S. et al. (1957). Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press.
Bertrand, M. and Duflo, E. (2017). Field experiments on discrimination. Handbook of Economic
Field Experiments, pages Pages 309–393.
Bertrand, M. and Mullainathan, S. (2004). Are Emily and Greg more employable than Lakisha
and Jamal? a field experiment on labor market discrimination. The American Economic Review,
94(4):991–1013.

19

Bettinger, E. P. (2012). Paying to learn: The effect of financial incentives on elementary school test
scores. Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(3):686–698.
Blanton, H., Jaccard, J., Klick, J., Mellers, B., Mitchell, G., and Tetlock, P. E. (2009). Strong
claims and weak evidence: Reassessing the predictive validity of the IAT. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 94(3):567.
Bordalo, P., Coffman, K., Gennaioli, N., and Shleifer, A. (2016). Stereotypes. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics.
Bordalo, P., Coffman, K. B., Gennaioli, N., and Shleifer, A. (2018). Beliefs about gender. American
Economic Review.
Botelho, F., Madeira, R. A., and Rangel, M. A. (2015). Racial discrimination in grading: Evidence
from Brazil. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(4):37–52.
Burgess, S. and Greaves, E. (2013). Test scores, subjective assessment, and stereotyping of ethnic
minorities. Journal of Labor Economics, 31(3):535–576.
Burns, J., Corno, L., and La Ferrara, E. (2016). Interaction, stereotypes and performance. Evidence
from South Africa. Working Paper.
Carlana, M. (2018). Implicit stereotypes: Evidence from teachers’ gender bias. Working Paper.
Carlana, M., La Ferrara, E., and Pinotti, P. (2018). Goals and gaps: Educational careers of immigrant children. Mimeo Bocconi Univeristy.
Coviello, D. and Persico, N. (2015). An economic analysis of Black-White disparities in the New
York Police Department’s stop-and-frisk program. The Journal of Legal Studies.
De Quidt, J., Haushofer, J., and Roth, C. (2018). Measuring and bounding experimenter demand.
The American Economic Review.
Dobbie, W., Goldin, J., and Yang, C. S. (2018). The effects of pretrial detention on conviction, future crime, and employment: Evidence from randomly assigned judges. The American Economic
Review.
Donders, F. (1868). On the speed of mental processes. Translation by WG Kostor in Attention and
performance II, ed. WG Koster. North Holland.

20

Facchini, G., Margalit, Y., and Nakata, H. (2016). Countering public opposition to immigration:
The impact of information campaigns. Working Paper.
Figlio, D. (2005). Names, expectations and the Black-White test score gap. NBER Working Paper.
Figlio, D., Giuliano, P., Özek, U., and Sapienza, P. (2018). Long-term orientation and educational
performance. Working Paper.
Fong, C. (2001). Social preferences, self-interest, and the demand for redistribution. Journal of
Public economics, 82(2):225–246.
Fryer Jr, R. G. (2016). An empirical analysis of racial differences in police use of force. NBER
Working Paper.
Gilliam, W. S., Maupin, A. N., Reyes, C. R., Accavitti, M., and Shic, F. (2016). Do early educators’
implicit biases regarding sex and race relate to behavior expectations and recommendations of
preschool expulsions and suspensions. Research Study Brief. Yale University, Yale Child Study
Center, New Haven, CT.
Glover, D., Pallais, A., and Pariente, W. (2017). Discrimination as a self-fulfilling prophecy: Evidence from French grocery stores. The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A., and Banaji, M. R. (2003). Understanding and using the Implicit
Association Test: I. An improved scoring algorithm. Journal of personality and social psychology, 85(2):197.
Greenwald, A. G., Poehlman, T. A., Uhlmann, E. L., and Banaji, M. R. (2009). Understanding
and using the Implicit Association Test: III. Meta-analysis of predictive validity. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 97(1):17.
Grigorieff, A., Roth, C., and Ubfal, D. (2017). Does information change attitudes towards immigrants? representative evidence from survey experiments. Working Paper.
Guryan, J. and Charles, K. K. (2013). Taste-based or statistical discrimination: The economics of
discrimination returns to its roots. The Economic Journal, 123(572):F417–F432.
Hanna, R. N. and Linden, L. L. (2012). Discrimination in grading. American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 4(4):146–68.
Hopkins, D. J., Sides, J., and Citrin, J. (2018). The muted consequences of correct information
about immigration. Working Paper.
21

Howell, J. L., Gaither, S. E., and Ratliff, K. A. (2015). Caught in the middle: Defensive responses
to IAT feedback among whites, blacks, and biracial black/whites. Social Psychological and
Personality Science, 6(4):373–381.
Imbens, G. W. and Rubin, D. B. (2015). Causal inference in statistics, social, and biomedical
sciences. Cambridge University Press.
Imbens, G. W. and Wooldridge, J. M. (2009). Recent developments in the econometrics of program
evaluation. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1):5–86.
Jussim, L. and Harber, K. D. (2005). Teacher expectations and self-fulfilling prophecies: Knowns
and unknowns, resolved and unresolved controversies. Personality and social psychology review,
9(2):131–155.
Knowles, J., Persico, N., and Todd, P. (2001). Racial bias in motor vehicle searches: Theory and
evidence. Journal of Political Economy.
Lavy, V. (2008). Do gender stereotypes reduce girls’ or boys’ human capital outcomes? Evidence
from a natural experiment. Journal of Public Economics, 92(10):2083–2105.
Lavy, V. and Sand, E. (2018). On the origins of gender human capital gaps: Short and long term
consequences of teachers’ stereotypical biases. Journal of Public Economics.
Lowes, S., Nunn, N., Robinson, J. A., and Weigel, J. (2015). Understanding ethnic identity in
Africa: Evidence from the Implicit Association Test (IAT). The American Economic Review,
105(5):340–45.
Nosek, B. A., Smyth, F. L., Hansen, J. J., Devos, T., Lindner, N. M., Ranganath, K. A., Smith,
C. T., Olson, K. R., Chugh, D., Greenwald, A. G., et al. (2007). Pervasiveness and correlates of
implicit attitudes and stereotypes. European Review of Social Psychology, 18(1):36–88.
O’Brien, L. T., Crandall, C. S., Horstman-Reser, A., Warner, R., Alsbrooks, A., and Blodorn, A.
(2010). But I’m no bigot: How prejudiced White Americans maintain unprejudiced self-images.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 40(4):917–946.
Olson, M. A. and Fazio, R. H. (2004). Reducing the influence of extrapersonal associations on the
Implicit Association Test: personalizing the IAT. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
86(5):653.

22

Oswald, F. L., Mitchell, G., Blanton, H., Jaccard, J., and Tetlock, P. E. (2013). Predicting ethnic
and racial discrimination: A meta-analysis of IAT criterion studies. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 105(2):171.
Paluck, E. L., Green, S. A., and Green, D. P. (2018). The contact hypothesis re-evaluated. Behavioural Public Policy, (1–30).
Papageorge, N. W., Gershenson, S., and Kang, K. (2018). Teacher expectations matter. NBER
Working Paper No. 25255.
Reuben, E., Sapienza, P., and Zingales, L. (2014). How stereotypes impair women’s careers in
science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(12):4403–4408.
Rooth, D.-O. (2010). Automatic associations and discrimination in hiring: Real world evidence.
Labour Economics, 17(3):523–534.
Rosenthal, R. and Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the Classroom. The Urban Review, 3(1):16–
20.
Sukhera, J., Milne, A., Teunissen, P. W., Lingard, L., and Watling, C. (2018). The actual versus idealized self: Exploring responses to feedback about implicit bias in health professionals.
Academic Medicine, 93(4):623–629.
Van den Bergh, L., Denessen, E., Hornstra, L., Voeten, M., and Holland, R. W. (2010). The implicit
prejudiced attitudes of teachers: Relations to teacher expectations and the ethnic achievement
gap. American Educational Research Journal, 47(2):497–527.
Van Ewijk, R. (2011). Same work, lower grade? Student ethnicity and teachers’ subjective assessments. Economics of Education Review, 30(5):1045–1058.

23

Tables and Figures
Figure 1: Distribution of the race IAT score across teachers

pro-immigrant bias

some
bias

no bias

0

.2

kdensity d-score Race IAT
.4
.6
.8
1

Teachers' Race Implicit Associations

-.75

-.6

-.45

-.3

-.15

0

.15

Math teachers

.3

severe antiimmigrant bias
.45

.6

.75

.9

1.05 1.2

Literature teachers

Exact p-value of Kolmogorov-Smirnov: 0.920

Notes: This graph shows the distribution of raw IAT scores for mathematics and for literature teachers.
A positive value indicates a stronger association between “natives”-“good” and “immigrant”-“bad”. The
vertical lines indicate the critical thresholds suggested by Greenwald et al. (2009) for defining different
levels of bias, also indicated in the graph.

24

Figure 2: Teacher-assigned grades vs. blindly-graded, standardized test scores

Teacher-assigned grades
6.5
7
7.5
8
6

6

Teacher-assigned grades
6.5
7
7.5
8

8.5

Literature

8.5

Mathematics

1

2
3
4
Blind test score (INVALSI), quintiles
Italians

5

1

Immigrants

2
3
4
Blind test score (INVALSI), quintiles
Italians

5

Immigrants

Notes: This graph shows teacher-assigned grades (non-blindly graded) on the vertical axis and quintiles of
the standardized test score INVALSI (blindly-graded) on the horizontal axis at the end of grade 8. Teacherassigned grades are on a scale from 3 to 10, with 6 as the pass grade. The green squares and lines are for
native students, while the red circles and lines are for immigrant students. The left panel presents evidence
from grades in mathematics, while the right panel presents grades in literature. Students in this sample
completed grade 8 between school years 2011-2012 and 2015-2016.

25

Figure 3: Timeline

end-of-year grades and test scores (INVALSI)
school years 2011/12-2015/16
end-of-semester grading
school year 2016/17

survey & IAT ★
oct-dec

•

jan feb

★ Feedback on IAT offered to teachers randomized into the treated group

•

Feedback on IAT offered to teachers randomized into the control group

Notes: This figure shows the timeline of the data collection, survey, and experiment. As described at length in
Section 3, we obtained administrative data on end-of-year teacher-assigned grades as well as on standardized,
blindly graded test scores for school years 2012/13 through 2015/16. During the first semester of the 2016/17
school year (October-January), we administered the survey and the IAT to all teachers in our sample. On
January 2017, before end of semester grading, we sent feedback about own IAT score to a random group of
teachers. All other teachers were allowed to see their score after the end of semester grading (i.e., February
2018).

26

Figure 4: The impact of revealing bias to teachers on grading of immigrant and native students

Grades
Math teachers
Natives

0

0

.1Density
.2

Density
.1
.2

.3

.3

Immigrants

4

5

6

7

8

Feedback

9

10

4

5

No Feedback

6

7

8

9

Feedback

10

No Feedback

Literature teachers

0

0

.1 Density
.2
.3

.1 Density
.2 .3 .4

.4

Natives

.5

Immigrants

4

5

6

Feedback

7

8

9

10

4

No Feedback

5

6

Feedback

7

8

9

10

No Feedback

Notes: This graph shows the distribution of grades given to native and immigrant children by math and
literature teachers eligible (light blue bars) and non-eligible (striped bars) for receiving feedback about own
IAT score before end of semester grading.

27

Table 1: Correlation between teachers characteristics and IAT
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.002
(0.002)

-0.039
(0.027)
-0.056∗∗∗
(0.017)
-0.014
(0.020)
0.027
(0.022)
-0.022
(0.028)
-0.045∗
(0.025)
0.010
(0.092)
0.002
(0.002)

-0.046
(0.032)
-0.042∗∗
(0.020)
-0.009
(0.025)
0.031
(0.026)
-0.008
(0.035)
-0.043
(0.031)
0.025
(0.120)
0.002
(0.002)

779
0.094

779
0.123

779
0.203

Dep. Var.: IAT score (stereotypes against immigrants)
Female

-0.042∗∗
(0.020)
-0.026∗
(0.014)

Born in the North
Children

0.021
(0.050)

Middle edu Mother

0.027
(0.017)
-0.022
(0.021)

High edu Mother

-0.058∗∗∗
(0.017)

WVS Immigrants’ Rights to Job
Native-Imm INVALSI(/100)

-0.040
(0.085)

SD Native- SD Imm INVALSI(/100)
Obs.
R2

1384
0.063

1384
0.063

1384
0.060

1384
0.065

1384
0.066

779
0.092

Notes: This table reports OLS estimates, where the dependent variable is IAT score of teachers and the unit of observation is teacher t
in grade 8 of school s. We include controls for the order of IATs and for whether the blocks were presented on a order compatible or
incompatible way (which was randomized at the individual level). The variable “WVS Immigrants’ Rights to Job” equals 1 for teachers believing that immigrants should have the same right to jobs as natives. “Native-Imm INVALSI(/100)” indicates the difference in
average standardized test scores of native and immigrant students assigned to the teacher in the previous four years; “SD Native- SD
Imm INVALSI(/100)” is the difference in standard deviations. In columns 6-9, the number of observations decreases because information on past students is not available for all teachers; in these columns, we control for the number of observations with information
available for immigrants and native children. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% percent level respectively.

28

Table 2: Balance table - Teacher characteristics
Variable

(1)
Control

Panel A: Math teachers
0.481
IAT Immigrants
(0.278)
Female
0.782
(0.415)
Born in the North
0.641
(0.482)
Age
48.641
(9.795)
Years of experience 18.310
(11.923)
Children
0.664
(0.474)
Low edu Mother
0.541
(0.501)
Middle edu Mother
0.306
(0.463)
High edu Mother
0.153
(0.362)
Degree cum Laude
0.200
(0.402)
Advanced STEM
0.248
(0.434)
Observations

119

Panel B: Literature teachers
0.493
IAT Immigrants
(0.275)
Female
0.915
(0.281)
Born in the North
0.737
(0.442)
Age
49.737
(8.720)
Years of experience 22.035
(11.146)
Children
0.718
(0.452)
Low edu Mother
0.486
(0.502)
Middle edu Mother
0.355
(0.481)
High edu Mother
0.159
(0.367)
Degree cum Laude
0.340
(0.476)
Observations

117

(2)
Treatment

(3)
Diff.

(4)
Normalized difference

0.455
(0.253)
0.888
(0.316)
0.579
(0.496)
49.064
(9.667)
19.681
(12.128)
0.720
(0.450)
0.466
(0.501)
0.366
(0.484)
0.168
(0.375)
0.266
(0.443)
0.191
(0.395)

-0.026
(0.032)
0.107
(0.049)**
-0.062
(0.070)
0.423
(1.599)
1.371
(2.090)
0.056
(0.061)
-0.075
(0.063)
0.060
(0.058)
0.015
(0.047)
0.066
(0.060)
-0.056
(0.055)

-0.070

143

262

0.472
(0.254)
0.903
(0.297)
0.779
(0.416)
48.979
(9.305)
20.755
(10.793)
0.695
(0.462)
0.504
(0.502)
0.321
(0.469)
0.176
(0.382)
0.323
(0.469)

-0.021
(0.028)
-0.012
(0.038)
0.042
(0.059)
-0.758
(1.359)
-1.280
(1.570)
-0.023
(0.060)
0.018
(0.072)
-0.035
(0.068)
0.017
(0.063)
-0.017
(0.060)

154

271

0.204
-0.090
0.031
0.081
0.086
-0.106
0.090
0.028
0.110
-0.096

-0.057
-0.029
0.070
-0.059
-0.082
-0.036
0.025
-0.051
0.032
-0.025

Notes: Standard errors are robust and clustered at the school level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the
90%, 95%, and 99% confidence level, respectively.

29

Table 3: Balance table - Students’ characteristics
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Variable

Control

Treatment

Diff.

Normalized Diff.

Female

0.503
(0.500)
0.079
(0.271)
0.051
(0.220)

0.490
(0.500)
0.088
(0.283)
0.064
(0.244)

-0.012
(0.014)
0.008
(0.015)
0.013
(0.012)

-0.018

7.145
(1.052)
7.199
(1.250)
7.232
(1.054)
7.376
(1.288)

7.116
(1.046)
7.135
(1.227)
7.180
(1.054)
7.309
(1.287)

-0.028
(0.069)
-0.065
(0.074)
-0.053
(0.064)
-0.067
(0.067)

-0.019

0.206
(0.405)
0.165
(0.371)
0.143
(0.350)
0.340
(0.474)
0.100
(0.300)

0.254
(0.435)
0.213
(0.410)
0.174
(0.379)
0.353
(0.478)
0.137
(0.344)

0.048
(0.038)
0.048
(0.042)
0.031
(0.022)
0.014
(0.035)
0.037
(0.033)

0.080

0.257
(0.437)
0.152
(0.359)
0.245
(0.430)
0.340
(0.474)
0.177
(0.382)

0.302
(0.459)
0.178
(0.383)
0.271
(0.444)
0.359
(0.480)
0.217
(0.412)

0.045
(0.044)
0.026
(0.043)
0.026
(0.037)
0.019
(0.036)
0.040
(0.050)

2,756

3,275

6,031

First Gen Imm
Born before 2003
Grade Ita June ’16
Grade Math June ’16
Grade Ita June ’15
Grade Math June ’15
Mother

Less than high school
High education
Low Occupation
Mid Occupation
High Occupation

Father

Less than high school
Low education
Low Occupation
Mid Occupation
High Occupation

Observations

0.021
0.039

-0.037
-0.035
-0.037

0.087
0.060
0.020
0.082
0.071
0.050
0.043
0.028
0.071

Notes: Standard errors are robust and clustered at the school level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the
90%, 95%, and 99% confidence level, respectively.

30

Table 4: Teachers’ IAT scores and grades assigned to immigrant students
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Panel A. Dependent Variable: Grades given by Math Teacher
Immigrant

-0.439∗∗∗
(0.025)

-0.091∗∗∗
(0.018)

-0.032
(0.038)
-0.033∗
(0.019)

0.049
(0.046)
-0.030∗
(0.018)

1.151∗
(0.637)
-0.032∗
(0.018)

1.582∗∗
(0.619)
-0.030∗
(0.017)
0.485∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.101∗∗∗
(0.017)

0.928
(0.626)
-0.030∗
(0.018)

-0.439
21846
0.093

-0.091
21846
0.475

-0.091
21846
0.475

-0.075
21846
0.505

-0.075
21846
0.505

-0.076
21353
0.592

-0.065
21846
0.540

Imm*Teacher’s IAT
Behavior
Imm* Behavior
Mean of Native-Imm Gap
Obs.
R2

Panel B. Dependent Variable: Grades given by Literature Teacher
Immigrant

-0.574∗∗∗
(0.022)

-0.110∗∗∗
(0.017)

-0.108∗∗∗
(0.036)
-0.001
(0.017)

-0.082∗
(0.043)
-0.000
(0.017)

0.334
(0.724)
0.002
(0.017)

1.141∗
(0.627)
0.012
(0.015)
0.437∗∗∗
(0.010)
-0.086∗∗∗
(0.015)

0.316
(0.716)
0.009
(0.016)

-0.574
20457
0.149

-0.110
20457
0.524

-0.110
20457
0.524

-0.103
20457
0.558

-0.103
20457
0.558

-0.094
20097
0.643

-0.111
20457
0.595

Yes
No
No
No
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Imm*Teacher’s IAT
Behavior
Imm*Behavior
Mean of Native-Imm Gap
Obs.
R2
Teacher FE
Class FE
INVALSI cubic
Student Controls
Student Controls*Imm
Teacher Controls *Imm

Notes: This table reports OLS estimates, where the dependent variable is grade given by teachers in math
(Panel A) and literature (Panel B) in grade 8, and the unit of observation is student i, in class c taught by
teacher t in grade 8 of school s. “Teacher’s IAT” is the raw score of IAT divided by the standard deviation.
We include a cohort dummy in all regressions and “INVALSI cubic” indicates the cubic polynomial of
INVALSI test score in grade 8. Student controls include gender, generation of immigration, and mother’s
education. Teacher controls include gender, place of birth, age, and advanced STEM degree (i.e., physics,
math, engineering). “Behavior” is a grade between 5 and 10 assigned jointly by all teachers to measure
behavior in the classroom. “Mean of Native-Imm Gap” indicates the average difference in grades between
immigrants and natives when including fixed effects and all control variables, but not their interaction with
the “Immigrant” dummy. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% percent level respectively.

31

Table 5: Impact of revealing stereotypes to teachers on grades
(1)
Dep Var:

(2)

(3)

Grades given by Math Teacher

(4)

(5)

(6)

Grades given by Literature Teacher

Panel A: Intention to Treat
Early Feedback*Imm
Early Feedback
Immigrant
Obs.
R2

0.392∗∗∗
(0.142)
-0.153
(0.100)
-0.713∗∗∗
(0.091)

0.437∗∗∗
(0.129)
-0.176∗
(0.094)
-0.687∗∗∗
(0.222)

0.439∗∗∗
(0.126)
-0.155
(0.095)
0.915
(1.274)

0.312∗∗∗
(0.103)
-0.150∗
(0.084)
-0.697∗∗∗
(0.055)

0.302∗∗∗
(0.083)
-0.160∗∗
(0.072)
-0.685∗∗∗
(0.131)

0.288∗∗∗
(0.087)
-0.147∗
(0.075)
-0.107
(1.361)

5141
0.023

5141
0.108

5141
0.118

5138
0.037

5138
0.167

5138
0.174

Panel B: Local Average Treatment Effect
0.501∗∗∗
(0.171)
-0.206
(0.131)
-0.713∗∗∗
(0.090)

0.552∗∗∗
(0.161)
-0.234∗
(0.127)
-0.659∗∗∗
(0.226)

0.554∗∗∗
(0.156)
-0.208
(0.128)
0.998
(1.252)

0.403∗∗∗
(0.132)
-0.202∗
(0.111)
-0.697∗∗∗
(0.054)

0.392∗∗∗
(0.112)
-0.214∗∗
(0.099)
-0.624∗∗∗
(0.142)

0.366∗∗∗
(0.114)
-0.194∗
(0.101)
-0.306
(1.408)

Obs.
R2
F- stat

5141
0.022
84.5

5141
0.105
94.2

5141
0.116
101.1

5138
0.035
106.8

5138
0.161
125.9

5138
0.169
138.8

Mean dep. var.
Student Controls
Student Controls*Imm
Teacher Controls
Teacher Controls*Imm

6.83
No
No
No
No

6.83
Yes
Yes
No
No

6.83
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

6.95
No
No
No
No

6.95
Yes
Yes
No
No

6.95
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Email*Imm
Email
Immigrant

Notes: This table reports OLS estimates (Panel A) and IV estimates (Panel B), where the dependent
variable is grade given by teachers in math (columns 1-3) and literature (columns 4-6) at the end of the
first semester of grade 8 (January); the unit of observation is student i, in class c taught by teacher t in
grade 8 of school s. Standard errors are robust and clustered at the school level. ”Early Feedback” is
a dummy variable indicating whether the teacher was eligible for receiving the feedback before end of
semester grading (January) or after end of semester grading (February). “Email” is a dummy variable
indicating whether teachers eligible for receiving the feedback before end of semester grading actually
requested it. The coefficients in Panel B are estimated by instrumental variables, using “Early Feedback” as an instrument for “Email”. Student controls include gender, generation of immigration, and
education of the mother, interacted with whether the student is an immigrant. Teacher controls include
gender, place of birth, advanced STEM degree (as physics, math, engineering), and age, interacted with
whether the student is an immigrant. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% percent level respectively.

32

Table 6: Impact of revealing stereotypes to teachers on the probability of failing students
(1)

(2)

(3)

Math Fail (Grade < 6)

Dep Var:

(4)

(5)

(6)

Literature Fail (Grade < 6)

Panel A: Intention to Treat
Early Feedback*Imm
Early Feedback
Immigrant
Obs.
R2

-0.094∗∗
(0.044)
0.026
(0.028)
0.161∗∗∗
(0.032)

-0.103∗∗
(0.041)
0.029
(0.025)
0.122∗
(0.072)

-0.107∗∗∗
(0.038)
0.022
(0.025)
-0.217
(0.409)

-0.012
(0.023)
0.000
(0.015)
0.075∗∗∗
(0.014)

-0.014
(0.020)
-0.002
(0.012)
0.056
(0.034)

-0.009
(0.021)
-0.009
(0.012)
-0.366
(0.343)

5141
0.015

5141
0.059

5141
0.067

5138
0.011

5138
0.038

5138
0.045

Panel B: Local Average Treatment Effect
-0.119∗∗
(0.052)
0.035
(0.037)
0.161∗∗∗
(0.032)

-0.129∗∗∗
(0.049)
0.038
(0.033)
0.117∗
(0.071)

-0.133∗∗∗
(0.046)
0.030
(0.033)
-0.226
(0.400)

0.001
(0.019)
-0.015
(0.028)
0.075∗∗∗
(0.014)

-0.003
(0.017)
-0.017
(0.024)
0.053
(0.034)

-0.011
(0.016)
-0.010
(0.025)
-0.369
(0.343)

Obs.
R2

5141
0.017

5141
0.059

5141
0.068

5138
0.011

5138
0.038

5138
0.045

Mean dep. var.
Student Controls
Student Controls*Imm
Teacher Controls
Teacher Controls*Imm

0.173
No
No
No
No

0.173
Yes
Yes
No
No

0.173
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.067
No
No
No
No

0.067
Yes
Yes
No
No

0.067
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Email*Imm
Email
Immigrant

Notes: This table reports OLS estimates (Panel A) and IV estimates (Panel B), where the
dependent variable is the probability of obtaining a grade lower than 6 (pass grade) in math
(columns 1-3) and literature (columns 4-6) at the end of the first semester of grade 8 (January), and the unit of observation is student i, in class c taught by teacher t in grade 8 of
school s. Standard errors are robust and clustered at the school level. “Early Feedback” is
a dummy variable indicating whether the teacher was eligible for receiving the feedback before end of semester grading (January) or after end of semester grading (February). “Email”
is a dummy variable indicating whether teachers eligible for receiving the feedback before
end of semester grading actually requested it. The coefficients in Panel B are estimated by
instrumental variables, using “Early Feedback” as an instrument for “Email”. Student controls include gender, generation of immigration, and education of the mother, all interacted
with whether the student is an immigrant. Teacher controls include gender, place of birth, advanced STEM degree (as physics, math, engineering), and age, interacted with whether the
student is an immigrant. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% percent
level respectively.

33

Table 7: Heterogeneous effects of revealing bias to teachers on grades, by teacher and student
characteristics
(1)
Dependent Variable:

(2)

(3)

Grades given by Math Teacher

Early Feedback*Imm

0.439∗∗∗

Early Feedback

(0.126)
-0.155
(0.095)

Early Feedback*Imm*WVS
Early Feedback*WVS
Imm*WVS

0.051
(0.236)
-0.131
(0.180)
0.545∗
(0.293)
-0.138
(0.225)
-0.090
(0.187)

Early Feedback*First Gen Imm

0.415∗∗∗

0.615∗∗∗

(0.141)
-0.155
(0.095)

(0.136)
-0.155
(0.095)

(6)

(7)

Early Feedback*Asia

(8)

Grades given by Literature Teacher
0.288∗∗∗
(0.087)
-0.147∗
(0.075)

-0.200
(0.185)
0.080
(0.159)
0.663∗∗∗
(0.187)
-0.288∗
(0.168)
-0.135
(0.144)

0.245∗∗
(0.106)
-0.147∗
(0.075)

0.440∗∗∗
(0.140)
-0.147∗
(0.075)

0.091
(0.138)
-0.473∗
(0.269)
-0.105
(0.250)
-0.441∗
(0.251)

Early Feedback*Latin

Student Controls
Student Controls*Imm
Teacher Controls
Teacher Controls*Imm

(5)

0.052
(0.153)

Early Feedback*Africa

Obs.
R2

(4)

-0.189
(0.228)
-0.257
(0.189)
-0.260
(0.220)

5141
0.118

5141
0.120

5141
0.118

5141
0.123

5138
0.174

5138
0.179

5138
0.174

5138
0.176

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table reports OLS estimates, where the dependent variable is grade given by teachers in math (columns 1-4)
and literature (columns 5-8) at the end of the I semester of grade 8 (January), and the unit of observation is student i, in
class c, taught by teacher t in grade 8 of school s. The regressions are fully saturated: all interactions are included even if
not reported in the table. “Early Feedback” is a dummy variable indicating whether the teacher was eligible for receiving
the feedback before end of semester grading (January) or after end of semester grading (February).“WVS Immigrants’
Rights to Job” equals 1 for teachers believing that immigrants should have the same right to jobs as natives. “First Gen
Imm” assumes value 1 for first generation immigrants. “Africa”, “Latin”, and “Asia” indicates the place of origin of immigrants, where the excluded category is Eastern Europe. Standard errors are robust and clustered at the school level.
Student controls include gender, generation of immigration, and mother’s education, all interacted with whether the student is immigrant. Teacher controls include gender, place of birth, advanced STEM degree (physics, math, engineering),
age, interacted with whether the student is animmigrant. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
percent level respectively.

34

Appendix
Figure A.1: Average race IAT scores across European countries

Notes: This map shows the average race IAT scores across European countries. Red indicates a stronger
association between “natives”-“good” and “immigrant”-“bad”. Source: Tom Stafford, theconversation.
com

35

Figure A.2: Distribution of grades

Panel A: Teacher-assigned Grades
Literature

0

0

Fraction
.2
.4

Fraction
.2
.4

.6

.6

Math

3

4

5

6

7

8

Natives

9

10

3

4

5

Immigrants

6

7

8

Natives

9

10

Immigrants

Panel B: Standardized Test Scores (Blindly-graded)
.02
kdensity
.005 .01 .015
0

0

20

40
Natives

Literature

kdensity
0 .005 .01 .015 .02 .025

Math

60

80

100

Immigrants

0

20

40
Natives

60

80

100

Immigrants

Notes: These graphs show the distribution of teacher-assigned grades (Panel A) and standardized test scores
(Panel B) in math and literature across native and immigrant students.

36

Table A.1: Country of birth of immigrant students (school year 2016-2017)
Place of Birth
Romania
Albania
Morocco
China
Philippines
India
Moldavia
Ukraine
Pakistan
Egypt
Tunisia
Peru
Ecuador
Macedonia
Nigeria

Number of students

Share among immigrant children

158,428
112,171
102,121
49,514
26,962
25,851
25,308
19,956
19,934
19,925
18,613
18,018
16,153
15,193
14,853

19.2%
13.6%
12.4%
6.0%
3.3%
3.1%
3.1%
2.4%
2.4%
2.4%
2.3%
2.2%
2.0%
1.8%
1.8%

Source: Italian Ministry of Education. This table reports the total number of students by country of birth for the 15
most represented nationalities, and their share among all immigrant students.

37

Table A.2: Correlation between teacher characteristics and IAT
(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.015
(0.026)
-0.018
(0.014)
0.032∗∗
(0.014)
0.025
(0.020)
-0.010
(0.016)
0.022
(0.016)

-0.014
(0.027)
-0.021
(0.014)
0.031∗∗
(0.014)
0.027
(0.020)
-0.010
(0.016)
0.022
(0.015)
-0.040∗
(0.020)
-0.027∗
(0.014)
-0.055∗∗∗
(0.017)
0.094
(0.071)
0.028
(0.017)
-0.021
(0.021)

0.000
(0.029)
-0.013
(0.015)
0.031∗∗
(0.015)
0.017
(0.021)
-0.007
(0.016)
0.019
(0.016)
-0.045∗∗
(0.021)
-0.023
(0.016)
-0.051∗∗
(0.020)
0.085
(0.080)
0.030
(0.019)
-0.029
(0.023)

No

No

Yes

1384
0.067

1384
0.086

1384
0.152

Dep. Var.: Teacher’s IAT
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: economic
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: behavior
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: ability
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: language
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: information
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: prejudices
Female
Born in the North
WVS Immigrants’ Rights to Job
Children
Middle edu Mother
High edu Mother
School FE
Obs.
R2

Notes: This table reports OLS estimates, where the dependent variable is IAT score of teachers, and the unit of observation is the teacher t in grade 8 of school s. We include controls
for the order of IATs and for whether the blocks were presented on an order compatible or
incompatible way (which was randomized at the individual level). The variables “Reason
Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: X” equal 1 for teachers believing that X is a very important or important reason for the Immigrant-Native gap in high-school choice. *, **, and
*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% percent level respectively.

38

Table A.3: Teacher characteristics across schools included and not included in the experiment

Variable
IAT Immigrant
Female
Teaching Math
Born in the North
Age
Full time contract
Years of experience
Children
Low edu Mother
Middle edu Mother
High edu Mother
Degree Laude
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: economic
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: behavior
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: ability
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: language
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: information
Reason Immigrant-Native Gap High-School: prejudices
WVS Immigrants’ Rights to Job
Observations

(1)
Not in the
Sample

(2)
Final
Sample

0.457
(0.257)
0.821
(0.384)
0.464
(0.500)
0.636
(0.482)
49.155
(8.636)
0.887
(0.317)
20.469
(10.825)
0.634
(0.483)
0.539
(0.500)
0.348
(0.478)
0.113
(0.317)
0.230
(0.422)
3.844
(1.088)
2.661
(1.040)
2.822
(1.169)
3.552
(0.984)
2.741
(1.064)
2.667
(1.023)
0.792
(0.407)

0.474
0.017
(0.264)
(0.020)
0.874
0.053
(0.332)
(0.034)
0.492
0.027
(0.500)
(0.023)
0.684
0.049
(0.465)
(0.045)
49.093
-0.062
(9.374)
(0.902)
0.858
-0.029
(0.349)
(0.030)
20.203
-0.265
(11.537)
(1.051)
0.700
0.066
(0.459)
(0.044)
0.498
-0.041
(0.501)
(0.047)
0.338
-0.011
(0.473)
(0.043)
0.165
0.052
(0.371)
(0.031)*
0.284
0.054
(0.452)
(0.031)*
3.945
0.101
(1.063)
(0.081)
2.575
-0.086
(1.098)
(0.079)
2.536
-0.286
(1.163) (0.103)***
3.533
-0.019
(0.991)
(0.084)
2.697
-0.043
(1.091)
(0.090)
2.728
0.061
(1.051)
(0.073)
0.800
0.008
(0.401)
(0.038)

224

(3)
Diff.

(4)
Normalized
Difference
0.046
0.104
0.039
0.073
-0.005
-0.062
-0.017
0.099
-0.058
-0.016
0.106
0.088
0.066
-0.057
-0.173
-0.014
-0.028
0.042
0.013

533

Notes: This table compares the average characteristics of teachers across schools included and not included in the
experiment. Standard errors are robust and clustered at the school level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance
at the 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence level, respectively.

39

Table A.4: Teacher characteristics across schools included and not included in the experiment

Variable
Female
Immigrant
High Edu Mother
High Edu Father
Mother High-skill
Mother Mid-Skill
High Occupation Father
Medium Occupation Father
Grade Math June ’16
Grade Ita June ’16
Observations

(1)
Not in the Sample

(2)
Final Sample

(3)
Diff.

(4)
Normalized difference

0.481
(0.500)
0.256
(0.437)
0.139
(0.346)
0.132
(0.338)
0.103
(0.304)
0.289
(0.453)
0.179
(0.384)
0.310
(0.462)
7.223
(1.307)
7.131
(1.064)

0.496
(0.500)
0.185
(0.388)
0.191
(0.393)
0.166
(0.372)
0.120
(0.325)
0.347
(0.476)
0.199
(0.399)
0.350
(0.477)
7.164
(1.238)
7.129
(1.049)

0.015
(0.012)
-0.072
(0.022)***
0.052
(0.035)
0.034
(0.035)
0.017
(0.029)
0.058
(0.024)**
0.020
(0.041)
0.041
(0.024)*
-0.059
(0.052)
-0.001
(0.046)

0.021

2,597

6,031

8,628

-0.122
0.100
0.068
0.039
0.088
0.035
0.061
-0.033
-0.001

Notes: This table compares the average characteristics of students across schools included and not included in the
experiment. Standard errors are robust and clustered at the school level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance
at the 90%, 95%, and 99% confidence level, respectively.

40

Table A.5: Correlation between teachers characteristics and willingness to receive the feedback
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Dependent variable: Dummy for whether the teacher wants to receive the feedback
IAT Immigrant

0.004
(0.032)

Teaching Math

0.003
(0.031)

WVS

-0.036
(0.029)

Time Survey: slow
Time Survey: fast
Time Survey: missing

Obs.
R2

0.031
(0.032)
0.029
(0.023)
0.020
(0.028)
-0.002
(0.029)
0.014
(0.032)
0.004
(0.047)
-0.032
(0.050)

0.026
(0.022)

Female

FE school

0.053∗
(0.031)
-0.017
(0.053)
-0.096∗∗
(0.046)

0.000
(0.033)
0.021
(0.022)
0.004
(0.031)
-0.034
(0.030)
0.053∗
(0.031)
-0.015
(0.054)
-0.093∗∗
(0.046)

No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

1384
0.000

1384
0.001

1384
0.000

1384
0.001

1384
0.004

1384
0.006

1384
0.247

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at school level are in parentheses. All columns include dummy variables for
missing characteristics (if any). “Time Survey: fast ” equals 1 for teachers who took fewer than 11 minutes to complete
the survey. “Time Survey: slow” equals 1 for teachers who took more than 20 minutes to complete the survey. The
average completion time is around 15.5 minutes. “Time Survey: missing” indicates that a teacher did not complete the
survey with the tablet and only did the IAT.

41

Table A.6: Teachers’ IAT scores and grades assigned to immigrants, distinguishing between first
and second generation
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Dependent Variable

Grades given by Math Teacher

Grades given by Literature Teacher

Immigrant

-0.357∗∗∗
(0.033)
-0.136∗∗∗
(0.034)

-0.111∗∗∗
(0.023)
0.035
(0.027)

-0.505∗∗∗
(0.028)
-0.115∗∗∗
(0.030)

-0.117∗∗∗
(0.021)
0.012
(0.024)

21846
0.094

21846
0.475

21846
0.475

21846
0.505

21846
0.505

20457
0.150

20457
0.524

20457
0.524

20457
0.558

20457
0.558

Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

First Gen Imm
Imm*Teacher IAT
First Gen *Teacher IAT
Obs.
R2
Teacher FE
INVALSI cubic
Student Controls
Student Controls*Imm
Teacher Controls *Imm

-0.046
0.053 1.159∗
(0.047) (0.052) (0.636)
0.024
0.044
0.045
(0.052) (0.052) (0.052)
-0.037 -0.032 -0.035
(0.023) (0.022) (0.023)
0.007
0.003
0.006
(0.025) (0.025) (0.025)

-0.074 -0.051 0.362
(0.045) (0.047) (0.725)
-0.054 -0.023 -0.026
(0.045) (0.045) (0.045)
-0.024 -0.017 -0.016
(0.023) (0.022) (0.022)
0.038
0.028
0.029
(0.023) (0.023) (0.023)

Notes: This table reports OLS estimates, where the dependent variable is grade given by teachers in math (Columns 1-5) and literature
(Columns 6-10) in grade 8, and the unit of observation is student i, in class c taught by teacher t in grade 8 of school s. “‘Teacher’s
IAT” is the raw score of IAT divided by the standard deviation. We include a cohort dummy in all regressions and “INVALSI cubic”
indicates the cubic polynomial of INVALSI test score in grade 8. Student controls include gender, generation of immigration, and education of the mother. Teacher controls include gender, place of birth, age, and advanced STEM degree (physics, math, engineering).
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% percent level respectively.

42

B
B.1

Online Appendix
Description of Implicit Association Test

We invite teachers to complete a seven-block IAT following the schematic overview presented in
Table B.1.1. Half of the teachers, randomly selected at the individual level, completed the IAT in
the order as presented in Table B.1.1 (“order compatible” task first), while the other half completed
the IAT with the blocks in the following order: 1, 5, 6, 7, 2, 3, 4 (“order incompatible” task first).
An example screenshot of the latter task is presented in Figure B.1.1, while all the words presented
to teachers are shown in the box below (with the original in Italian in parentheses). On average,
there is a small difference in the IAT score between individuals who perform the order compatible
task first vs. the order incompatible task first. Hence, in all regressions where there are no teacher
fixed effects, we control for whether the first task was order compatible.
The blocks used to calculate the IAT score are blocks 3, 4, 6, and 7. The number of words that
need to be categorized is 20 in blocks 3 and 6 and 40 in blocks 4 and 7, as in the standard IAT with
7 blocks. The scoring procedure follows the guidelines of the improved scoring algorithm defined
by Greenwald et al. (2003).
Table B.1.1: Schematic overview of the Immigrant Implicit Association Test
Blocks

Left Categories

Right Categories

1

Italian

Immigrant

2

Good

Bad

3

Italian
Good

Immigrant
Bad

4

Italian
Good

Immigrant
Bad

5

Bad

Good

6

Italian
Bad

Immigrant
Good

7

Italian
Bad

Immigrant
Good

43

Figure B.1.1: Example of the screenshot of the tablet in the “order incompatible” task

• IAT with male names of immigrants and natives
1. Immigrant (Immigrato): Youssef, Mohamed, Gheorghe, Alejandro, Li Yi, Pascual
2. Italian (Italiano): Marco, Simone, Daniele, Francesco, Lorenzo, Mattia
3. Good (Bravo): Prepared (Preparato), Intelligent (Intelligente), Capable (Capace), Studious (Studioso), Able (Abile), Precise (Attento), Willing (Volenteroso), Respectful
(Rispettoso)
4. Bad (Impreparato): Disrespectful (Irrispettoso), Slow (Tardo), Incapable (Incapace),
Boisterous (Irrequieto), Lazy (Pigro), Distracted (Distratto), Demotivated (Demotivato), Insufficient (Scarso)

44

• IAT with female names of immigrants and natives
1. Immigrant (Immigrata): Fatima, Naila, Adina, Iryna, Jiaxin, Beatriz
2. Italian (Italiana): Valentina, Sara, Giorgia, Francesca, Elisa, Alice
3. Good (Brava): Prepared (Preparata), Intelligent (Intelligente), Capable (Capace), Studious (Studiosa), Able (Abile), Precise (Attenta), Willing (Volenterosa), Respectful
(Rispettosa)
4. Bad (Impreparata): Disrespectful (Irrispettosa), Slow (Tarda), Incapable (Incapace),
Boisterous (Irrequieta), Lazy (Pigra), Distracted (Distratta), Demotivated (Demotivata), Insufficient (Scarsa)

B.2

Teacher Questionnaire

1) Immigrant children, with the same grades of natives, are more likely to choose a vocational
track. According to your experience, how much do you think these factors affect the choice of
immigrants? Answers on a scale from 1 to 5.
1. Economic reasons
2. Bad behaviour at school
3. Insufficient abilities for more demanding schools
4. Knowledge of the language
5. No information about educational and occupational careers
6. Perception of prejudices in school or at work
2) Do you agree or disagree with the following statements? When jobs are scarce, employers
should give priority to Italian people over immigrants. Possible answers: Agree, Neither Agree nor
Disagree, Disagree, Don’t know

45

B.3

Email with the feedback

The exact wording of the email with the feedback about own implicit bias is reported in this appendix translated in English. Instead of the XXX, teachers saw the precise score (for example,
0.25). We followed the standard categorization of IAT scores (Greenwald et al., 2009): no association if the score is between -0.15 and 0.15, slight association for values between |0.15| and |0.35|,
moderate association between |0.35| and |0.60|, and strong association for scores higher than |0.60|.

46

Subject: Result of the Implicit Association Test – Research Project of Bocconi University
Dear teacher,
As per your request, we are writing you to let you know your result of the Implicit Association Test
that you completed during the questionnaire administered by Bocconi University and related to the
research titled “The role of teachers in high-school track choice”. You did this test using a tablet
in the school building where you work. The Implicit Association Test was administered to teachers
in middle school to measure and increase the awareness of potential unconscious preferences or
associations.
IMPLICIT ASSOCIATION TEST: this test investigates the automatic associations between immigrant and Italian names with positive associations (e.g., good) and negative associations (e.g.,
bad). You completed this test separately with male and female names.
Your Immigrant-Native Implicit Association Test score using male names of natives and immigrants is XXX, which suggests a (slight/moderate/strong) association between positive attributes
and Italian/immigrant names, and between negative attributes and immigrant/Italian names (or no
automatic associations between positive attributes and Italian or immigrant names).
Your Immigrant-Native Implicit Association Test score using female names of natives and immigrants is XXX, which suggests a (slight/moderate/strong) association between positive attributes
and Italian/immigrant names, and between negative attributes and immigrant/Italian names (or no
automatic associations between positive attributes and Italian or immigrant names).
We want to underscore that this test reveals implicit attitudes and not behaviours. Our attitudes
may derive from the cultural and social context where we live, and it is not obvious that explicit
and implicit behaviours coincide. All of your responses will be held in confidence: only the
researchers involved in this study will have access to the information you provide. Your responses
will not be shared with other people. Data collected will be published in aggregate form and it will
not be possible to link them with the teacher or the school. We hope that you found this test useful.
Thank you for the time you dedicated to our research.
The Research Team

47

