                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MONETARY INDEPENDENCE AND ROLLOVER CRISES

                                            Javier Bianchi
                                          Jorge Mondragon

                                        Working Paper 25340
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25340


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2018




We are grateful to Sushant Acharya, Manuel Amador, Luigi Bocola, Fernando Broner, Alessandro
Dovis, Mark Gertler, Tim Kehoe for excellent comments. We have also benefited from comments
by seminar participants at IX Annual CIGS Conference on Macroeconomic Theory and Policy, the
27th CEPR ESSIM Workshop, Columbia, Drexel-Philadelphia Fed Conference on Credit Markets
and the Macroeconomy, European Central Bank, Federal Reserve System Conference, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, Goethe University, Lacea, XXII IEF Workshop, NBER IFM Spring Meetings,
NCID VII Annual Research Workshop, Society of Economic Dynamics, the Trade Workshop at the
University of Minnesota, University of Houston, University of Toronto, and Wharton. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Javier Bianchi and Jorge Mondragon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Independence and Rollover Crises
Javier Bianchi and Jorge Mondragon NBER
Working Paper No. 25340
December 2018, Revised September 2019
JEL No. E4,E5,F34,G15

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper shows that the inability to use monetary policy for macroeconomic stabilization leaves
a government more vulnerable to a rollover crisis. We study a sovereign default model with self-
fulfilling rollover crises, foreign currency debt, and nominal rigidities. When the government lacks
monetary independence, lenders anticipate that the government would face a severe recession in
the event of a liquidity crisis, and are therefore more prone to run on government bonds. In a
quantitative application, we find that the lack of monetary autonomy played a central role in making
Spain vulnerable to a rollover crisis during 2011-2012. Finally, we argue that a lender of last resort can
go a long way towards reducing the costs of giving up monetary independence.


Javier Bianchi
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER
javieribianchi@gmail.com

Jorge Mondragon
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
3-141 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
mondr020@umn.edu
1       Introduction
A prominent concern during the Eurozone crisis was the risk of a rollover crisis. Policymakers feared
that an adverse shift in market expectations would restrict governments’ ability to roll over their
debt, creating liquidity problems that would feed back into investors’ expectations and ultimately lead
governments to default. At the same time, the premise was that the lack of monetary independence
was aggravating sovereign debt problems in Southern Europe. In this context, the European Central
Bank took unprecedented policy measures aimed at stabilizing financial markets and reducing the
risks of a potential collapse of the monetary union.1
    The goal of this paper is to investigate whether and how the lack of monetary independence affects
the vulnerability to a rollover crisis. A central question we tackle is: Does a country become more
vulnerable after joining a monetary union? We present a novel theory in which the inability to use
monetary policy for macroeconomic stabilization leaves a government more vulnerable to a rollover
crisis. The key insight is that lenders’ pessimism can trigger a demand-driven recession, making the
option to default more attractive and, in turn, validating the initial pessimism. A government that
has monetary independence can alleviate the recession that results from a rollover crisis, making in-
vestors less prone to run in the first place. Quantitative simulations show that while an economy
that possesses monetary independence is almost immune to a rollover crisis, it can become signifi-
cantly vulnerable once it joins a monetary union. Moreover, we show that a lender of last resort can
significantly mitigate the welfare costs from joining a monetary union.
    The environment we consider is a version of the canonical model of sovereign default à la Eaton
and Gersovitz (1981) that incorporates the possibility of rollover crises, as in Cole and Kehoe (2000).
The government issues debt before deciding on whether to repay or default. When lenders expect
the government to default, the government is shut-off from credit markets and is forced to repay the
maturing debt exclusively out of its tax revenues. When the maturing debt is large enough, repay-
ment becomes too costly for the government and lenders’ pessimistic expectations are validated: a
self-fulfilling rollover crisis arises. We depart from the standard endowment economy setup by con-
sidering nominal rigidities, which creates a scope for a stabilization role for monetary policy. External
debt is denominated in real terms, or equivalently in foreign currency, eliminating the possibility of
inflating away the debt. The model features tradable and non-tradable goods and downward nominal
wage rigidity, as in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016). In this environment, a shock leading to a contrac-
tion in aggregate demand reduces the price of non-tradables in equilibrium, generating a decline in
labor demand. When wages cannot fall sufficiently quickly to clear the labor market, involuntary un-
    1
     On September 6, 2012, Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, expressed that “the assessment of
the Governing Council is that we are in a situation now where you have large parts of the euro area in what we call a
‘bad equilibrium,’ namely an equilibrium where you may have self-fulfilling expectations that feed upon themselves and
generate very adverse scenarios.” Preceding these remarks, Draghi famously pledged to do “whatever it takes to preserve
the euro.”



                                                          1
employment arises and the economy goes through a recession. Following the classic principles from
Friedman (1953), a government with an independent monetary policy can use the nominal exchange
rate as a shock absorber, altering real wages, and reducing unemployment.
    Our main theoretical result is that the lack of an independent monetary policy increases the vul-
nerability to a rollover crisis. To understand the mechanisms in the model, consider what happens
when a government is trying to roll-over its debt and investors suddenly panic and refuse to lend to
the government. As the government is shut-off from credit markets, it needs to raise tax revenues and
cut down on expenditures in order to service the maturing debt. In the presence of nominal rigidi-
ties and constraints on monetary policy, this situation has macroeconomic implications. The fiscal
contraction generates a decline in aggregate demand, which leads to involuntary unemployment and
makes repayment less attractive for the government. If the increase in unemployment is sufficiently
large, the government finds it optimal to default, which in turn validates the initial panic by investors
and generates a self-fulfilling rollover crisis. Interestingly, for this pessimistic equilibrium to emerge,
unemployment does not have to be realized in equilibrium. In fact, it is the off-equilibrium outcome
of a large recession that pushes the government to default and triggers the rollover crisis.
    On the other hand, if the government can use monetary policy, the fiscal contraction that results
from being shut-off from credit markets does not have macroeconomic implications. In this scenario,
the government’s willingness to repay is relatively less affected by the lenders’ pessimistic expecta-
tions. As a result, a panic is less likely to be triggered in the first place under monetary independence.
We also show that our main theoretical insight applies along several extensions of the baseline model.
Among other extensions, we show that the same results apply when the source of nominal rigidity is
on prices rather than wages, when costs are associated with depreciating the exchange rate, when the
government follows a fixed exchange rate regime, and finally, when debt is denominated in domestic
currency.
    We then proceed to conduct a quantitative investigation. We start by considering a calibration of
the model under monetary independence, in particular a flexible exchange rate regime under which
the government chooses the exchange rate optimally at each point in time. In this regime, the govern-
ment finds it optimal to implement the full employment allocations by depreciating the currency, in
line with the traditional argument for flexible exchange rates. (Notice, however, that the government
cannot alter the value of the debt since it is denominated in foreign currency.) In a calibrated version
of the model, we find that rollover crises play a modest role under a flexible exchange rate regime.
In fact, less than 1% of default episodes in the simulations are driven by rollover crises. Almost all
defaults occur because of fundamental factors.
   We then examine the quantitative effects of giving up monetary independence. One can think of
a small open economy that has a fixed exchange rate regime, or equivalently, a single small economy
within a monetary union in which wages (and debt) are denominated in the currency of the union,
and the conduct of monetary policy is exogenous to the single small economy. Keeping the same

                                                    2
parameter values for the calibration of the flexible exchange rate regime, we find that the economy
faces a significantly larger fraction of defaults due to rollover crises, which can reach about 20% com-
pared with less than 1% in the flexible exchange rate regime. The large difference also remains if we
recalibrate the fixed exchange rate regime to match the same targets for debt and spreads as for the
flexible exchange rate regime. Our quantitative findings therefore suggest that joining a monetary
union entails significant costs in terms of a higher exposure to rollover crises.
    Using the calibrated model for the fixed exchange rate regime, we then simulate the path of the
Spanish economy starting at the time of the adoption of the euro. We find that the economy hits
the “crisis zone” around 2012, in line with the turmoil in sovereign debt markets that occurred at the
time. As a counterfactual, we then consider what the outcome would have been if Spain had exited
the Eurozone in 2012. According to our model, the government would have remained immune to a
rollover crisis, thanks to the ability to use monetary policy for macroeconomic stabilization. The goal
of this exercise, however, is not to argue that being part of a monetary union is undesirable, but only
to point out a new cost from giving up monetary independence and help to shed light on effective
policies. An important welfare consequence that emerges from our welfare analysis is that a lender
of last resort can significantly reduce the costs of joining a monetary union.


Related literature. Our paper contributes to a vast literature on monetary unions, pioneered by the
seminal work of Mundell (1961). The traditional view is that the benefits of joining a monetary union
are given by larger international trade, fostered by lower transaction costs. A more modern view,
stressed by Alesina and Barro (2002), has emphasized the benefits from a reduction in the inflation-
ary bias generated by the time inconsistency problem of monetary policy from the seminal work of
Barro and Gordon (1983). The main theme in the literature is that these benefits have to be traded-off
against the losses from inefficient macroeconomic fluctuations due to nominal rigidities and the lack
of monetary independence. A comprehensive discussion of these issues, which has taken center stage
since the formation of the Eurozone, is provided in Alesina, Barro, and Tenreyro (2002), Santos Silva
and Tenreyro (2010), and De Grauwe (2018). A related literature compares the performance of fixed
versus flexible exchange rates. Of particular interest are studies that consider financial accelerator
models and argue that fixed exchange rates may exacerbate financial distress (Céspedes, Chang, and
Velasco, 2004; Gertler, Gilchrist, and Natalucci, 2007).2
   Our paper adds a new dimension to the costs from giving up monetary independence: a higher
exposure to rollover crises. Our welfare analysis shows that the new costs that we uncovered are
substantial and suggests that an adequate evaluation of the overall net benefits should consider these
costs. In this respect, our results shed some light on the Outright Monetary Transactions facility es-
   2
    Also related in this regard is an active closed economy literature on how the interaction between household delever-
aging and a zero lower bound can amplify demand shocks (Eggertsson and Krugman, 2012, Guerrieri and Lorenzoni,
2017).



                                                           3
tablished by the European Central Bank (ECB) to purchase government bonds of distressed countries,
following Mario Draghi’s July 2012 speech pledging to do “whatever it takes to preserve the euro.”
Indeed, the paper shows that a lender of last resort can substantially reduce the costs for a country to
remain in a monetary union.
    Our paper also belongs to the literature on rollover crises in sovereign debt markets, starting with
Sachs (1984), Alesina, Prati, and Tabellini (1990), and Cole and Kehoe (2000). Our formulation follows
Cole-Kehoe, which has become the workhorse model in the quantitative sovereign default literature
in the tradition of Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano (2008). Examples include Chatterjee and
Eyigungor (2012), Aguiar, Chatterjee, Cole, and Stangebye (2016), Conesa and Kehoe (2017), Roch and
Uhlig (2018), and Bocola and Dovis (2019). Different from these contributions, we consider an econ-
omy with production and nominal rigidities, and establish how the exchange rate regime is central to
the risk of exposure to rollover crises. With a flexible exchange rate regime, we find the exposure to a
rollover crisis to be minimal, which is in line with Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), who showed that
in a canonical endowment economy model with long-term debt calibrated to the data, the presence
of rollover crises has a negligible effect on debt and spreads. By contrast, we show that with a fixed
exchange rate regime, the multiplicity region expands significantly, and the government is heavily
exposed to a rollover crisis.3
     The paper that is perhaps most closely related to ours is Aguiar, Amador, Farhi, and Gopinath
(2013), who address the question of whether the government’s ability to inflate away its debt reduces
its exposure to rollover crises, an argument notably raised by De Grauwe (2013) and Krugman (2011),
who made the observation that Spain and Portugal had higher levels of sovereign spreads compared
to the UK, despite having lower levels of debt. Aguiar et al. consider an endowment economy with
domestic currency debt and show that when commitment to low inflation is weak, an independent
monetary policy can actually increase the vulnerability to a rollover crisis, contrary to De Grauwe
and Krugman’s argument. Our paper also studies how monetary policy matters for the exposure to a
rollover crisis but considers instead a model with nominal rigidities and foreign currency debt. Our
results show that the lack of monetary autonomy does increase vulnerability to a rollover crisis and
provides a new perspective that ascribes a role for monetary policy to deal with rollover crises, even
   3
     With one-year maturity, as in Cole and Kehoe (1996, 2000), the exposure to a rollover crisis is typically large because
the government has to roll over a large amount of debt relative to output every period. While they were motivated by the
1994 Mexican crisis with maturity of less than a year, the typical maturity for sovereign bonds, is much larger, averaging
around six years for the Eurozone. With debt duration calibrated to the Eurozone, Conesa and Kehoe (2017) and Bocola and
Dovis (2019) achieve a somewhat more significant role for rollover crises but rely implicitly on a minimum subsistence
level for consumption, which they set to about 70% of income, and require debt levels of around 100% of GDP for a
typical rollover crisis. Overall, Bocola and Dovis (2019) still finds that non-fundamental risk played a limited role during
the Italian debt crisis. Our model, in the context of a monetary union, does attribute a significant role to rollover crises in
Spain, despite lower observed external debt levels of about 30%. Notably, the model predicts that Spain was vulnerable to
a rollover crisis in 2012, precisely around the time during which the ECB’s promise to buy government bonds effectively
led to a sharp reduction in sovereign spreads.




                                                              4
when debt is denominated in foreign currency.4
    A related literature studies sovereign debt crises, but in the tradition of Calvo (1988), in which the
government lacks commitment to debt issuances. If investors expect high inflation, the government
borrows at a high rate and finds it optimal to inflate ex post, validating the initial expectations. In
this line of work, the fact that debt is denominated in domestic currency and that the government
can inflate away the debt is at the core of the fragility problem.5 We consider a baseline model with
debt in real terms, which allows us to abstract from the use of inflation to reduce the real value of
the debt (and the multiplicity issues associated) to highlight a new channel by which monetary policy
can actually help to reduce a fragility problem that arises from rollover crises.
    Our paper is also related to an emerging literature that integrates nominal rigidities into the
workhorse sovereign default model. Na, Schmitt-Grohé, Uribe, and Yue (2018) study a sovereign
default model with downward nominal wage rigidity and show that it can account for the joint oc-
currence of large nominal devaluations and defaults, a phenomenon known as the “twin Ds.” Bianchi,
Ottonello, and Presno (2019) analyze a trade-off between the expansionary effects of government
spending and the increase in sovereign risk and show how it can generate the observed fiscal pro-
cyclicality. Other recent papers include Arellano, Mihalache, and Bai (2019) who study the comove-
ments of sovereign spreads with domestic nominal rates and inflation, and Bianchi and Sosa-Padilla
(2019) who study the accumulation of international reserves as a macroeconomic stabilization tool.
In contrast to this literature, we consider the possibility of rollover crises, which allows us to pro-
vide the first analysis of how nominal rigidities and monetary policy affect vulnerability to rollover
crises. Another contribution of our paper is to provide an analytical characterization of how nominal
rigidities affect the incentives to default.


Layout. Section 2 presents the model, and Section 3 presents the theoretical analysis. Section 4
presents the quantitative analysis, and Section 6 concludes. The proofs are listed in Appendix A.
   4
       Aguiar, Amador, Farhi, and Gopinath (2015) consider a setup similar to Aguiar, Amador, Farhi, and Gopinath (2013)
but with multiple countries and a union-wide monetary policy. They show that for a country with a high level of debt,
it is preferable to join a monetary union with a mix of high and low debt countries as a way to balance the costs from
inflationary bias and the reduction in the vulnerability to rollover crises by inflating away the debt ex post. Although we
focus on a single country, a likely implication of our analysis is that an optimal currency area would feature countries with
similar debt positions, more in line with Mundell’s criteria for an optimal currency area. Other recent papers addressing
issues of debt crises with a focus on the Eurozone are Broner, Erce, Martin, and Ventura (2014), Gourinchas, Martin, and
Messer (2017), De Ferra and Romei (2018).
     5
       A large literature on multiple equilibria follows this tradition: Corsetti and Dedola (2016) study the role of central
bank backstop policies; Farhi and Maggiori (2017) study the implications for the international monetary system; Bacchetta,
Perazzi, and Van Wincoop (2018) study conventional and unconventional monetary policy, building on a dynamic version
of Calvo by Lorenzoni and Werning (2013). The role of inflation as a partial default also plays a key role in recent work
by Araujo, Leon, and Santos (2013), Du and Schreger (2016), Bassetto and Galli (2019), Nuño and Thomas (2017), Camous
and Cooper (2018), and Hur, Kondo, and Perri (2018).




                                                             5
2       Model
We study a small open economy (SOE) model of endogenous sovereign default subject to rollover
crises. The SOE is populated by households, firms, and a government. In the international financial
markets, risk-neutral lenders buy the long-term government bonds of the SOE denominated in foreign
currency. A single tradable good can be traded without any frictions, and as a result, the law of one
price holds. A non-tradable good in the SOE is produced using labor, and downward nominal wage
rigidity creates the possibility of involuntary unemployment. We next describe the decision problems
of households, firms, lenders, and the government.


2.1     Households
There is a unit measure of households with preferences over consumption given by
                                                       ∞
                                                       X
                                                  E0         β t U (ct ),                                          (1)
                                                       t=0


with
                                        T −µ               −µ −1/µ
                ct = C(cTt , cN
                              t ) = [ω(ct )  + (1 − ω)(cN
                                                        t )  ]     , ω ∈ (0, 1), µ > −1.

The utility function U (c) satisfies the standard properties u0 > 0, u00 < 0, and Inada conditions, where
c is a composite of tradable (cT ) and non-tradable goods (cN ), with constant elasticity of substitution
(CES) equal to 1/(1 + µ).6
    Each period, households receive ytT units of tradable endowment, which is stochastic and follows
a stationary first-order Markov process. We assume a constant unit price of tradable goods in terms
of foreign currency. The value of the tradable endowment in domestic currency is therefore given
by et y T , where et denotes the exchange rate measured as domestic currency per foreign currency
(an increase in et denotes a depreciation of the domestic currency). Households also receive firms’
profits, which we denote by φN t , and labor income, Wt ht , where W is the wage expressed in domestic
currency and h is the amount of hours worked. Households inelastically supply h hours of work to
the labor markets, but because of the presence of downward wage rigidity, they will work a strictly
lower amount of hours when wage rigidity is binding. As we will discuss below, when wage rigidity is
binding, the actual hours worked will be determined by firms’ labor demand given prices and wages.
   As is standard in the sovereign debt literature, we assume that households do not have direct
access to external credit markets, although the government can borrow abroad and distribute the net
proceedings to the households using lump-sum taxes or transfers. The households’ budget constraint,
    6
    The assumption of CES is only done to simplify some of the expressions. For our theoretical results, any homothetic
preferences over tradables and non-tradables, or even normality, would suffice.




                                                             6
expressed in domestic currency, is therefore given by

                               et cTt + PtN cN       T    N
                                             t = et yt + φt + Wt ht − Tt ,                              (2)

where PtN denotes the price of non-tradables in domestic currency, and Tt denotes lump-sum taxes/transfers
in units of domestic currency.
    The households’ problem consists of choosing cTt and cN   t to maximize (1) given the sequence of
prices for non-tradables {Pt }, labor income {Wt ht }, profits {φN
                            N
                                                                  t }, and taxes {Tt }. The static optimal-
ity condition equates the relative price of non-tradables to the marginal rate of substitution between
tradables and non-tradables:                          1+µ
                                       PtN     1 − ω cTt
                                            =                    .                                      (3)
                                        et       ω     cN
                                                        t

Thanks to homotheticity, the relative demand of tradable and non-tradable consumption goods is only
a function of the relative price.


2.2     Firms
Firms operate a production function y N = F (h) where ytN denotes the output of non-tradable goods,
and ht denotes employment, the sole input. The production function F (·) is a differentiable, in-
creasing, and concave function. In particular, we will consider a homogeneous production function
F (h) = hα where α ∈ (0, 1].
   Firms operate in perfectly competitive markets, and each period they maximize profits that are
given by
                                 φN           N
                                  t = max Pt F (ht ) − Wt ht .                                (4)
                                             ht

The optimal choice of labor employment ht equates the value of the marginal product of labor to the
nominal wage:
                                       PtN F 0 (ht ) = Wt .                                      (5)

Given the price of non-tradables, a higher wage leads to lower employment. Likewise, given the
wage, a lower price of non-tradables leads to lower employment. As we will see below, how the price
of non-tradables reacts in general equilibrium will have important implications for debt crises.


2.2.1   Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity

We model downward nominal wage rigidity, following Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016). For an econ-
omy that is outside a currency union, we assume, in particular, that wages in domestic currency




                                                    7
cannot fall below W :7
                                                         Wt ≥ W                                                           (6)

for all t.
    The parameter W determines the severity of the wage rigidity.8 There are two cases. If the nom-
inal wage that clears the labor market is higher than W , the economy is at full employment and (6)
is not binding. If, however, the nominal wage that would clear the market is below W , the economy
experiences involuntary unemployment. In this case, the amount of employment in equilibrium is de-
termined by the amount of labor demand (5), and households work strictly less than their endowment
of hours. Formally, wages and employment need to satisfy the following slackness condition:
                                                                    
                                                Wt − W         h − ht = 0.                                                (7)

For an economy within a currency union, wages are set in foreign currency (the currency of the
union), and therefore the lower bound is also in foreign currency. As we will see, in a fixed exchange
rate regime, the wage also becomes effectively rigid in foreign currency.


2.3     Government
The government can issue a non-contingent long-term bond and can default at any point in time.
As in Hatchondo and Martinez (2009) and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), a bond issued in period t
promises an infinite stream of coupons that decrease at an exogenous constant rate 1−δ.9 In particular,
a bond issued in period t promises to pay δ(1 − δ)j−1 units of foreign currency in period t + j, for
all j ≥ 1. Given the assumption of a constant unitary price of the tradable good in terms of foreign
currency, it is equivalent to specify the bond in terms of the tradable good. Debt dynamics can be
represented by the following law of motion:

                                                 bt+1 = (1 − δ)bt + it ,                                                  (8)

where bt is the stock of bonds due at the beginning of period t, and it is the stock of new bonds issued
in period t.
   7
      There is a large amount of empirical evidence on downward wage rigidity. In particular, a recent literature has used
micro-level data to highlight the important role that this friction played in the European crisis (e.g. Faia and Pezone, 2018;
Ronchi and Di Mauro, 2017).
    8
      In Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016), W depends on the previous period wage and a parameter that controls the speed
of wage adjustment. For numerical tractability, we take W as an exogenous (constant) value, as in Bianchi et al. (2019).
Notice also that allowing for indexation to CPI inflation would not affect our theoretical mechanism because a nominal
exchange rate depreciation in a state with unemployment would lead to a real exchange rate depreciation, and the price
of non-tradables in domestic currency would rise by more than the increase in wages due to indexation.
    9
      We take maturity as a primitive. There is an active literature studying maturity choices in sovereign default models
(Arellano and Ramanarayanan, 2012; Bocola and Dovis, 2019; Sanchez, Sapriza, and Yurdagul, 2018).



                                                               8
    Debt contracts cannot be enforced. If the government chooses to default, it faces two punishments.
First, the government switches to financial autarky and cannot borrow for a stochastic number of
periods. Second, there is a utility loss κ(ytT ), assumed to be increasing in tradable income. We think of
this utility loss as capturing various default costs related to reputation, sanctions, or the misallocation
of resources.10
       The government’s budget constraint in a period starting with good credit standing is

                                         δet bt (1 − dt ) = Tt + et qt it (1 − dt ),                                      (9)

where dt = 0(1) if the government repays (defaults) and q(·) denotes the price schedule, which we will
characterize below. The budget constraint indicates that repayment of outstanding debt obligations
is made by collecting lump-sum taxes and issuing new debt. 11
    The timing within each period follows Cole and Kehoe (2000). At the beginning of each period,
the government has outstanding debt liabilities bt and could be in good or bad credit standing. If the
government is in good credit standing, it chooses new debt issuances at the price schedule offered by
investors. At the end of each period, the government decides whether to default or repay the initial
debt outstanding. The difference with respect to Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) that will give rise to
multiplicity is that here the government does not have the ability to commit to repaying within the
period.12 As we will see, negative beliefs about the decision of the government to default can become
self-fulfilling.


Monetary regimes. Regarding the policy for exchange rates, we will consider two regimes: a flex-
ible exchange rate and a fixed exchange rate. In the flexible exchange rate regime, the government
  10
      Utility losses from default in sovereign debt models are also used by Bianchi, Hatchondo, and Martinez (2018) and
Roch and Uhlig (2018), among others. An alternative often used is an output cost. If the utility function is log over the
composite consumption, and output losses from default are proportional to the composite consumption in default, the
losses from default would be identical across the two specifications. In any case, as will become clear below, what will be
most important for our mechanism is the difference in the values of repayment for the government when investors are
willing to lend and when they refuse to lend, but not the explicit form of the default cost.
   11
      As is well-understood, allowing for specific taxes on consumption or payroll subsidies can mimic a nominal deprecia-
tion, as studied, for example, in Farhi, Gopinath, and Itskhoki (2013) and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016) (see also Correia,
Nicolini, and Teles, 2008). As long as there are some limitations on the use of these policies (either political or economic),
there remains a role for explicit nominal depreciations. Quantitatively, we will calibrate wage rigidity to match the ob-
served increase in unemployment, and so implicitly this captures that the government could in practice be using these
policies to some extent. From a normative standpoint, the importance of the exchange rate regime that we will uncover
applies to the role of fiscal devaluation policies.
   12
      A different source of multiplicity following Calvo (1988) arises if the government has to issue a fixed amount of debt
revenues. In this case, the fact that bond prices decrease with debt generates a Laffer curve, which leads, directly through
the budget constraint, to a high debt/spreads equilibrium and a low debt/spreads equilibrium. Lorenzoni and Werning
(2013) explore this kind of multiplicity in a dynamic context with fiscal rules and long-term maturity and show how this
gives rise to “slow moving debt crises” (see also Ayres, Navarro, Nicolini, and Teles, 2016).




                                                              9
will choose the optimal exchange rate at all dates without commitment.13 In the fixed exchange rate
regime, we assume that the government fixes the exchange rate to an exogenous level e = e at all
times. Equivalently, one can also interpret the fixed exchange rate regime as the policy of a single
economy that enters a monetary union and gives up its currency, in which case wages would be di-
rectly denominated in the foreign currency. In the former, monetary policy is set by the country to
which the currency is pegged. In the latter, monetary policy is set at the level of the monetary union.14
The important point is that in both cases, the government lacks monetary independence.


2.4     International Lenders
Sovereign bonds are traded with atomistic, risk-neutral foreign lenders. In addition to investing
through the defaultable bonds, lenders have access to a one-period risk-free security paying a net
interest rate r. By a no-arbitrage condition, equilibrium bond prices when the government repays are
then given by

                                           1
                                   qt =       Et [(1 − dt+1 )(δ + (1 − δ)qt+1 )].                                     (10)
                                          1+r

    Equation (10) indicates that in equilibrium, an investor has to be indifferent between investing
in a risk-free security and buying a government bond at price qt , bearing the risk of default. In case
of repayment next period, the payoff is given by the coupon δ plus the market value qt+1 of the
nonmaturing fraction of the bonds. Since we assume no recovery, the bond price is zero in the event
of default.


2.5     Equilibrium
In equilibrium, the market for non-tradable goods clears:

                                                     cN
                                                      t = F (ht ).                                                    (11)

In addition, using the households’ and government budget constraint (2) and the definition of the
firms’ profits and market clearing condition (11), we obtain the resource constraint for tradable goods
in the economy:
                            cTt = ytT + (1 − dt )[δbt − qt (bt+1 − (1 − δ)bt )].                    (12)
  13
      Given the path for nominal exchange rates that the government chooses, there is a domestic nominal interest rate that
would implement this path. This interest rate can be obtained, via an interest parity condition, by introducing nominal
bonds in domestic and foreign currency traded among domestic households.
   14
      One could also allow some degree of correlation between the monetary policy conducted at the union level or by the
target country by allowing P ∗ to follow a stochastic process correlated with the small open economy. Theoretically, all
our results would remain unchanged.



                                                            10
    Before proceeding to study a Markov equilibrium in which the government chooses policies op-
timally without commitment, let us examine the equilibrium for given government policies. A com-
petitive equilibrium given government policies in our economy is defined as follows:

Definition 1 (Competitive Equilibrium). Given an initial debt b0 , an initial credit standing, govern-
ment policies {Tt , bt+1 , dt , et }∞
                                    t=0 , and an exogenous process for the tradable endowment {yt }t=0
                                                                                                        T ∞

                                                                                                      ∞
and for reentry after default, a competitive equilibrium is a sequence of allocations {cTt , cN
                                                                                              t , ht }t=0 and
prices {PtN , Wt , qt }∞
                       t=0 such that:


   1. Households and firms solve their optimization problems.

   2. Government policies satisfy the government budget constraint (9).

   3. The bond pricing equation (10) holds.

   4. The market for non-tradable goods clears (11), and the resource constraint for tradables (12)
      holds.

   5. The labor market satisfies conditions (6), (7), and h ≤ h.


Employment, Consumption, and Wages Using market clearing for non-tradable goods (11), to-
gether with the optimality conditions for households (3) and firms (5), we can obtain a useful (par-
tial) characterization of equilibrium in a system of these three static equations and three variables
(cTt , ht , wt ), where wt ≡ Wt /et denotes the wage denominated in tradable goods. Using this sys-
tem of equations, we can then derive in every period a real equilibrium wage solely as a function of
(cTt , ht ).

Lemma 1. In any equilibrium, the real wage in terms of tradable goods is a function of tradable con-
sumption and employment,
                                                                      1+µ
                                                              cTt
                                                       
                                                 1−ω
                                W(cTt , ht )   ≡                             F 0 (ht ).                 (13)
                                                  ω         F (ht )

Moreover, W(cTt , ht ) is increasing with respect to cTt and decreasing with respect to ht .

    One implication of Lemma 1, which will be important once we turn to the determination of the
entire dynamic equilibrium, is that a decrease in the amount of tradable consumption is associated
with a lower equilibrium wage. This occurs because lower tradable consumption is associated in equi-
librium with a lower relative price of non-tradables (via household optimality), which, in turn, leads
to a lower demand for labor and a decrease in the real wage, for a given level of employment. In addi-
tion, for a given level of tradable consumption, a decrease in employment is associated in equilibrium


                                                       11
with a higher price of non-tradables (via market clearing and household optimality), which, in turn,
requires a higher real wage to be consistent with firms’ labor demand.
   In equilibrium, we then have that downward nominal wage rigidity can be expressed as

                                            W(cTt , ht )et ≥ W .                                   (14)

According to this lemma, we then have that if (14) is binding, a reduction in the amount of tradable
consumption is associated with low employment in equilibrium. This result has important impli-
cations for the general equilibrium effects in the full dynamic system. If a shock reduces the de-
mand for total consumption, we must have that for a given level of non-tradable output, the price of
non-tradables needs to decline so that households switch consumption from tradables toward non-
tradables and the market for non-tradable goods clears. Absent wage rigidity, we would have that the
wage falls, and the only implication for the real economy is the reduction in tradable consumption.
However, if wages are downwardly rigid, the decline in the relative price of non-tradables will lead
to a decline in employment and non-tradable consumption.
    Based on Lemma 1, we can also analogously construct an equilibrium employment that is a func-
tion of cTt and wt ≡ W /et .

Lemma 2. In any equilibrium, employment is given by
                                    h     i 1       1+µ
                                     1−ω α 1+αµ cT  1+αµ               if cTt ≤ cTwt ,
                                                  t
                     H(cTt , wt ) =     ω  wt
                                                                                               ,   (15)
                                      h                                  if   cTt   >   cTwt
                                    


where
                                                             1
                                                            1+µ
                                 T        ω           wt              1+αµ
                                cw     =                            h 1+µ .
                                   t
                                         1−ω          α

   This condition implies that when the wage rigidity is binding and there is unemployment, the
government will realize that repaying debt and cutting back on consumption will create more unem-
ployment. We will see below how the implied increase in the cost of repayment affects incentives to
default and vulnerability to a rollover crisis.


2.6     Recursive Government Problem
We consider the optimal policy of a benevolent government with no commitment, which chooses con-
sumption and external borrowing to maximize households’ welfare, subject to the implementability
conditions. We focus on the Markov equilibria.
   Every period in which the government enters with access to financial markets, it evaluates the

                                                      12
lifetime utility of households if debt contracts are honored against the lifetime utility of households if
they are repudiated. We use s = (y T , ζ) to denote the vector of exogenous states in every period. The
variable ζ is a sunspot variable to index for the possibility of multiplicity of equilibria, as in Cole and
Kehoe (2000), which we will describe below. Different from the equilibrium according to the timing in
Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), the possibility of a rollover crisis implies that the bond price is a function
of the initial debt position and the sunspot, in addition to the debt choice and current income shock.
    Regarding the policy for exchange rates, we will start with the case in which the government is
under a fixed exchange rate regime. That is, the exchange rate is fixed at an exogenous level e = e for
every period. We can define a real wage rigidity constraint as w ≥ w where w ≡ W /e and w ≡ W/e.
We can then rewrite (14) as W(cT , h) ≥ w. Later on, we will study the case in which we allow the
government to depreciate its currency. As should be clear from (14), an exchange rate depreciation
will be able to undo the wage rigidity, and this will be the optimal policy for the government.
    The government problem with access to financial markets can be formulated in recursive form as
follows:
                         V (b, s) = max {(1 − d)VR (b, s) + dVD (y T )},                      (16)
                                                      d∈{0,1}

where VR (b, s) and VD (y T ) denote, respectively, the values of repayment and default.
       The value of repayment is given by the following Bellman equation:

                                                    u(cT , F (h)) + βEV (b0 , s0 )
                                                
                    VR (b, s) = max                                                                                  (17)
                                  b0 ,cT ,h≤h

                                             subject to

                                           cT = y T − δb + q(b0 , b, s)(b0 − (1 − δ)b)
                               W(cT , h) ≥ w,

where q(b0 , b, s) denotes the debt price schedule, taken as given by the government, and W is defined
in (13).15 Meanwhile, the value of default is given by

           VD (y T ) = max            u cT , F (h) −κ(y T ) + βE ψV (0, s0 ) + (1 − ψ)VD (y T 0 )
                                                                                               
                                                                                                                     (18)
                        cT ,h≤h

                                                        subject to

                                                     cT = y T
                                         W(cT , h) ≥ w,

where ψ ∈ [0, 1] is the probability of reentering financial markets after a default.
       A Markov-perfect equilibrium is then defined as follows.
  15
       An equivalent representation uses equilibrium employment (15) rather than the explicit wage rigidity constraint.

                                                                     13
Definition 2 (Markov-perfect equilibrium). A Markov-perfect equilibrium is defined by value func-
                                                          ˆ s), ĉT (b, s), b̂(b, s), ĥ(b, s)}, and a bond price
tions {V (b, s), VR (b, s), VD (y T )}, policy functions {d(b,
schedule q(b0 , b, s) such that

   1. Given the bond price schedule, policy functions solve problems (16), (17), and (18).

   2. The debt price schedule satisfies
                                     
                                         1
                                             E[(1   − d0 )(δ + (1 − δ)q(b00 , b0 , s0 ))]      ˆ s) = 0,
                                                                                            if d(b,
                        0                1+r
                    q(b , b, s) =                                                                          ,
                                     0                                                        ˆ s) = 1
                                                                                            if d(b,

      where

                                                        b00 = b̂(b0 , s0 )
                                                         d0 = d(b0 , s0 ).


    For the economy with a flexible exchange rate, the only difference is that the government also
chooses e, in addition to the prices and allocations that are chosen under the fixed exchange rate
regime subject to the implementability conditions. It is also straightforward to expand the definition
for an arbitrary Markov exchange rate policy.


2.7    Multiplicity of Equilibrium
As in Cole and Kehoe (2000), the government is subject to self-fulfilling rollover crises. Let us define
the debt price schedule, assuming there will be no default and the break-even condition of lenders is
satisfied. We will call this the fundamental debt price schedule:

                                               1
                            q̃(b0 , y T ) ≡       E[(1 − d0 )(δ + (1 − δ)q(b00 , b0 , s0 ))],                  (19)
                                              1+r

where b00 = b̂(b0 , s0 ) and d0 = d(b0 , s0 ). This debt price schedule does not depend on the sunspot nor
on the current amount of debt held by the government. Using this price schedule, we can construct
the value of repayment when international lenders believe that the government will honor its debt
commitments at the end of the period and therefore extend credit to the government. This value is as




                                                             14
follows:

                 VR+ (b, y T ) = max               u(cT , F (h)) + βEV (b0 , s0 )
                                               
                                                                                                                    (20)
                                 b0 ,cT ,h≤h

                                            subject to

                                        cT = y T − δb + q̃(b0 , y T )[b0 − (1 − δ)b]
                               W(cT , h) ≥ w.

Denote by b̂+ (b, y T ) the solution to the previous problem. Divide the state space where the govern-
ment finds it optimal to issue strictly positive amounts of debt:
                                n                                                            o
                             B ≡ (b, y T ) ∈ R × R+ :                b̂+ (b, y T ) > (1 − δ)b .

Consider now the case in which investors are unwilling to lend to the government. Denote by VR−
the value function in this case, when the government decides to repay. If (b, y T ) ∈
                                                                                    / B, we have that
  −     T      +     T
VR (b, y ) = VR (b, y ), as the government is not issuing debt even when investors are willing to lend
to the government. Then, if (b, y T ) ∈ B, the value is given by

                  VR− (b, y T ) = max           u(cT , F (h)) + βEV ((1 − δ)b, s0 )
                                            
                                                                                                                    (21)
                                  cT ,h≤h

                                          subject to

                                       cT = y T − δb
                             W(cT , h) ≥ w.

Lemma 3 states that the value of repayment when lenders refuse to roll over government bonds is
never greater than the value when lenders are willing to roll over. This must be the case since the
government can always choose not to borrow when lenders are willing to roll over.16
Lemma 3. For every tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ and debt level b ∈ R, we have that VR+ (b, y T ) ≥
VR− (b, y T ).

    Because tradable consumption is lower when the government does not have access to borrowing
, the wage rigidity constraint will become binding for lower levels of debt, in line with Lemma 1.
As a result, the presence of wage rigidity will have a stronger effect on VR− than on VR+ and lead
to an increase in the gap between these two values. As we will see below, this will have important
implications for the occurrence of self-fulfilling rollover crises.
  16
    One element implicit here is that if the government were to try to repurchase debt when investors are unwilling to
lend, the price of bonds would rise to the fundamental price, and hence the budget constraint when (b, y T ) ∈ B would be
cT = y T − δb, as reflected in (21). See Aguiar and Amador (2013) and Bocola and Dovis (2019) for an elaboration of this
point.

                                                                15
Three zones. Let us separate the state space (b, y T ) into three zones: the safe zone, default zone,
and crisis zone. The safe zone will denote those states in which the government finds it optimal to
repay its debt even if international lenders are not willing to issue more debt to the government. That
is,

                         S ≡ (b, y T ) ∈ R × R+ :        VD (y T ) ≤ VR− (b, y T ) .
                            


The default zone defines those states in which the government finds it optimal to default even if in-
ternational lenders are willing to lend at the fundamental debt price schedule. That is,

                         D ≡ (b, y T ) ∈ R × R+ :        VD (y T ) > VR+ (b, y T ) .
                            


Finally, the crisis zone will correspond to those states in which the government finds it optimal to
repay if investors are willing to lend at the fundamental debt price schedule, but finds it optimal to
default if investors are not willing to lend. That is,

                  C ≡ (b, y T ) ∈ R × R+ :      VR+ (b, y T ) > VD (y T ) > VR− (b, y T ) .
                     


In the crisis zone, the outcome is undetermined and depends on investors’ beliefs. If investors believe
the government will repay, the government will find it optimal to repay, whereas if they believe that
the government will default, the government will default. To select an equilibrium, we will use a
sunspot ζ ∈ {0, 1}. If ζ = 0, we will say there is a “good sunspot,” in which case the equilibrium with
repayment is selected. If ζ = 1, we will say there is a “bad sunspot,” in which case the equilibrium
with default is selected. We assume that ζ follows an i.i.d. process with probability π of selecting the
bad sunspot.
    Following these definitions, the optimal binary default decision and the optimal debt price sched-
ule will satisfy
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                      1    if (b, y T ) ∈ D
                                     
                                     
                                            if (b, y T ) ∈ C
                                     
                                     1                        &   ζ=1
                           d(b, s) =                                                                (22)
                                     
                                     
                                      0    if (b, y T ) ∈ C   &   ζ=0
                                     
                                     
                                            if (b, y T ) ∈ S
                                     
                                     0


                                       
                                       
                                       
                                        0            if (b, y T ) ∈ D
                                       
                         q(b0 , b, s) = 0             if (b, y T ) ∈ C & ζ = 1 .                    (23)
                                       
                                       
                                       q̃(b0 , y T ) in every other case
                                       



                                                    16
3         Theoretical Analysis
In this section, we provide an analytical characterization of how monetary policy and downward
nominal wage rigidity affect the government’s incentives to default. The central point we will establish
is that fixing the exchange rate leaves a government more vulnerable to a rollover crisis. In other
words, we will show that the crisis zone will be larger for an economy with a fixed exchange rate.


3.1        Flexible Exchange Rate Regime
The flexible exchange rate regime allows the government to choose any nominal exchange rate every
period. The following proposition characterizes the optimal exchange rate policy.

Proposition 1 (Optimal Exchange Rate Policy). Under a flexible exchange rate regime, the government
chooses an exchange rate that delivers full employment in all states.

    This proposition establishes that the government finds it optimal to choose an exchange rate that
delivers full employment, a result that can be seen from the value functions (17) and (18). If there
was unemployment in the economy, the government could always relax the wage constraint by suf-
ficiently depreciating the nominal exchange rate without bearing any other costs. This basic result
is of course in line with the traditional benefit of having a flexible exchange rate in the presence of
nominal rigidities, going back to Friedman (1953) and Mundell (1961). One difference here is that to
ensure full employment, the government needs to depreciate the currency not only on-equilibrium
but also off-equilibrium.
    We would like to highlight two points. First, while the only role of monetary policy is to help sta-
bilize unemployment through real wages, this is usually seen as a central channel of monetary policy
in open economies. Milton Friedman, for example, highlighted the dangers of Europe eliminating the
exchange rate adjustment because of possible misalignments in real wages.17
     Second, it is worth pointing out that while we do not explicitly model why the government would
fix the exchange rate or join a monetary (and therefore depart from the optimal exchange rate policy),
doing so, in practice, offers a number of well-studied benefits. The gains could arise, for example, from
lower inflationary bias (Alesina and Barro, 2002, Barro and Gordon, 1983) or from improvements in
trade due to lower volatility and transaction costs (Mundell, 1961, Frankel and Rose, 2002). Following a
    17
         As expressed by Milton Friedman in “Why Europe Can’t Afford the Euro,” Times (London), November 19, 1997.
           If one country is affected by negative shocks that call for, say, lower wages relative to other countries, that
           can be achieved by a change in one price, the exchange rate, rather than by requiring changes in thousands
           on thousands of separate wage rates, or the emigration of labour. The hardships imposed on France by its
           “franc fort” policy illustrate the cost of a politically inspired determination not to use the exchange rate to
           adjust to the impact of German unification. Britain’s economic growth after it abandoned the exchange-
           rate mechanism a few years ago to refloat the pound illustrates the effectiveness of the exchange rate as an
           adjustment mechanism.



                                                                 17
large literature on monetary unions, we do not model explicitly these gains. We will show, however,
that the main theoretical results to be presented below will continue to hold in the presence of an
exogenous specified costs from current or future nominal exchange rate fluctuations.18


3.2     Uncovering the Role of Nominal Rigidities and Monetary Policy
In this section, we study how wage rigidity and the exchange rate regime shape default decisions and
the exposure to a rollover crisis. As a starting point, we consider the impact of a temporary change in
the degree of wage rigidity. In particular, we examine a one-period tightening of wage rigidity. Since
w = We , the tightening can arise because of an increase in W , a more appreciated exchange rate, or
some combination of the two.19 The advantage of assuming that the change in wage rigidity (or the
exchange rate) is only for one period is that the fundamental price schedule remains the same. This is
because continuation values do not change, and hence future default decisions also remain unchanged.
Notice that it is equivalent to consider a stochastic i.i.d. process for w. In this case, a shock to w will
also leave the fundamental price schedule unchanged and the theoretical propositions that we will
derive, would apply in the same way. We will later study the consequences of permanent changes
in the exchange rate regime, but studying a temporary change in wage rigidity is useful because it
allows us to isolate current changes in monetary policy while leaving future policies constant.
     Denote the current value functions with the one-period change in wage rigidity w as ṼD (y T ; w),
ṼR+ (b, y T ; w), and ṼR− (b, y T ; w). We maintain the same notation for continuation values V and the
bond price q which correspond to a Markov equilbrium with an arbitrary exchange rate policy.20
The problem the government faces when there is a temporary change in wage rigidity can then be
expressed as

        ṼD (y T ; w) = max         u cT , F (h) −κ(y T ) + βE ψV (0, s0 ) + (1 − ψ)VD (y T 0 )
                                                                                             
                                                                                                                         (24)
                         cT ,h≤h

                                                   subject to
                                                cT = y T ,
                                        W(cT , h) ≥ w,
  18
      It remains a topic for future research to provide a more comprehensive analysis that integrates the gains from joining
a monetary union studied in the literature and the new cost identified in this paper.
   19
      Alternatively, one can think of a decrease in the price of tradables in foreign currency P ∗ , which we have assumed
                                                                                                      W
constant and normalized to one for simplicity. In this case, by the law of one price we have w = eP     ∗ , and a reduction in

P ∗ would have the same tightening effects.
   20
      To fix ideas, one can think about these continuation values being associated with the economy under flexible wages.
What is important in this comparative static exercise is that we change the current wage rigidity (wt ) leaving the t +
1, t + 2.... rigidity constant, and so our results apply for any arbitrary continuation Markov equilibrium, including the
one under the flexible exchange rate.




                                                             18
                ṼR+ (b, y T ; w) = max               u(cT , F (h)) + βEV (b0 , s0 )
                                                  
                                                                                                                         (25)
                                    b0 ,cT ,h≤h

                                               subject to
                                           cT = y T − δb + q̃(b0 , y T )(b0 − (1 − δ)b),
                                  W(cT , h) ≥ w,

and

                 ṼR− (b, y T ; w) = max           u(cT , F (h)) + βEV ((1 − δ)b, s0 )
                                               
                                                                                                                         (26)
                                     cT ,h≤h

                                              subject to
                                          cT = y T − δb,
                                 W(cT , h) ≥ w.

To show how the three zones (safe, default, and crisis) are affected by nominal rigidity, we first present
some useful properties regarding the thresholds at which the government is indifferent between re-
paying and defaulting.

Lemma 4 (Debt Thresholds). For every y T ∈ R+ , there exist debt thresholds b̄+ (w) , b̄− (w) ∈ R+ such
that ṼD (y T ; w) = VR+ b, y T ; w ∀b ≥ b̄+ (w) and
                                    

ṼD (y T ; w) ≥ VR− b, y T ; w ∀b ≥ b̄− (w). Moreover, ṼD (y T ; w) = VR+ b̄+ (w) , y T ; w and
                                                                                           

ṼD (y T ; w) = VR− b̄− (w) , y T ; w . Finally, we have b̄+ (w) ≥ b̄− (w).
                                      

(Notice that to streamline notation, we omit the dependence of these thresholds on y T .)

    Using that the repayment value functions are strictly decreasing with respect to current debt and
that the value of default is independent of debt, Lemma 4 presents the debt intervals that characterize
the repayment/default decision. The lemma also establishes that the amount of debt that makes the
government indifferent between repaying and defaulting is higher when investors are willing to lend.
    Using these results, we can construct a safe region, a default region, and a crisis region for every
level of wage rigidity:21

        S̃ (w) ≡ −∞, b̄− (w) ,             C̃ (w) ≡ b̄− (w) , b̄+ (w) ,            and D̃ (w) ≡ b̄+ (w) , ∞ .
                                                                                                         


Figure 1 shows how the debt space can be separated into these distinct regions by the thresholds
defined in Lemma 4 for every possible y T .


  21
     Different from the “zones” constructed above, which are in the (b, y T ) space, the “regions” fix the level of y T and w.
Recall that the dependence of the debt threshold y T is made implicit to avoid clutter. We will often refer to the thresholds,
in short, as b+ or b− .


                                                                  19
                          Safe Region             Crisis Region           Default Region
                                                                                                b
                                            b̄− (w)             b̄+ (w)


                       Figure 1: Safe, crisis, and default regions and debt thresholds

Comparative static results. We now study how these regions expand or contract with the degree
of wage rigidity. Notice that to characterize the three regions, it is sufficient to determine the threshold
values of b̄− and b̄+ . A property that will be useful in the characterization, established in Lemma 7 in
                                                                                 −
the appendix, is the existence of wage rigidity thresholds wD , w+     R , and w R . When w is below these
thresholds, the value functions are identical to their corresponding flexible wage counterparts, and
when w is above these thresholds, the value functions become strictly inferior to their corresponding
flexible wage counterparts. We will be using this property to show how b̄− and b̄+ change with w.
       We first establish that the safe region contracts with higher wage rigidity.

Proposition 2 (Safe Region Threshold). For every y T and taking a pair of wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the
following claims hold:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄− (w2 ) ≤ b̄− (w1 ), or equivalently, S (w2 ) ⊆ S (w1 ). Moreover, if
      w2 ∈ w−                    −           −
                       
                R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently, S (w 2 ) ⊂ S (w 1 ).


  ii) Consider F (h) = h, u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−                   −           −
                                                               
                                                           R , ∞ , then b̄ (w 2 ) ≤ b̄ (w 1 ), or equiva-
      lently, S (w2 ) ⊆ S (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ w−                −           −
                                                           
                                                    R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ), or equivalently,
      S (w2 ) ⊂ S (w1 ).

    An implication of b̄− decreasing with wage rigidity is that a higher level of rigidity can push the
government away from the safe zone. Key for Proposition 2 is that, relative to being in default, wage
rigidity is more binding under a state in which the government cannot roll over the debt. The first part
of this proposition analyzes a range of w of low wage rigidity in the sense that there is unemployment
only when the government repays while being unable to roll over the debt. Within this range, the
value of repayment is decreasing in w whereas the value of default stays constant. The result is that
a higher w always leads to a contraction of the safe zone. Once w is high enough, both the value
of default and the value of repayment are affected, and the strong monotonicity cannot be ensured
for general conditions. With linear production and log utility, we can establish that the changes in
these value functions once the wage rigidity becomes binding under both default and repayment are
of the same magnitude.22 Hence, the safe region for high wage rigidity such that unemployment
occurs under default is strictly higher than the safe region for any lower wage rigidity such that
  22
     The reason is that under these assumptions, the non-tradable consumption becomes linear in tradable consumption
and with log utility, and one can then separate the component associated with tradable consumption from the wage
rigidity component.


                                                        20
unemployment occurs only when the government cannot roll over the debt. Furthermore, we are able
to show in Proposition 5 in the appendix that for any utility function that satisfies separability between
tradables and non-tradables, a fixed exchange rate always displays a smaller safe zone compared with
a flexible exchange rate regime.
    One implication of the fact that the safe zone contracts with a higher w is that the maximum default
region that includes both the crisis region and the (fundamental) default region expand. Moreover,
the crisis region expands to the left, meaning that the government is vulnerable to a rollover crisis for
lower levels of debt. To examine the overall change in the crisis region and how the default region
change, we need to examine the other debt threshold b̄− .
    We show next that the effect of wage rigidity on b̄− depends crucially on the trade balance in the
flexible exchange rate economy when the government repays while being able to roll over the debt.
Let T BRf lex,+ = y T − ĉ+    +      T                                                             +
                          R (b̄ (0), y ; 0) denote such a trade balance. Proposition 3 shows that b̄ (w) is
increasing in w if T BRf lex,+ ≤ 0. Conversely, b̄+ (w) is decreasing in w if T BRf lex,+ ≥ 0.

Proposition 3 (Default Region Threshold). For every y T and taking a pair of wage rigidities w1 < w2 ,
we have that:

If T BRf lex,+ ≤ 0:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, w+
                                  +            +
                         R , then b̄ (w 1 ) ≤ b̄ (w 2 ), or equivalently, D (w 2 ) ⊆ D (w 1 ). Moreover, if
      w2 ∈ wD , w+
                              +           +
                    R , then b̄ (w 1 ) < b̄ (w 2 ), or equivalently, D (w 2 ) ⊂ D (w 1 ).

  ii) Consider F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ [wD , ∞), then b̄+ (w1 ) ≤ b̄+ (w2 ), or equiva-
      lently, D (w2 ) ⊆ D (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wD , w+
                                                                  +           +
                                                         R , then b̄ (w 1 ) < b̄ (w 2 ), or equivalently,
      D (w2 ) ⊆ D (w1 ).

If T BRf lex,+ ≥ 0:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄+ (w2 ) ≤ b̄+ (w1 ), or equivalently, D (w1 ) ⊆ D (w2 ). Moreover, if
      w2 ∈ w+
                        
                R , w D  , then b̄+ (w2 ) < b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently, D (w1 ) ⊂ D (w2 ).

  ii) Consider F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w+
                                                                                   +           +
                                                                      R , ∞ , then b̄ (w 2 ) ≤ b̄ (w 1 ). Equiva-
      lently, D (w1 ) ⊆ D (w2 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ w+
                                                                           +           +
                                                            R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ), or equivalently,
      D (w1 ) ⊂ D (w2 ).

    This proposition tells us that depending on the sign of the trade balance, the default zone will
contract or expand. If T BRf lex,+ ≥ 0, we have that a higher wage rigidity can push the government
to the default region. On the other hand, if T BRf lex,+ ≤ 0, a higher wage rigidity can push the
government out of the default region.
  The intuition for this proposition is that the trade balance determines (together with y T ) the
amount of tradable resources available for consumption and affects how binding wage rigidity is.

                                                       21
If the trade balance is positive when the government repays, this implies that there are fewer trad-
able resources available under repayment than under default (since the trade balance is zero in this
case).23 Starting from a low w, this implies that an increase in w generates unemployment first under
repayment, and only after a sufficiently large increase does unemployment emerge under default too.
As a result, starting at an indifferent point between repayment and defaulting under flexible wages,
there is a range of w such that the value of repayment is decreasing in w while the value of default is
unchanged. In this range, the default region expands with w.24 If the trade balance is negative, these
results revert, since now more resources are available for consumption under repayment than under
default. Hence, a tighter wage rigidity first affects the value of default, and only after a sufficiently
large increase is the value of default affected. The result is a default region that contracts with w.
    Putting together Propositions 2 and 3 that establish how b+ and b− change with w, we can now
examine what happens with the crisis zone. Since the safe region contracts with w, we know that the
crisis region expands to the left (i.e., the government becomes vulnerable for lower values of debt). We
also know that if T BRF lex,+ < 0, the crisis region expands to the right as well. If T BRF lex,+ > 0, we can
also show that the crisis region expands, in general, for moderate degrees of rigidity. Furthermore,
under stricter conditions, we can show that it always expands for any degree of rigidity. Proposition
4 establishes this central result.
Proposition 4 (Crisis Region Expansion). For every y T and taking a pair of wage rigidities w1 < w2 ,
the following claims hold:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, min w+              , then C̃ (w1 ) ⊆ C̃ (w2 ). Moreover, if w2 ∈ w−
                                                                                                 +         
                                R , wD                                                    R , min w R , w D      ,
       then C̃ (w1 ) ⊂ C̃ (w2 ).

  ii) Under T BRf lex,+ ≤ 0, F (h) = h, and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−
                                                                                    
                                                                               R , ∞ , then C̃ (w 1 ) ⊆ C̃ (w 2 ).
       Moreover, if w1 ∈ w−         +
                                     
                             R , w R , then C̃ (w 1 ) ⊂ C̃ (w 2 ).

    Key for this result is that starting from full employment, a small increase in wage rigidity first
affects the safe zone, thereby increasing the crisis region, and only after a sufficiently large increase
does the default region start to increase (and the crisis region starts to contract to the right). When
T BRf lex,+ ≤ 0, and under log utility and linear production, the monotonicity can be extended further.
In general, for any value of w, we can obtain the change in the length of the crisis zone as follows: 25

                                             ∂ ṼR+ (b̄+ ,y T ;w)                       ∂VR− (b̄− ,y T ;w)
                  ∂[b̄+ (w) − b̄− (w)]                ∂w
                                                                    − ∂ Ṽ∂wD (w)
                                                                                               ∂w
                                                                                                             − ∂ Ṽ∂w
                                                                                                                    D (w)

                                       =                                            −                                     .   (27)
                          ∂w                           ∂ ṼR+ (b̄+ ,y T ;w)                    ∂ ṼR− (b̄− ,y T ;w)
                                                                ∂b                                      ∂b
  23
      Assuming a loss in tradable output under default would lead to lower tradable resources available compared with the
case under repayment with a zero trade balance. Considering the same percentage loss in non-tradable output, however,
leads to an increase in the relative price of non-tradables, which offsets the losses in tradable output and generates the
same amount of unemployment, leaving w− and the debt threshold unchanged.
   24
      Notice that when investors are pessimistic and the government repays, b0 = (1 − δ)b, and since δ ≤ 1, this implies
that the trade balance is always positive, giving rise to a safe region that contracts with wage rigidity.
   25
      To see this, apply the implicit function theorem in VR+ (b̄+ , y T ; w) = V D (w) and VR− (b̄− , y T ; w) = V D (w).

                                                                22
This shows that the higher the decrease in VR− is relative to VR+ when there is a tightening of wage
rigidity, the higher the increase tends to be in the crisis region.


3.3    Graphical Illustration
Following the theoretical analysis above, this section provides a graphical illustration of how wage
rigidity affects incentives to default and, in particular, raises the vulnerability to a rollover crisis. To
construct the following figures, we use the calibrated version of our model, which we will explain in
the quantitative section. In addition, as we vary the current level of rigidity, we fix the continuation
values from the economy with flexible wages.
     In Figure 2 we present the values ṼD , ṼR+ , ṼR− for different levels of debt. We fix the tradable en-
dowment to the average value in default episodes in our simulation exercise for the flexible exchange
rate regime (technically, the element in the grid that is closest to this point). This level is 4.3% be-
low average. To facilitate the reading of the figures, we normalize debt by average GDP. Unless we
specify otherwise, all numbers reported will be expressed in this way. Notice that in Figure 2, the ac-
tual equilibrium value function is given by the upper envelope of ṼD and ṼR+ in the case of the good
sunspot and by the upper envelope of ṼD and ṼR− in the case of the bad sunspot. Panel (a) presents
the values for the flexible exchange rate regime. It should be understood that when we refer to the
flexible exchange rate, we mean the exchange rate policy that delivers the full employment case in
all states. For the case of a fixed exchange rate, it will be useful to consider two values for w. Panel
(b) corresponds to the fixed exchange rate regime with “low” wage rigidity and panel (c) to a fixed
exchange rate regime with “high” wage rigidity.
     Using these value functions, it is straightforward to graphically represent the safe region, crisis
region, and default region in Figure 2. The crisis region (i.e., the levels of debt at which a default would
occur if investors turn pessimistic) appears shaded in the figure. The safe region (i.e., the levels of debt
at which the government repays regardless of lenders’ beliefs) is to the left of the crisis region. The
default region (i.e., the levels of debt at which the government defaults regardless of lenders’ beliefs)
is to the right. It is apparent from these figures that vulnerability to a rollover crisis is higher in a fixed
exchange rate regime than in a flexible one for both degrees of wage rigidity. A difference between
the low and high rigidity is that under the former, only the safe region and the crisis region change,
whereas the default region remains the same.


Crisis region for flexible exchange rate. Let us now describe how we arrive at the crisis region
in the flexible exchange regime in panel (a) of Figure 2. The value of default ṼD is a constant because it
does not depend on the amount of debt the government owes.26 The values of repayment ṼR+ , ṼR− are
  26
    In case of the flexible exchange rate regime, we have Ṽ = V . However, we keep the notation with Ṽ to make it more
uniform with the fixed exchange rate regime.



                                                          23
                                                       (a) Flexible exchange rate
                                      -11.5
                                                                                     Crisis
                                                                                     Region
                                      -11.6            ṼR+
                                                                                           Default Region

                                      -11.7                  ṼR−


                                      -11.8
                                                                                                         ṼD

                                      -11.9
                                                     Safe Region

                                            0.0        0.1            0.2          0.3        0.4            0.5
                                                                            Debt

                  (b) Fixed exchange rate                                                           (c) Fixed exchange rate
                        (low rigidity)                                                                   (high rigidity)
   -11.5                                                                         -11.5
                                      Crisis                                               Safe Region               Crisis         Default Region
                                      Region                                                                         Region
   -11.6        ṼR+                                                             -11.6
                                                  Default Region
                                                                                                ṼR+
   -11.7              ṼR−                                                       -11.7




   -11.8                                                                         -11.8
                                                                ṼD
                                                                                                      ṼR−
   -11.9                                                                         -11.9
             Safe Region                                                                                                                       ṼD

       0.0      0.1          0.2          0.3        0.4            0.5              0.0        0.1            0.2            0.3        0.4         0.5
                                   Debt                                                                               Debt



                                     Figure 2: Value Functions and Crisis Regions
   Notes: The income shock in the three panels is set to −4.3% below the mean, which is the average income shock
   before a default episode in the flexible exchange rate regime. Panel (a) uses parameter values from the calibrated
   flexible exchange rate economy. Panels (b) and (c) use the same parameters with the exception of the current
   level of wage rigidity w. In panel (a), w is set to its highest value where full employment is achieved under a
   good sunspot. This is 1.33 times the real wage in the flexible exchange rate regime. Panel (c) increases the wage
   rigidity to 1.66 times higher than the wage in the flexible exchange rate regime.



decreasing in debt in both cases because the resource constraint becomes tighter. The value function
ṼR+ is uniformly above ṼR− . Moreover, the difference between these two values is higher for low levels
of debt (when the government wants to issue more debt), and the values become identical for very
high levels of debt (when the government does not issue debt even when it has access to financial
markets).


                                                                            24
    At the debt level in which the curves ṼR+ and ṼD intersect, the government is indifferent between
repaying when having access to credit markets and defaulting. For debt positions higher than this
level, the government defaults regardless of the international lenders’ beliefs. This is what we define
as the default region. On the other hand, at the debt level in which the curves ṼR− and ṼD intersect,
the government is indifferent between repaying when unable to roll over the debt and defaulting. For
debt positions lower than this level, the value of repayment is higher than the value of default, and
the government repays its debt. This is what we define as the safe region: levels of debt at which the
government repays even if investors are pessimistic. In between these two regions, there is an interval
of debt positions in which the government will default only if international lenders are unwilling to
roll over the debt. This is what we define as the crisis region. This region, which appears shaded in
panel (a) of Figure 2, is less than 1% of debt in terms of average GDP: the range is between 33.5% and
34.4%. The region in which the government is vulnerable to a rollover crisis is small for a flexible
exchange rate regime.


Crisis region for fixed exchange rate. Panels (b) and (c) of Figure 2 consider the one-period fixed
exchange rate regime. As described above, we consider a situation in which there is a fixed exchange
rate regime for only the current period and the flexible regime prevails from next period onward.
The impact of the fixed exchange rate regime depends, of course, on the level of nominal wages and
the level of the exchange rate—in particular, a sufficient variable is w, the lower bound on wages in
foreign currency. We consider two values for this real wage rigidity w. In panel (b), we consider
the highest value of w such that only b− changes while b+ remains the same. This case allows us
to have a situation in which the default region remains unchanged relative to the flexible wage (as
characterized in the first item of Proposition 4). One can also see that ṼD is at exactly the same level
as in the flexible regime because the wage rigidity constraint is not binding for this income shock.
In panel (c) we consider a higher degree of wage rigidity, in which case we see a decline in b− and
an increase in the default region.27 Notice that here we also see a reduction in ṼD because the wage
rigidity is also binding under default.
    Panels (b) and (c) reveal that there is a bigger gap between ṼR+ and ṼR− with a fixed exchange rate
regime compared with the flexible exchange rate regime. In other words, both values drop, but ṼR−
is reduced by much more than VR+ . Key for this result is the behavior of unemployment, as we will
see below. The consequence of the increase in the gap between these two curves is the increase in
vulnerability to a rollover crisis, in line with Proposition 4. In panel (b), the range of the crisis region is
about 7% of GDP and goes from 27.1% to 34.4%. In panel (c), the crisis region increases to more than
12 percentage points of GDP and represents more than a third of the average debt to GDP. Moreover,
the economy enters a rollover crisis with a level of debt that is 14 percentage points of GDP lower
than the level it takes under a flexible exchange rate regime.
                                              F lex,+
  27
       In this case, we have wD > w+ since T BR       > 0, in line with Proposition 3.


                                                            25
                                                              2.6
                                                                                          Crisis
                                                                                          Region




                                   Normalized wage rigidity
                                                              2.2

                                                                                                         Default Region
                                                              1.8




                                                              1.4


                                                                      Safe Region
                                                              1.0




                                                                0.0    0.1          0.2            0.3        0.4         0.5
                                                                                          Debt

                  Figure 3: Safe, Crisis, and Default Regions under Different Wage Rigidities

Crisis regions for range of w and y T . So far we have illustrated how the exchange rate regime
shapes the crisis region for two values of w. In Figure 3 we show how the safe, crisis, and default
regions change for a whole range of w, keeping the income level the same as before. The value of w
is normalized by the highest w that is consistent with no changes in the three zones.28 In this way, a
value lower than unity in Figure 3 will correspond effectively to the flexible exchange rate regime. As
soon as w rises above one, given the normalization, wage rigidity becomes binding and the safe region
contracts. For low values of wage rigidity, the intersection between ṼD and ṼR+ remains unaffected,
and hence the crisis region expands at the expense of the safe region without changes in the default
region. Once w reaches 1.33, which is the value used in panel (b) of Figure 2, the value of default
starts to increase, which in turn leads to an expansion of the default region at the expense of the crisis
region.29 However, we can see in Figure 3 that the crisis region continues to expand significantly
because the safe region contracts by an amount greater than the default region expansion.
    These regions were also constructed for a given level of the tradable endowment. To have a more
complete picture, we show in Figure 4 the three zones in the (b, y T ) state space. For any given level
of debt, the economy is in the default zone for a sufficiently low level of tradable endowment. As
we increase the tradable endowment, the economy arrives in the crisis zone at some point. Finally,
increasing it even further makes the economy reach the safe zone. Again, we can clearly see how
vulnerability to a rollover crisis is lower in a flexible exchange rate regime compared with a fixed
exchange rate regime, and this occurs for all income levels.30

  28
       This level can be computed by first obtaining b̂−
                                                       yT
                                                          such that ṼR− (b̂−
                                                                            yT
                                                                               (w) , y T ) = ṼD (y T ; w) and then finding w such
that ṼR+ (b̂+
             yT
                (w) , y T ; w) = ṼD (y T ; w).
                                F lex,+
   29
      If we were to have T BR             < 0, we would also have an expansion in the crisis region to the right, in line with
Proposition 3.
   30
      Along the horizontal y-axis with y T = 0.957 for all panels of Figure 4, we recover exactly the same thresholds that
separate the three regions in Figure 2. Notice also that for any income level different from y T = 0.957, the default region
will change in panel (b).


                                                                                          26
                                                                                       (a) Flexible exchange rate



                                                                        1.10




                                                  Tradable Endowment
                                                                        1.05                 Safe Zone

                                                                        1.00



                                                                        0.95
                                                                                                                           Crisis
                                                                                                                           Zone

                                                                        0.90                                                                Default Zone

                                                                           0.0         0.1           0.2                     0.3                0.4         0.5
                                                                                                           Debt
                                  (b) Fixed exchange rate                                                                                               (c) Fixed exchange rate
                                        (low rigidity)                                                                                                       (high rigidity)



                       1.10                                                                                                          1.10
  Tradable Endowment




                                                                                                                Tradable Endowment
                                Safe Zone                                                                                                             Safe Zone
                       1.05                                                                                                          1.05



                       1.00                                                                                                          1.00                                  Crisis
                                                                       Crisis                                                                                              Zone
                       0.95
                                                                       Zone                                                          0.95


                                                                           Default Zone                                                                                              Default Zone
                       0.90                                                                                                          0.90


                          0.0   0.1      0.2                   0.3               0.4           0.5                                      0.0           0.1         0.2          0.3        0.4       0.5
                                               Debt                                                                                                                     Debt

                                Figure 4: Safe, Crisis, and Default Zones under Different Wage Rigidities

3.4                       Inspecting the Mechanism
In this section, we delve deeper into the differences in the incentives to default under a fixed and flexi-
ble exchange rate regime. We highlight the role of unemployment in generating a higher vulnerability
to a rollover crisis under a fixed exchange rate regime.


On and off equilibrium unemployment. Figure 5 shows the behavior of unemployment under a
fixed exchange rate for the two levels of w considered earlier. For each panel, there are three lines: uD
denotes the unemployment rate if the government chooses to default: u+    R is the unemployment rate if
the government chooses to repay when investors are willing to roll over, and u−  R is the unemployment
rate if the government chooses to repay when investors refuse to roll over.
  When the government repays, unemployment is increasing in the current amount of debt both
when the government can access the debt market and when it cannot. This is because a higher debt




                                                                                                           27
level reduces aggregate demand, which in turn generates a decline in the price of non-tradables.31
Under a fixed exchange rate, the wage rigidity in terms of domestic currency becomes a wage rigidity
in foreign currency. Because of the downward rigidity in wages, the decline in the price of non-
tradables leads to a rise in unemployment. A crucial feature of the model is that when investors
refuse to roll over, unemployment starts rising strictly for lower levels of debt, and it is always higher
than when investors are willing to roll over the government bonds. The reason is that when the
government is forced to raise tax revenues to repay the maturing debt, this generates a more severe
contraction in aggregate demand, causing larger unemployment.
    The unemployment level that is realized on equilibrium depends on the initial debt level and pos-
sibly on investors’ beliefs. In the safe region, the on-equilibrium unemployment rate is u+       R , whereas
in the default region, it is uD . In both cases, it is determined. In the crisis region, unemployment rate
can be either uD or u+ R , depending on the realization of the sunspot. It is interesting to realize that in
the low rigidity case of panel (a) in Figure 5, no unemployment equilibrium arises on the equilibrium
path. For debt levels such that u+    R > 0, the government finds it optimal to default, and given the
value of w, unemployment is zero in this case. For debt levels such that u−       R > 0 and the government
finds it optimal to repay, investors do not refuse to roll over on the equilibrium path. As a result,
                                                                                                   −
unemployment is given by u+    R , which is zero in this case. Finally, for debt levels such that uR > 0 and
the government finds optimal to default, investors do run and the government defaults on the equi-
librium path. As a result, we arrive again at uD = 0. The takeaway is that what leads the government
to default in a rollover crisis (and investors to run) is not the realization of unemployment per se but
the desire to avoid the large unemployment that would emerge if the government were to repay while
being unable to borrow.32
    This increase in unemployment that emerges from fluctuations in labor demand from the non-
tradable sector is at the heart of the mechanism to generate a larger exposure to a rollover crisis. It
is useful to point out that having production in the tradable sector would not affect the differences in
employment when investors lend vis-à-vis when investors refuse to lend. The level of the exchange
rate would affect employment in the tradable sector, but this would be independent of investors’
beliefs. The key idea is that for tradable goods, the relevant demand is the international one. On the
other hand, in the non-tradable sector, the availability of domestic resources is critical in determining
the domestic price of tradables and firms’ labor demand.
  31
      A decline in aggregate demand requires a decline in the relative price of non-tradables to clear the market for non-
tradables. Since the price of tradables in terms of domestic currency is constant (because of the fixed exchange rate and
the assumption of zero foreign inflation), it is the price of non-tradables that falls (in both domestic and foreign currency).
   32
      In panel (b), because the wage rigidity is tighter, we do observe unemployment on the equilibrium path. For the level
of rigidity considered, there is positive unemployment when the government defaults, either in the crisis region or in the
default region, but not in the safe region. An even larger degree of rigidity would lead to unemployment in the safe region
too. In these cases, the level of u−R > 0 would be even larger, but this level of unemployment would not be observed in
equilibrium.




                                                              28
                       (a) Low rigidity                                                     (b) High rigidity

              Safe Region            Crisis Default Region                      Safe Region          Crisis          Default Region
    50%
                                     Region                           50%
                                                                                                     Region


    40%                                                               40%
                                                                                                                           u+
                                                                                                                            R

    30%                                                               30%            u−
                                                                                      R


    20%                                                               20%                                                       uD

    10%
                                                 u+
                                                  R                   10%
                           u−
                            R
                                                      uD
        0.0     0.1         0.2          0.3    0.4        0.5            0.0       0.1        0.2            0.3         0.4         0.5
                                  Debt                                                                Debt

                       Figure 5: Unemployment Rates with Fixed Exchange Rate Regime



                       (a) Low rigidity                                                     (b) High rigidity
    -11.5                                                             -11.5

                                    h=h        h<h                                 h=h        h<h                      h<h
              ṼR+
    -11.6                                                             -11.6


                ṼR−
    -11.7                                                             -11.7




    -11.8                                                             -11.8          ṼR−

    -11.9                                                             -11.9                                   ṼR+
                     h=h     h<h

        0.0     0.1         0.2          0.3    0.4        0.5            0.0       0.1        0.2            0.3         0.4         0.5
                                  Debt                                                                Debt

              Figure 6: Values of Repayment in Flexible vs. Fixed Exchange Rate Regime.

   Notes: Dashed lines correspond to the flexible exchange rate regime and straight lines correspond to the fixed
   exchange rate regime. Green (dark) lines correspond to ṼR+ , and yellow (light) lines correspond to ṼR− .


Unemployment and value functions. These differences in unemployment that arise depending
on whether investors are willing to lend or not translate into differences in the value functions. Figure
6 shows how ṼR+ and ṼR− change when we introduce rigidities. These are the same value functions
from Figure 2, but now we put them together to better appreciate the differences and mark the thresh-
olds at which unemployment emerges. Consider first the repayment value functions under a flexible
exchange rate regime, which are denoted with dashed lines. We can see that the gap between the
two is very small: there is zero unemployment regardless of whether investors lend or not. Moreover,
the gap is relatively wider at very low levels of debt (because the government wants to issue more
debt). However, at those levels of debt, the government has a value of repayment that is far larger

                                                                 29
than the value of default, and hence this gap between Ṽ + and Ṽ − is innocuous. As debt increases and
we approach the value of default, the gap becomes smaller (because the government does not want
to issue as much debt). The outcome is a narrow crisis region.
    Figure 6 shows that when the exchange rate is fixed, all value functions drop relative to the flexible
case, and there is a strict decline at the debt threshold in which unemployment emerges. Most im-
portantly, however, is that Ṽ − is reduced by more than Ṽ + , and hence there is a bigger gap between
the two compared with the flexible exchange rate. This arises because of the substantially different
unemployment levels that arise depending on whether investors lend or not. Moreover, the widening
of the gap occurs precisely at debt levels at which lenders’ beliefs matter for the repayment decision.
The outcome is a wide crisis region.


3.5       Extensions, Generalizations and a Simple Example
The main theoretical results that we have presented so far can be extended and generalized in a rel-
atively straightforward manner. While the full details are presented in the Online Addendum, we
discuss here the main elements of each of these extensions.33 In addition, we also present in Section
3.5.1 a simple example with deterministic income.
    The same results can be obtained in a model with sticky prices instead of sticky wages. Consider
a situation in which investors become pessimistic and the government raises taxes to service the
maturing debt. With sticky wages, we showed that the resulting decline in aggregate demand leads to
a decline in the price of non-tradables, which generates a decline in employment and makes repayment
more costly. With sticky prices, firms respond to the cut in demand by reducing production, which in
turn generates lower labor demand, lower wages, and lower employment. In both cases, repayment
becomes very costly when investors turn pessimistic, and this precipitates a rollover crisis. Appendix
A shows how all the propositions extend to the case of price stickiness and also shows that with linear
production functions, results are identical.
    The same results can also be obtained when there are costs from exchange rate fluctuations, so that
a fixed exchange rate regime is not necessarily a dominated regime. In our baseline model, a higher
exchange rate unambiguously increase the utility flow at any particular state given that it reduces
unemployment and does not involve any cost (see Proposition 1). We consider two specifications of
costs from exchange rate fluctuations (see Appendix B.1). In one specification, we consider a quadratic
cost of departing from a target exchange rate ē. These costs could come from redistributive effects or
monetary distortions, but we prefer not to take a stance on the source of these costs. In this situation,
the government will tradeoff the benefits from higher employment with the costs of exchange rate
fluctuations. The higher the costs are from depreciating, the more similar the economies will be
under flexible and fixed exchange rate regimes. Regardless of how large the costs are, however, an
  33
       We leave the case with an arbitrary maturity structure and elastic labor supply entirely for the appendix.


                                                              30
economy under flexible exchange rate regime displays a smaller crisis zone, and all our theoretical
results continue to hold.
    In the second specification, we consider a version of the model in which the costs from exchange
rate fluctuations arise from the expectation of future depreciations, rather than from the current one.
Lacking commitment to an exchange rate policy, the government always finds it optimal to depreciate
the currency enough to deliver full employment, generating an inflationary bias. An economy that
fixes the exchange rate or enters a monetary union is able to avoid this inflationary bias, and doing so
could be desirable if these costs are sufficiently large. Still, the economy under a flexible exchange rate
will feature a lower exposure to rollover crises, as in our baseline model. These two specifications are
useful because they highlight that our main result is not altered by the fact that our baseline model
abstracts from modeling the reasons why the government implements a fixed exchange rate regime.
    We also consider an inflation-targeting regime. In particular, we focus on a regime in which the
government keeps constant the price of the composite consumption good. When investors turn pes-
simistic, the government can depreciate the currency to alleviate unemployment, but there is a limit
given by achieving the inflation target. A negative shock to aggregate demand in this economy leads
to deflationary pressures and a reduction in the price of non-tradables. As the government depreciates
the domestic currency, real wages fall, which stimulates labor demand. The price of tradable goods
rises at the same time, thereby placing a limit on the government’s ability to stabilize employment
while fulfilling the inflation target. Appendix C shows how the same propositions as in our baseline
model hold under inflation targeting. The general lesson here is that the presence of monetary policy
constraints in the form of a fixed exchange rate or an inflation targeting regime, can make an economy
more vulnerable to rollover crises.
     We also consider a model with debt denominated in domestic currency. In the baseline model,
the only difference between a flexible exchange rate regime and a fixed exchange rate regime is that
in the former, the government can use monetary policy to stabilize macroeconomic fluctuations. We
made this assumption partly to better highlight the new channel regarding the role of monetary pol-
icy in reducing the vulnerability to rollover crises. In principle, however, an economy that is outside
a monetary union can also issue debt in domestic currency, which opens the possibility to inflating
away the debt. We argue that the main insight of the paper remains when we allow for this possi-
bility. In Appendix F, we consider a version of the model in which a nominal depreciation allows for
simultaneously affecting the real value of the debt as well as the level of employment.In this economy,
depreciating the currency allows for an increase in the amount of consumption by effectively diluting
the real value of foreign lenders’ debt. Importantly, this allows for an increase in aggregate demand
and, through the mechanism highlighted above, also reduces unemployment and makes repayment
less costly in the event of investors’s panic. Therefore, the possibility of depreciating the currency,
again reduces the investors’ incentives to run, thereby reducing the exposure to a rollover crisis.
   Finally, another point worth considering is whether other differences between a fixed and a flex-

                                                    31
ible exchange rate regime could alter our conclusions. Specifically, some observers have argued that
defaulting while being in a monetary union might be more costly, perhaps because punishments are
easier to enforce. Interestingly, an increase in the default cost has the direct implication of always
reducing the fundamental default region, but the crisis region may expand. Key for the results is that
crisis region depend mainly on the gap between ṼR+ and ṼR− . Specifically, the change in the size of
the crisis region upon a change in the value of default can be calculated, via the implicit function
theorem, as
                                  ∂ b̄+ (w) − b̄− (w)
                                                      
                                                           1       1
                                                        = + − −.                                   (28)
                                          ∂ ṼD          ∂ ṼR   ∂ ṼR
                                                                         ∂b        ∂b

Notice that the derivatives of these value functions are negative. If the absolute value of the derivative
of ṼR− is higher than the one of ṼR+ evaluated respectively at b̄− and b̄+ , the distance between b̄− and
b̄+ goes up. In other words, if ṼR− varies relatively more than ṼR+ with the level of debt, the crisis
region expands when default costs increase.34
    Beyond these specific extensions, our main result is quite general in the sense that it hinges on only
two key robust elements: (i) A sudden panic by investors triggers capital outflows, if the government
chooses to repay; (ii) The costs of sudden capital outflows are more severe under a fixed exchange rate
(because the government is unable to mitigate the contraction in aggregate demand). The combination
of these two elements implies that the government is more tempted to default during a panic under a
fixed exchange rate regime, and, hence, investors are more prone to run.


3.5.1      Simple Example

In this section, we consider a simple version of the model in which (i) the tradable endowment is
deterministic ytT = y T , (ii) β(1 + r) = 1, (iii) the exclusion after default is permanent, and (iv) debt is
one period δ = 1. With these assumptions, the dynamics are simplified significantly, following Cole
and Kehoe (2000). In particular, when the economy is in the crisis zone, the government is motivated
to reduce the debt until it exits the crisis zone. The key additional insight that we are able to show
is that a government under a fixed exchange rate regime has incentives to exit the crisis zone more
slowly. In other words, a country within a monetary union is more vulnerable to a rollover crisis not
only is because the crisis zone is larger but also because it exits more slowly.
    In contrast with the theoretical analysis presented above, we now allow for a permanent change
in wage rigidity. That is, rather than changing only the current wage rigidity keeping future rigidities
constant, we change w over all periods. Following the same steps as above, we proceed to analyze
how the default thresholds b̄+ and b̄− change with the rigidity. Thanks to the simplifying assumptions
in this example, characterizing the thresholds is now straightforward. In particular, given that there
  34
       This point can be seen by a simple inspection of the introduction of a parallel shift in the value of default in Figure 6.




                                                               32
is permanent exclusion, the value of default is entirely determined by exogenous parameters:

                                                1
                                                   [u y T , F (H y T , w ) − κ]
                                                                        
                                  VD (w) =
                                               1−β

with H defined as in Lemma 2. The value of VR− also simplifies because once the government pays
the entire stock of debt (δ = 1), from tomorrow onward, it consumes a constant amount given by
the annuity value of the income, a result that follows from the fact that βR = 1 and income being
deterministic.

                                                                           β
                VR− (b; w) = u y T − b, F (H y T − b), w                      u(y T , F (H y T , w )).
                                                                                                
                                                                      +
                                                                          1−β

The value of VR+ depends on whether the government is in the safe zone or the crisis zone. If the
economy is in the safe zone, the government simply consumes every period the annuity value of the
income minus the interest payments. On the other hand, if the economy is not in the safe zone, the
optimal policy for the government is to gradually reduce the debt until it is able to exit the crisis zone.
The value function can be written as
                        
                            1              r                        r
                                      T                       T
                                                                            
                        
                        
                          1−β
                               u    y   − 1+r
                                               b, F (H      y   −  1+r
                                                                       b, w    ,       ∀b ≤ b̄+ (w)
                        
           VR+ (b; w) =                               0                          0
                                        T                           T
                                                                                       
                          max  b 0 u y   −  b  +  qb   , F   H   y   −   b + qb   , w
                        
                                        +β πVD (w) + (1 − π)VR+ (b0 ; w) ∀b > b̄+ (w)
                        
                                                                                   


The government finds it optimal to save its way out of the crisis zone because it wants to avoid the
default costs that carry the realization of a bad sunspot while in the crisis zone. A key question is how
much the government should save, or equivalently, how fast the government should exit, depending
on the exchange rate regime. We address this question next.
    Figure 7 compares the incentives to save for the fixed and flexible exchange rate economies. Panels
(a) and (b) show the policy functions for debt: the top panels present the flexible and fixed case,
respectively, and the dashed line denotes the 45o line. The crisis zone is again larger for the fixed
exchange rate economy although now both economies appear larger because debt has one-period
maturity in this simple example, which exacerbates the liquidity problems.35 In particular, following
the same logic as before, we can see that b̄− moves to the left, and hence the government is exposed
to a rollover crisis for smaller levels of debt. In addition, the default region now always expands, for
two reasons. First, in this simple example, that the government reduces the path of debt while in
the crisis zone implies that it is running a trade surplus, and, in line with Proposition 3, tighter wage
  35
     The advantage of modelling one-period debt is that the government moves immediately to the safe zone after repaying
the debt when it is unable to roll over the debt. This result simplifies the computation of the debt thresholds. Regardless
of the maturity, however, the results we emphasize regarding the difference between the flexible and fixed regimes would
be essentially the same.



                                                            33
                  (a) Debt Policy under flexible                                          (b) Debt Policy under fixed
         1.0                                                                   1.0




         0.8                                                                   0.8




         0.6                                                                   0.6




         0.4                                                                   0.4




         0.2                                                                   0.2




         0.0                                                                   0.0
            0.0     0.2     0.4      0.6         0.8         1.0                  0.0         0.2         0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0




                                                  (c) Comparison of cT policy

                                     1.00




                                     0.95




                                     0.90




                                     0.85




                                     0.80


                                           0.0         0.2         0.4        0.6       0.8         1.0




                            Figure 7: Policy Functions for Debt and Consumption

           Note: Parameter values follow the calibration set in the following section, with the exception of
                                                                        1
           the maturity parameter δ = 1, the discount factor β = 1+r      , permanent autarky default penalty
           ψ = 0, and the utility penalty for defaulting is a constant level κ = 0.150.

rigidity has more of an effect on the value of repayment than default. Second, that the change in wage
rigidity is permanent implies that continuation values under repayment fall. Even if wage rigidity is
small enough so that unemployment is triggered only when the government is shut-off from credit
markets, that b̄− falls implies that the government needs to save more to exit the crisis zone, thereby
reducing the value from repayment.
    Government savings differ markedly between the safe zone and the crisis zone. When the econ-
omy is in the safe zone, debt is kept constant. Because β(1 + r) = 1, the government finds it optimal
to keep debt and consumption constant over time, as long as a rollover crisis is not possible. When
the economy is in the crisis zone, the government reduces b0 , as illustrated by the policies being below
the 45o line. Essentially, the government chooses a constant consumption profile while in the crisis




                                                                         34
zone.36 The level of consumption it chooses guides the speed at which it exits the crisis zone. The debt
policy functions are therefore piecewise flat with discontinuities at the points where the government
decides to take one further period to exit the crisis zone. The further away from the crisis zone, the
longer it takes to exit.
    A comparison of panels (a) and (b) of Figure 7 shows that the government policy function features
more jumps under a fixed exchange rate regime, which implies, importantly, that the government
exits the crisis zone more slowly. One could argue that this is a natural consequence because a larger
crisis zone implies that the government should take longer to exit, particularly if it were to follow
the same savings policy as in the flexible exchange rate regime. However, this is only one part of the
story. Under a fixed exchange rate regime, the government realizes that if it were to save more today
to speed up the exit from the crisis zone, it would generate a recession today. This force pushes the
government to reduce borrowing at a slower pace instead of saving more to speed up the exit. Panel
(c) of Figure 7 shows that for high levels of debt, the government actually consumes more under a
fixed exchange rate regime. That is, when the government is deep in the crisis zone, it saves less under
a fixed exchange rate regime. In an attempt to avoid a current recession, the government gambles for
redemption, hoping that investors remain optimistic and a default does not occur.
    In Figure 8, we further examine how the speed at which the government exits the crisis zone
changes with wage rigidity. Fixing the initial amount of debt as the highest level of debt in the safe
zone under a flexible exchange rate regime, we show how the number of periods it takes to exit the
crisis zone increases with wage rigidity. One can see that the tighter wage rigidity is, the longer it
takes to exit.
    To conclude, this simple example shows that a government within a monetary union is more
vulnerable to a rollover crisis, both because the crisis zone is larger and because it slows down the
increase in savings and the exit to the safe zone. In the next section, we will generate simulated data
from the general model of Section 2 to investigate how often the government defaults because of
rollover crises when the government is in a monetary union and how does this compare when the
economy is outside a monetary union.




  36
     The reason for this result is that throughout the crisis zone, the probability of default is fixed at π, and hence a local
change in debt does not affect this probability. Right after jumping to the safe zone, when the probability of default drops
to zero, the government increases consumption and again keeps it constant.


                                                              35
                                       25




                                       20




                                       15




                                       10




                                        5




                                        0
                                            1.0       1.5         2.0       2.5      3.0
                                                            Wage rigidity

                                                  Figure 8: Time to Safety
           Note: The figure depicts the number of periods it takes for the government to exit the crisis zone
           if no bad sunspot is triggered. Wage rigidity is normalized by the level of w at which the solution
           corresponds to the flexible exchange rate regime. The initial debt level corresponds to the largest
           debt level in the safe zone in the flexible exchange rate regime.

4     Quantitative Analysis
This section presents the quantitative analysis and has three goals. First, we conduct model simula-
tions to quantitatively assess how often an economy is exposed to a rollover crises and examine how
this exposure depends on the exchange rate regime. Second, we perform welfare computations to
determine how significant the costs from monetary independence are, and, we additionally assess the
potential gains from a lender of last resort depending on the exchange rate regime. Third, we perform
a counterfactual experiment applied to the recent crisis in Spain to shed light on whether the crisis
was triggered by fundamentals or self-fulfilling beliefs.


4.1     Calibration
We calibrate the model at an annual frequency using Spain as a case study.37


Functional forms.         We use a CRRA utility function,

                                                      c1−σ
                                            U (c) =        ,        with    σ > 0.
                                                      1−σ

We parameterize the default utility cost as follows:

                                       κ(y T ) = max 0, κ0 + κ1 ln y T .
                                                                     

   37
      The model is solved numerically using value function iteration with interpolation. Linear interpolation is used for
the endowment and debt levels. We use 25 grid-points for the tradable endowment grid and 99 grid-points for debt. To
compute expectations, we use 105 quadrature points for the endowment realizations.



                                                               36
As shown in Arellano (2008) and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), a non-linear specification of the
cost of default is important to allow the model to match the levels of debt and spreads in the data. In
particular, we follow Bianchi et al. (2018) in specifying this default cost function in terms of utility.
   The tradable endowment process follows a lognormal AR(1) process,

                                       ln(ytT ) = ρ ln(yt−1
                                                        T
                                                            ) + σ y εt ,

where |ρ| < 1 and the shock εt is i.i.d. and normally distributed, ε ∼ N (0, 1). To estimate the tradable
endowment stochastic process, we use the value-added series in the manufacturing and agricultural
sectors in Spain. After we log-quadratically detrend the series, we estimate a persistence parameter
of ρ = 0.777 and a standard deviation of σy = 2.9%.


Model Parameters. Table 1 shows all the baseline calibration values for the parameters of the
model. A first subset of parameters is specified directly. These are parameters that can be calibrated
straight from the data or are relatively standard in the literature. We then choose a second subset of
parameters to match key moments in the data under two different regimes: flexible exchange rates
and fixed exchange rates.

                                        Table 1: Parameter Values

           Parameter          Value           Description
               h              1.000           Normalization
               σ              2.000           Standard risk aversion
               ω              0.197           Share of tradables
               µ              1.000           Unitary elasticity of substitution between T-NT
               ρ              0.777           Output persistence
               σy             0.029           Standard deviation of tradable output shock
               α              0.750           Labor share in non-tradable sector
               r              0.020           German 6-year government bond yield
               δ              0.141           Spanish bond maturity 6 years
               ψ              0.240           Reentry to financial markets probability
               π              0.030           Sunspot probability
          Calibration    Flexible   Fixed     Target
               β          0.914       0.908   Average external debt-GDP ratio 29.05%
               κ0         0.101       0.315   Average spread 2.01%
               κ1         0.759       3.273   Standard deviation interest rate spread 1.42%
               w            -         2.493   ∆ unemployment rate 2.00%



   We start with the first subset of parameters. First, we specify the parameters governing preferences
and technology, which will take standard values in the literature. The coefficient of risk aversion will

                                                       37
be set to σ = 2. Meanwhile, the elasticity of substitution between tradable and non-tradable goods
           1
is set to 1+µ = 0.5, which is in the range of empirical estimates. The share of tradable goods in the
consumption aggregator is set to ω = 0.197, so it matches the ratio between tradable output and total
output, which averages around 20% for Spain in the period considered.38 Regarding the labor share in
non-tradable production, we set α = 0.75, an estimate from Uribe (1997) for the non-tradable sector.
Last, we normalize the inelastic labor supply of households to h = 1.
    Next, we set the parameters from financial markets. We set the international risk-free interest rate
to r = 2%, which is the average annual gross yield on German 6-year government bonds over the
period 2000 to 2015. We calculate a maturity parameter of δ = 0.141 to reproduce an average bond
duration of 6 years, in line with Spanish data.39 We set the reentry to financial markets probability
after default to ψ = 0.24 to capture an average autarky spell of 4 years, in line with Gelos, Sahay, and
Sandleris (2011). Finally, we need to set the sunspot probability, which is a more difficult parameter
to calibrate. In the literature, the probability of drawing a bad sunspot is usually set to a relatively
low value (e.g., Chatterjee and Eyigungor, 2012, study a range between [0,0.10]). Our baseline value
is 3%, but we examine a wide range as well.
    For the second subset of parameters {β, κ0 , κ1 , w}, we will set these parameters so that the mo-
ments in the model match the counterparts in the data. Since we have two different exchange rate
regimes, we have two sets of parameters. The difference in the two calibrations is that w is set to zero
for the flexible exchange rate regime, whereas this value has to be calibrated for the fixed exchange
rate regime. In particular, we calibrate w in the fixed exchange rate regime to be consistent with
the increase in unemployment during episodes of high sovereign spreads. In the data for Spain, the
increase in unemployment relative to the HP-filtered trend was 2% in 2011, the year prior to the EU
and ECB’s intervention.40 With a value of w = 2.493 and given the rest of the calibrated parameters,
the average increase in unemployment in the year prior to default is 2% in the model, matching the
empirical counterpart.41
   For both regimes, we calibrate the parameters β, κ0 , and κ1 to match three moments from the
data, and we follow Hatchondo, Martinez, and Sosa-Padilla (2016) in considering the moments in the
  38
    In a non-stochastic version of the model with a mean value of debt b̄ and average employment h̄, the value of ω can
                               yT
be pinned down from                     µ+1 = 20%.
                          1−ω y T +r b̄
                              
                        yT +   ω   F (h̄)
  39
       The Macaulay duration of a bond with price q and our coupon structure is given by
                                                   ∞              t
                                                  X     δ 1−δ           1 + ib
                                            D=        t               =        ,
                                                  t=1
                                                        q   1 + ib      δ + ib
                                                              P∞       1−δ t
where the constant per-period yield ib is determined by q = t=1 δ( 1+i    b
                                                                            ).
   40
      We use a smoothing parameter of 100 for the HP filtering. If we use a log-quadratic filter, we obtain a value closer to
3%.
   41
      As we mentioned in footnote 11, governments have available to them fiscal instruments such as payroll subsidies to
stimulate employment. In terms of our model, this would imply that the wage rigidity would be governed by w net of
these subsidies. Our approach to calibrating w, therefore, incorporates these effects implicitly.


                                                             38
years following 2008 to concentrate on the period around the crisis. The three moments targeted are
the average debt-GDP ratio, and the average and standard deviation of spreads. For the average debt-
GDP ratio, we target an average external debt of 29%. For the average and the volatility of spreads,
we target 2.0 and 1.4, respectively.42 The resulting values for these parameters appear in Table 1.


4.2     Simulation Results: Exposure to Rollover Crises
We conduct simulations to investigate how the exchange rate regime determines which type of default—
fundamental or rollover crisis is more likely.


Degree of wage rigidity. We start from the flexible exchange rate economy. In this economy, out
of 100 default episodes, the share of defaults due to a rollover crisis is only 0.92. In line with this result,
only 0.77% of the time, the economy is in the crisis zone and therefore vulnerable to a rollover crisis.
To examine how the degree of wage rigidity matters for the exposure to a rollover crisis, we vary the
wage rigidity parameter w while keeping the same calibrated parameters for the flexible exchange rate
economy.43 In Figure 9 (panel (a)), we present the fraction of defaults that are explained by rollover
crises as a function of w. We can see here that the tighter wage rigidity is, the larger the fraction of
defaults that are explained by non-fundamentals. In line with this result, panel (b) of Figure 9 also
shows that the fraction of time the economy spends in the crisis region becomes larger with the degree
of rigidity.
    It is worth highlighting that in these simulations, we also obtain that the average debt level falls
with w (panel (c)). Two reasons explain this. First, the government faces borrowing terms that are
more adverse, given that incentives to default in the future are higher. Second, the government also
attempts to stay further away from the crisis zone by reducing debt. Despite this attempt, the fact
that the crisis region expands significantly implies that the government ends up being more heavily
exposed to a rollover crisis.
    When we vary the degree of wage rigidity, the long-run moments to which we calibrate the flex-
ible exchange rate economy also change. In particular, as mentioned above, the economy under a
fixed exchange rate ends up borrowing less than the economy under flexible exchange rate. To take
these changes into account, we complement the results by recalibrating the economy to hit the same
targets: mean debt, mean spreads, and volatility of spreads, while calibrating the value of w to match
the increase in unemployment, as described in Section 4.1. We present these results in the first two
  42
      The debt level in the model is computed as the present value of future payment obligations discounted at the risk-free
                                                                                δ
rate r. Given our coupon structure, we thus have that the debt level is 1−(1−δ)/(1+r)   bt .
   43
      Different from our analysis in the comparative statics exercise of Section 3, the change in w is now permanent, and
therefore the bond price schedule is affected.




                                                            39
columns of Table 2, which show that the differences in vulnerability remain significant.44
                (a) Defaults due to Rollover                                                (b) Time in Crisis Zone
       18%


                                                                              12%
       15%



       12%
                                                                              9%


       9%
                                                                              6%

       6%


                                                                              3%
       3%




         1.0    1.1      1.2      1.3            1.4         1.5                1.0     1.1        1.2     1.3        1.4   1.5




                                                             (c) Average Debt


                                        30%




                                        20%




                                        10%




                                          1.0          1.1         1.2        1.3     1.4        1.5




                                                Figure 9: Role of Wage Rigidity



Sunspot Probability. The fraction of defaults that are the outcome of a rollover crisis depends
on two factors. One factor is the probability of a bad sunspot (i.e., the probability of selecting the
bad equilibrium whenever the economy is in the crisis zone). The second factor is the probability of
ending up in the crisis zone in the first place, which is an endogenous outcome that depends critically
on borrowing decisions and on the monetary policy regime. Next, we increase the probability of
selecting the bad equilibrium while keeping the rest of the parameter values for fixed and flexible
exchange rate regimes at their respective baseline values.



  44
      Because of the highly non-linear nature of the model, we have been unable to perfectly match the moments that we
target. In particular, spreads in the flexible (fixed) exchange rate regime are higher (lower) than the target. See Aguiar
et al. (2016) for a discussion of some of the challenges in the calibration of sovereign default models.


                                                                         40
                                Table 2: Sensitivity to Sunspot Probability

   Sunspot probability                                  π = 3%                 π = 10%            π = 20%
   (percentage %)                                   Flexible Fixed          Flexible Fixed     Flexible Fixed
   Average spread                                            2.46    1.43      2.45     1.47      2.46    1.53
   Average debt-income                                      29.73   31.33     29.58    29.29     29.37   28.53
   Spread volatility                                         1.33    1.60      1.30     1.72      1.31    1.75
   Unemployment increase                                     0.00    1.83      0.00     1.80      0.00    1.35
   Fraction of time in crisis region                         0.77    2.59      0.68     1.93      0.58    1.41
   Fraction of defaults due to rollover crisis               0.92    6.53      3.70    11.80      6.20   19.80
    Notes: All parameter values correspond to the benchmark calibrations for fixed and flexible exchange rate
    regimes. The benchmark calibration uses π = 3%.

    Table 2 shows how increasing the likelihood of a bad sunspot increases the fraction of defaults due
to a rollover crisis for the two economies, and particularly for the economy under a fixed exchange
rate regime. Specifically, when the probability of a bad sunspot is 20%, up from 3% in the baseline,
about one-fifth of all defaults are for non-fundamental reasons. Moreover, one can see that the fraction
of time spent in the crisis region decreases as the government reduces its exposure, but this duration
is not enough to offset the higher likelihood of a bad sunspot.


4.3     Welfare Consequences
Here we tackle two important welfare considerations: (i) What is the welfare cost of the lack of
monetary independence? (ii) What are the welfare costs of rollover crises?
    Our first result is that the possibility of a rollover crisis substantially increases the welfare costs of
giving up monetary independence. We examine, for all initial states, how much household are willing
to give up of the composite consumption good to move to a flexible exchange rate for one period. Two
steps are involved. The first step is to compute the value to the government of being able to vary
the exchange rate today. We denote this value by V0,F lex (b, s). In a state in which the government is
participating in financial markets, we have

                                                        D             R
                                V0,F lex (b, s) = max[V0,F lex (s), V0,F lex (b, s)]                         (29)

where

                                R                      T    α          0
                              V0,F lex (b, s) = max u(c , h̄ ) + βEV (b , s)                                 (30)
                                                   cT ,b0

                                     c + b = y T + q(b0 , b, s)(b0 − (1 − δ)b)




                                                            41
and
                          D               T                      0            D T0
                                                                                  
                        V0,F lex (s) = u(y , F (h̄)) + β ψV (0, s ) + (1 − ψ)V (y    )                                  (31)

The second step is to compare the value V0,F lex (b, s) with the value to the government in a fixed
exchange rate regime from the Markov equilibrium. Using these two values, we compute the welfare
gain θ0F lex (b, s), as given by

                         ˆ s))[(1 + θf lex (b, s))1−σ u(ĉT (b, s), ĉN (b, s)) + βEV (b̂0 (b, s), s)]+
  V0,F lex (b, s) = (1 − d(b,            0

                 ˆ s)[(1 + θF lex (b, s))1−σ u(ĉT (b, s), ĉN (b, s)) + β ψV (0, s0 ) + (1 − ψ)V D (y T 0 ) (32)
                                                                                                           
                 d(b,         0


       ˆ ĉT , ĉN , b̂0 correspond to the optimal policies from the Markov equilibrium under fixed ex-
where d,
change rate that solve (16)-(18). When the government under a fixed exchange rate finds it optimal
to repay, the welfare gain from having a flexible exchange rate can be obtained by equating V0 (b, s)
with the first line in eq. (32). The second line in eq. (32) allows for the same computation when the
government finds it optimal to default.
     Figure 10 shows the welfare cost of belonging to a monetary union in the current period for a
range values of debt and for a given endowment shock. For reference, we show the safe region, crisis
region, and default region for the economy under a fixed exchange rate, and the welfare gains are
presented for the good sunspot, ζ = 0, and the bad sunspot, ζ = 1. Starting from the left, we see that
if debt is very low, there is no unemployment and no cost from having a fixed exchange rate.45 As debt
approaches 0.2, unemployment emerges, and there is a positive welfare cost. Under the good sunspot,
the welfare cost increases continuously until debt reaches about 0.3, at which point the government
chooses to default under a fixed exchange rate and this helps to mitigate the effects from the wage
rigidities. Here, the welfare costs from a fixed exchange rate become decreasing in the level of debt
because the value function is independent of debt under a fixed exchange rate but it is still decreasing
under flexible exchange rate. Importantly, while the economy under a fixed exchange rate features no
unemployment, there is still a welfare cost from a fixed exchange rate because it is precisely the lack
of flexibility that triggers the government default, and the economy suffers from the default costs. For
debt levels higher than 0.35, the government under a flexible exchange rate also chooses to default
and there are no costs from rigidity. Under the bad sunspot, the welfare costs increase discretely once
the debt enters the crisis zone. This occurs because the lack of exchange rate flexibility prompts the
government to default if investors refuse to rollover the government bonds.
   The next welfare consideration that we tackle is on the welfare cost of rollover crises. We interpret
these costs as the potential gains from having a lender of last resort from the perspective of the small
open economy. As is well understood, a third party with deep pockets can eliminate the coordination
  45
    If we were to consider the permanent costs from belonging to a monetary union, there would be strictly positive
costs in this range of debt arising from the discounted future costs. Moreover, the higher exposure to future rollover crisis
would have negative effects on spreads today.


                                                             42
                             25%




                             20%




                             15%




                             10%




                              5%




                              0%
                               0.10                 0.20                0.30           0.40




                      Figure 10: Welfare gains from one-period flexible exchange rate
           The regions highlighted in the future correspond to the economy with fixed exchange rate.

problem behind a rollover crisis. The basic argument is that by purchasing a sufficiently large amount
of government bonds, in either the primary or the secondary market, this can induce the government
to repay and therefore make investors willing to lend to the government.46
    We ask how much households would be willing to pay in terms of consumption to permanently
eliminate the possibility of a rollover crisis. To compute these welfare costs, we take the fixed and
flexible exchange rate economies with their respective calibrations, and solve for the Markov equilib-
rium after setting the sunspot probability to zero. For each economy, we compute the welfare gains
in terms of consumption equivalence as
                                                                                    1/(1−σ)
                                                               V (b, s)N oSunspot
                                                           
                                    roll−over
                                θ               (b, s) =                                       −1                     (33)
                                                                    V (b, s)

for every initial state.47 Under a fixed exchange rate regime, the gains from having a lender of last
resort can reach about 1.5% of permanent consumption and average 0.5%. Having access to a lender
of last resort allows for both an improvement in the borrowing terms and a reduction in default costs.
For the flexible exchange rate, however, the unconditional welfare gains from having a lender of last
resort are negligible, in line with the minimal exposure to roll over crises.
    It is worth highlighting that a successful implementation of lender of last resort hinges on the
ability to correctly identify whether a default is being driven by fundamentals or by self-fulfilling
beliefs. Moral hazard concerns would naturally emerge when the government and investors expect
  46
     See Roch and Uhlig (2018) and Bocola and Dovis (2019) for an analysis of a lender of last resort in the context of the
Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) program by the ECB.
  47
     Equation (33) uses homotheticity of the utility function and transforms default costs into consumption equivalence.


                                                                   43
interventions in defaults driven by fundamentals.48 Therefore, in a scenario in which the lender of last
resort does not observe the source of the default, a trade-off is likely to emerge between the benefits
from offsetting the coordination problem and the moral hazard effects.49 Our analysis shows that
while economies that lack monetary independence are likely to strongly benefit from a lender of last
resort, this is less valuable for a flexible exchange rate regime, since defaults are almost exclusively
driven by fundamental reasons.
    Overall, this welfare analysis provides several important lessons. First, in the presence of rollover
crises, the lack of monetary independence can become very costly. In particular, governments can
become severely exposed to a rollover crisis and costly defaults because of the lack of monetary inde-
pendence. Second, a lender of last resort can help to ease the costs of an economy giving up monetary
independence.


4.4     The Path to Spain’s 2012 Rollover Crisis
In this section, we use the model to shed light on the Spanish experience after giving up the peseta
and adopting the euro. Two main points we wish to emphasize here. First, the model predicts that
Spain is in the crisis zone in 2012 whereas exiting the Eurozone would make the economy safe from
a rollover crisis. Second, the bulk of the welfare losses from lacking monetary independence can be
mitigated by access to a lender of last resort.
    The exercise we conduct is as follows. Starting at Spain’s external debt-GDP ratio in 2000, we
feed the sequence of shocks to tradable output and simulate the model under a fixed exchange rate
regime. From 2000 until 2011, we find that the economy remains in the safe zone (and hence the
sunspot realization is irrelevant). As it turns out, the model predicts that the economy is in the crisis
zone in 2012, and a negative sunspot would trigger a rollover crisis and a default. Spain did not
actually default in 2012, but a e100 billion assistance package by the European Union was channeled
through the European Financial Stability Fund and the European Stability Mechanism. In addition, the
announcement of the ECB’s OMT bond purchasing program following the “whatever it takes” speech
by Mario Draghi, led to a drastic collapse in spreads, which appeared to have dissipated concerns over
the emergence of a rollover crisis.
    Figure 11 summarizes the results of the exercise. Panel (a) shows the tradable output we feed into
the model and the one-period-ahead probability of falling into the crisis zone. To compute this prob-
ability, we use the end-of-period level of debt and compute the probability of receiving an income
shock in the following period that would push the economy into the crisis zone. Panels (b) and (c) of
  48
      As argued by Aguiar et al. (2015), an alternative to a lender of last resort would be some form of fiscal union in which
the government receives transfers from other countries, but this is more likely to be plagued by moral hazard and other
problems.
   49
      See Bianchi (2016) for a quantitative analysis of the trade-off between the moral hazard effects from bailouts and the
stabilization benefits in the context of firms’ borrowing.



                                                             44
               (a) Income process                                                   (b) Spread                                                         (c) Debt
   10%                                                             12%                                                            40%


                                                                   10%
                                                                                                                                  35%
    5%
                                                                   8%

                                                                                                                                  30%
                                                                   6%
    0%
                                                                   4%
                                                                                                                                  25%
                                                                                                                                                  Model

                                                                   2%                               Data
    -5%
                                                                                     Model                                        20%                                    Data
                                                                   0%


   -10%                                                            -2%                                                            15%
      2000   2002   2004   2006    2008     2010    2012             2000   2002   2004      2006     2008   2010   2012            2000   2002     2004   2006   2008     2010   2012
                                                                                             Year                                                          Year

                                          (d) Probability crisis zone                                        (e) One-period welfare
                                  20%                                                               20%




                                  15%                                                               15%




                                                                                                    10%
                                  10%



                                                                                                     5%
                                  5%



                                                                                                     0%
                                  0%

                                   2000     2002     2004   2006    2008    2010   2012               2000   2002   2004   2006    2008    2010    2012




                                                   Figure 11: Path to Spain’s 2012 Rollover Crisis
  Notes: Welfare gains in panel (e) correspond to policies that are in place for one period, reverting to the baseline
  Markov equilibrium. Crisis probability denotes the probability that the economy would be in a crisis region in the
  following period given the current choices of debt and initial states. The tradable endowment shock was obtained by
  applying a log-quadratic filter to the Spanish tradable output from 1995 to 2017. Debt levels in the data correspond
  to Spain’s external debt-GDP ratio. The shaded region denotes that the economy is in the crisis zone.


Figure 11 show the dynamics of debt and spread in these simulations. In early 2000, the government
increases its debt, and this is driven by the low initial debt (recall that the calibrated mean external
debt is close to 30%) and by relatively good income shocks that allow for favorable borrowing terms.
These dynamics are fairly similar to those in the data, except that the model overpredicts the initial
increase. One can also see that the model is able to replicate the low and stable spreads before 2008
in the data. Finally, the evolution of the probability of being in the crisis zone in panel (d) of Figure
11 reveals interesting dynamics. After the debt accumulation that occurs initially and the negative
income shocks that pile up after 2008, the economy’s probability of a rollover crisis becomes more sig-
nificant. By 2012, the year in which the ECB intervened, the economy becomes significantly exposed
to a rollover crisis, with a 20% probability of being in the crisis zone.
    The final block of the exercise is a series of policy counterfactuals. Building on the analysis of
Section 4.3, we first consider what the costs are from the lack of monetary independence. More
precisely, throughout the simulations, we ask how much households in Spain are willing to pay in
terms of current consumption to recover monetary independence for one period. As the blue line
in panel (e) of Figure 11 shows, the gains are about zero until 2011 when a modest increase takes
place, and strikingly the welfare cost reaches about 17 percent in 2012. As it turns out, close to 60% of
these costs are due to the presence of rollover crises. That is, if there were no possibility of a rollover

                                                                                          45
crisis, the increase in welfare from regaining monetary independence would be reduced by 60%; the
remaining 40% would be a direct reduction in unemployment. To illustrate this, we compute the gains
from eliminating a rollover crisis throughout the simulation for the fixed exchange rate regime (see
the red line in panel (e)). As the figure shows, the gains are zero from 2000 to 2011 since the economy
is in the safe zone, but these gains reach 10% in 2012 as the economy arrives in the crisis zone. For
comparison, one can see in the figure that the gains from eliminating a rollover crisis would remain
zero if the government were to regain monetary autonomy. In other words, the bulk of the welfare
losses from the lack of monetary independence arise because it exposes the government to a rollover
crisis and costly default. By the same token, a lender of last resort would help to significantly ease
the costs involved in giving up monetary autonomy.
    According to this experiment, if Spain had exited the monetary union in 2012, it would not have
been subject to a rollover crisis.50 Two remarks about this counterfactual experiment are in order.
First, we are keeping everything else constant when we analyze the implications of exiting the Euro-
zone. We are therefore abstracting from any possible structural changes that Spain could experience
upon exiting a monetary union. Notwithstanding, to the extent that these structural changes would
symmetrically affect VR + and VR − , we expect that the large gap between these two values that arise
because of the inability to depreciate the currency would remain intact, and hence these structural
changes should not significantly alter the crisis region. Second, we do not suggest that Spain would
have been better off by exiting the monetary union. Being in a monetary union indeed has many
benefits from that we are not modeling. Our goal is to point out an additional cost of remaining in a
monetary union, which arises from the higher exposure to rollover crises.


5     Conclusion
This paper shows that the inability to use monetary policy for macroeconomic stabilization leaves a
government more vulnerable to a rollover crisis and points to a new cost from joining a monetary
union. When a government lacks monetary autonomy, a run on government bonds can lead to a
large recession in the presence of nominal rigidities. In turn, anticipating that the government will
find it more costly to repay, investors become more prone to run and the crisis becomes self-fulfilling.
In a calibrated version of the model, we have found that an economy with a flexible exchange rate is
relatively immune to a rollover crisis. On the other hand, a substantial defaults under a fixed exchange
rate regime are driven by rollover crises.
   50
      While the welfare results of Figure 11 correspond to a situation in which Spain regains monetary autonomy for one
period, the same result would hold if there were a permanent exit from the Eurozone. In both cases, we continue to assume
that debt remains denominated in foreign currency, a natural assumption since a currency redenomination would be akin
to a default. While it is quite likely that Spain would start issuing debt in domestic currency after exiting, this would apply
only to new issuances of debt, not the existing stock, which is to a large extent the most relevant in understanding the
incentives to default and how they change if the government remains in or exits the monetary union.



                                                              46
    Our analysis provides a new perspective on discussions about whether the lack of monetary au-
tonomy in Southern European countries made them more vulnerable to a rollover crisis. According
to a popular view, the fact that their debt was not denominated in domestic currency contributed to
their vulnerability by preventing them from inflating away the debt. We argue instead that monetary
policy has a role in preventing rollover crises that goes beyond the ability to inflate away the debt.
Our analysis also suggests that a lender of last resort contributes to easing the costs from giving up
monetary independence and could be highly beneficial for the stability of a monetary union.
   Extending beyond our current analysis, several avenues remain for future work. In terms of debt
management, our model suggests that economies with more rigid labor markets or a less flexible
monetary policy should seek longer debt maturities. Another interesting avenue is to provide a more
explicit modeling of the benefits from joining a monetary union and quantify the relevant trade-offs
involved. Finally, one could also extend the analysis to consider spillovers within a monetary union.


6    Conclusion
This paper shows that the inability to use monetary policy for macroeconomic stabilization leaves a
government more vulnerable to a rollover crisis and points to a new cost from joining a monetary
union. When a government lacks monetary autonomy, a run on government bonds can lead to a
large recession in the presence of nominal rigidities. In turn, anticipating that the government will
find it more costly to repay, investors become more prone to run and the crisis becomes self-fulfilling.
In a calibrated version of the model, we have found that an economy with a flexible exchange rate is
relatively immune to a rollover crisis. On the other hand, a substantial defaults under a fixed exchange
rate regime are driven by rollover crises.
    Our analysis provides a new perspective on discussions about whether the lack of monetary au-
tonomy in Southern European countries made them more vulnerable to a rollover crisis. According
to a popular view, the fact that their debt was not denominated in domestic currency contributed to
their vulnerability by preventing them from inflating away the debt. We argue instead that monetary
policy has a role in preventing rollover crises that goes beyond the ability to inflate away the debt.
Our analysis also suggests that a lender of last resort contributes to easing the costs from giving up
monetary independence and could be highly beneficial for the stability of a monetary union.
   Extending beyond our current analysis, several avenues remain for future work. In terms of debt
management, our model suggests that economies with more rigid labor markets or a less flexible
monetary policy should seek longer debt maturities. Another interesting avenue is to provide a more
explicit modeling of the benefits from joining a monetary union and quantify the relevant trade-offs
involved. Finally, one could also extend the analysis to consider spillovers within a monetary union.




                                                  47
References
Aguiar, M. and M. Amador (2013): “Take the short route: How to repay and restructure rovereign
  debt with multiple maturities,” NBER Working Paper 19717.

Aguiar, M., M. Amador, E. Farhi, and G. Gopinath (2013): “Crisis and commitment: Inflation
  credibility and the vulnerability to sovereign debt crises,” NBER Working Paper No. 19516.

——— (2015): “Coordination and crisis in monetary unions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 1727–
 1779.

Aguiar, M., S. Chatterjee, H. Cole, and Z. Stangebye (2016): “Quantitative Models of Sovereign
  Debt Crises,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. Taylor and H. Uhlig, Amsterdam Elsevier,
  vol. 2, 1697–1755.

Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath (2006): “Defaultable debt, interest rates, and the current account,”
  Journal of International Economics, 69(1), 64–83.

Alesina, A. and R. J. Barro (2002): “Currency unions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 409–436.

Alesina, A., R. J. Barro, and S. Tenreyro (2002): “Optimal currency areas,” MIT Press, vol. 17, 301–
  345.

Alesina, A., A. Prati, and G. Tabellini (1990): “Public Confidence and Debt Management: A Model
  and a Case Study of Italy,” in Public Debt Management: Theory and History, ed. by R. Dornbusch and
  M. Draghi, Cambridge University Press and CEPR, 94–124.

Araujo, A., M. Leon, and R. Santos (2013): “Welfare analysis of currency regimes with defaultable
  debts,” Journal of International Economics, 89, 143–153.

Arellano, C. (2008): “Default risk and income fluctuations in emerging economies,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 98(3), 690–712.

Arellano, C., G. Mihalache, and Y. Bai (2019): “Inflation Targeting with Sovereign Default Risk,”
  Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Arellano, C. and A. Ramanarayanan (2012): “Default and the maturity structure in sovereign
  bonds,” Journal of Political Economy, 120(2), 187–232.

Ayres, J., G. Navarro, J. P. Nicolini, and P. Teles (2016): “Sovereign default: The role of expecta-
  tions,” Journal of Economic Theory, 175, 803–812.

Bacchetta, P., E. Perazzi, and E. Van Wincoop (2018): “Self-fulfilling debt crises: Can monetary
  policy really help?” Journal of International Economics, 110, 119–134, working Paper 21158, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Barro, R. J. and D. B. Gordon (1983): “Rules, discretion and reputation in a model of monetary
  policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 101–121.

Barro, R. J. and H. I. Grossman (1971): “A general disequilibrium model of income and employment,”
  American Economic Review, 61, 82–93.

                                                 48
Bassetto, M. and C. Galli (2019): “Is inflation default? The role of information in debt crises,”
  Forthcoming, American Economic Review.

Bianchi, J. (2016): “Efficient bailouts?” American Economic Review, 106, 3607–3659.

Bianchi, J., J. C. Hatchondo, and L. Martinez (2018): “International reserves and rollover risk,”
  American Economic Review, 108, 2629–2670.

Bianchi, J., P. Ottonello, and I. Presno (2019): “Fiscal Stimulus under Sovereign Risk,” Mimeo,
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Bianchi, J. and C. Sosa-Padilla (2019): “Reserve Accumulation, Macroeconomic Stabilization and
  Sovereign Risk,” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Bocola, L. and A. Dovis (2019): “Self-fulfilling debt crises: A quantitative analysis,” Forthcoming,
  American Economic Review.

Broner, F., A. Erce, A. Martin, and J. Ventura (2014): “Sovereign debt markets in turbulent times:
  Creditor discrimination and crowding-out effects,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 61, 114–142.

Caballero, R. and E. Farhi (2017): “The safety trap,” Review of Economic Studies, 85, 223–274.

Calvo, G. A. (1988): “Servicing the public debt: The role of expectations,” American Economic Review,
  78(4), 647–661.

Camous, A. and R. Cooper (2018): “Whatever it takes Is All You Need: Monetary Policy and Debt
  Fragility,” Forthcoming, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

Céspedes, L. F., R. Chang, and A. Velasco (2004): “Balance sheets and exchange rate policy,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 94, 1183–1193.

Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor (2012): “Maturity, indebtedness, and default risk,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 102, 2674–2699.

Cole, H. L. and T. J. Kehoe (1996): “A self-fulfilling model of Mexico’s 1994–1995 debt crisis,” Journal
  of international Economics, 41, 309–330.

——— (2000): “Self-fulfilling debt crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 67(1), 91–116.

Conesa, J. C. and T. J. Kehoe (2017): “Gambling for redemption and self-fulfilling debt crises,” Eco-
  nomic Theory, 64, 707–740.

Correia, I., J. P. Nicolini, and P. Teles (2008): “Optimal fiscal and monetary policy: Equivalence
  results,” Journal of political Economy, 116, 141–170.

Corsetti, G. and L. Dedola (2016): “The mystery of the printing press: Monetary policy and self-
  fulfilling debt crises,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 14, 1329–1371.

De Ferra, S. and F. Romei (2018): “Sovereign default in a monetary union,” CEPR Discussion Paper
  DP12976.



                                                   49
De Grauwe, P. (2013): “The European Central Bank as lender of last resort in the government bond
  markets,” CESifo Economic Studies, 59, 520–535.

——— (2018): Economics of monetary union, Oxford university press.

Du, W. and J. Schreger (2016): “Sovereign risk, currency risk, and corporate balance sheets,” Mimeo,
 Harvard University.

Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz (1981): “Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical
  analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, 48(2), 289–309.

Eggertsson, G. B. and P. Krugman (2012): “Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap: A Fisher-
  Minsky-Koo approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1469–1513.

Faia, E. and V. Pezone (2018): “Monetary Policy and the Cost of Heterogeneous Wage Rigidity:
  Evidence from the Stock Market,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP13407.

Farhi, E., G. Gopinath, and O. Itskhoki (2013): “Fiscal devaluations,” Review of Economic Studies,
  81, 725–760.

Farhi, E. and M. Maggiori (2017): “A model of the international monetary system,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 133, 295–355.

Frankel, J. and A. Rose (2002): “An estimate of the effect of common currencies on trade and income,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 437–466.

Friedman, M. (1953): The case for flexible exchange rates, University of Chicago Press.

Gelos, R. G., R. Sahay, and G. Sandleris (2011): “Sovereign borrowing by developing countries:
  What determines market access?” Journal of International Economics, 83(2), 243–254.

Gertler, M., S. Gilchrist, and F. M. Natalucci (2007): “External constraints on monetary policy
  and the financial accelerator,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 295–330.

Gourinchas, P. O., P. Martin, and T. Messer (2017): “The Economics of Sovereign Debt, Bailouts
  and the Eurozone Crisis,” Mimeo, Berkeley.

Guerrieri, V. and G. Lorenzoni (2017): “Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the liquidity trap,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 1427–1467.

Hatchondo, J. C. and L. Martinez (2009): “Long-duration bonds and sovereign defaults,” Journal of
 International Economics, 79(1), 117–125.

Hatchondo, J. C., L. Martinez, and C. Sosa-Padilla (2016): “Debt dilution and sovereign default
 risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 124(5), 1383–1422.

Hur, S., I. Kondo, and F. Perri (2018): “Inflation, debt, and default,” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of
 Cleveland.

Krugman, P. (2011):         “Wonking Out About the Euro Crisis (Very Wonkish),”
  Http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/08/08/wonking-out-about-the-euro-crisis-verywonkish/.


                                                  50
Lorenzoni, G. and I. Werning (2013): “Slow moving debt crises,” NBER Working Paper No. 19228.

Mundell, R. A. (1961): “A theory of optimum currency areas,” American economic review, 51, 657–665.

Na, S., S. Schmitt-Grohé, M. Uribe, and V. Yue (2018): “The twin Ds: Optimal Default and Devalu-
  ation,” American Economic Review, 108(7), 1773–1819.

Nuño, G. and C. Thomas (2017): “Monetary policy and sovereign debt sustainability,” Mimeo, Bank
 of Spain.

Roch, F. and H. Uhlig (2018): “The dynamics of sovereign debt crises and bailouts,” Journal of Inter-
  national Economics, 114, 1–13.

Ronchi, M. and F. Di Mauro (2017): “Wage bargaining regimes and firms’ adjustments to the Great
  Recession,” Mimeo, Queen Mary.

Sachs, J. (1984): Theoretical Issues in International Borrowing, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
  Press.

Sanchez, J., H. Sapriza, and E. Yurdagul (2018): “Sovereign default and the choice of maturity,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 95(C), 72–85.

Santos Silva, J. and S. Tenreyro (2010): “Currency unions in prospect and retrospect,” Annual Re-
  view of Economics, 2, 51–74.

Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe (2016): “Downward nominal wage rigidity, currency pegs, and
  involuntary unemployment,” Journal of Political Economy, 124(5).

Uribe, M. (1997): “Exchange-rate-based inflation stabilization: the initial real effects of credible plans,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 39, 197–221.




                                                    51
A       Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1
In any equilibrium, the real wage in terms of tradable goods is a function of tradable consumption and
employment:
                                                                             1+µ
                                                                     cTt
                                                              
                                                 1−ω
                                W(cTt , ht )   ≡                                    F 0 (ht ).
                                                  ω                F (ht )

Moreover, W(cTt , ht ) is increasing with respect to cTt and decreasing with respect to ht .

Proof. Using the firm’s first order condition (5) and the equilibrium relative price, the equilibrium
real wages in terms of tradable goods can be defined as a function of tradable consumption goods and
employment:
                                                                                        1+µ
                                                                               cTt
                                                                        
                                                0            1−ω
                         W(cTt , ht )   =   pN
                                             t F (ht )     =                                   F 0 (ht ).
                                                              ω              F (ht )

Using this, we can find that
                                         0
                     ∂Wt    (1 + µ)pN t F (ht )
                          =                       and
                     ∂cTt          cTt
                                                 0
                                                                   −F 00 (ht )
                                                                             
                     ∂Wt                N 0      F (ht )      1
                          = −(1 + µ)pt F (ht )           +                       .
                     ∂ht                         F (ht )     1+µ    F 0 (ht )

Because F (·) is a non-negative, strictly increasing, and decreasing returns to scale function, we know
that F , F 0 > 0, and F 00 < 0. Therefore, we can conclude that ∂W
                                                                ∂cT
                                                                   t
                                                                     > 0 and ∂W
                                                                              ∂ht
                                                                                 t
                                                                                   < 0.
                                                                                    t




Proof of Lemma 2
Under a fixed exchange rate regime, the employment function is a piecewise linear function:
                                                              1             1+µ
                                             1−ω       α
                                                           1+αµ          1+αµ
                                        
                                              ω        w
                                                                      cT                if cT ≤ cTw
                          H(cT ) =                                                                     ,
                                        h                                              if cT > cTw

where
                                                                  1
                                                               1+µ
                                     T              ω          w        1+αµ
                                    cw   =                             h 1+µ .
                                                   1−ω         α




                                                              52
Proof. When the real wage rigidity is binding,
                                                       1+µ                        1+µ ! 
                                                 T                              cT          F 0 (h)
                                                                                                   
                                     1−ω        c                         1−ω
            w = W(cT , h) =                                   F 0 (h) =                               .
                                      ω        F (h)                       ω    F (h)µ      F (h)

Using the property that F (·) is a homogeneous function of degree α ∈ [0, 1], we then know that F 0 (h)
is homogeneous of degree α−1. Moreover, because it is a unidimensional function, we can also assert
that F (h) = hα and F 0 (h) = hα−1 . Finally, we can also say that hF 0 (h) = αF (h). Hence, we can say
that
                                                           1+µ !
                                            1 − ω α cT
                                      w=                          .
                                              ω        h1+αµ

Hence, solving for h, we get
                                                                  1
                                                              1+αµ
                                      T              1−ω      α           1+µ
                                 hw (c ) =                             cT 1+αµ .
                                                      ω       w

Moreover, this labor function is increasing with respect to the consumption of non-tradables. Know-
ing that labor cannot go above the household’s labor endowment of h, we can compute the consump-
tion threshold for tradables at which employment reaches this cap. Hence, we solve for this level:
                                                                 1
                                                              1+µ
                                       T              ω       w        1+αµ
                                      cw   =                          h 1+µ .
                                                     1−ω      α

For levels of tradable consumption above this threshold, the supply of labor in the economy will be
in full employment.


Proof of Lemma 3
For every tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ and debt level b ∈ R, we have that VR+ (b, y T ) ≥ VR− (b, y T ).

Proof. Realize that problem (21) is a particular case of (20). That is,

            VR+ (b, y T ) = max u(y T − δb + q̃(b0 , y T ) (b0 − (1 − δ)b) , h) + βE [V (b0 , s0 )]
                               
                           b0 ,h≤h

                        ≥ max u(y T − δb, h) + βE [V ((1 − δ)b, s0 )]
                             
                           h≤h

                        = VR− (b, y T ),

where both problems satisfy the same labor and wage constraints.




                                                              53
Proof of Proposition 1
Under a flexible exchange rate regime, the government chooses an exchange rate that delivers full em-
ployment in all states.

Proof. The value of repayment when the government can choose the exchange rate is given by the
following Bellman equation:

                                                    u(cT , F (h)) + βEV (b0 , s0 )
                                                
                VR (b, s) =         max                                                                      (34)
                                b0 ,cT ,h≤h,e

                                                subject to

                                         cT = y T − δb + q(b0 , b, s)(b0 − (1 − δ)b)
                           W(cT , h)e ≥ W .

Meanwhile, the value of default when the government can choose the exchange rate is given by the
following Bellman equation:

        VD (y T ) = max             u cT , F (h) −κ(y T ) + βE ψV (0, s0 ) + (1 − ψ)VD (y T 0 )
                                                                                             
                                                                                                             (35)
                    cT ,h≤h,e

                                                        subject to

                                                     cT = y T
                                      W(cT , h)e ≥ W .

It is immediate from (34) and (35) that an increase in e relaxes the wage rigidity constraint without
tightening any other constraint. Fully relaxing the wage rigidity constraint allows the government to
achieve full employment.



Proof of Lemma 4
For every level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ , there exist levels of debt b̄+ , b̄− ∈ R such that ṼD (y T ) =
VR+ b̄+ , y T and ṼD (y T ) = VR− b̄− , y T . Furthermore, it also satisfies b̄+ ≥ b̄− .
                                           


Proof. First, realize that for every level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ , if b = 0 then VD (y T ) ≤
ṼR− (0, y T ) ≤ ṼR+ (0, y T ). Because V is strictly decreasing in b, we can choose a level of debt sufficiently
high b >> 0 such that ṼD (y T ) > ṼR+ (b, y T ) ≥ ṼR− (b, y T ). Because ṼR+ and ṼR− are continuous
functions, by the intermediate value theorem there exist levels of debt b̄+ , b̄− ∈ R such that ṼD (y T ) =




                                                                  54
ṼR+ b̄+ , y T and ṼD (y T ) = ṼR− b̄− , y T . Acknowledge that for every level of endowment y T ∈ R+ ,
                                             


                        ṼR− b̄− , y T = ṼD (y T ) = ṼR+ b̄+ , y T ≥ ṼR− b̄+ , y T .
                                                                                   


Using that VR− is decreasing, we can conclude that b̄+ ≥ b̄− . Furthermore, we have ṼD (y T ; w) =
VR+ b, y T ; w ∀b ≥ b̄+ (w) and ṼD (y T ; w) ≥ VR− b, y T ; w ∀b ≥ b̄− (w)
                                                             



Proof of Proposition 2
For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the following claims hold:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄− (w2 ) ≤ b̄− (w1 ). Equivalently, S (w2 ) ⊆ S (w1 ). Moreover, if
      w2 ∈ w−                    −           −
                       
                R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently, S (w 2 ) ⊂ S (w 1 ).


  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−                       −          −
                                                                   
                                                              R , ∞ , then b̄ (w 2 ) ≤ b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently,
                                                −
      S (w2 ) ⊆ S (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wR , wD , then b̄− (w2 ) < b̄− (w1 ). Equivalently, S (w2 ) ⊂
                                                         

      S (w1 ).

Proof. Choose an arbitrary level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ and two arbitrary wage rigidities
w1 , w2 ∈ R+ such that w1 < w2 . Let us now proceed by cases:

   i) First, let the arbitrary wage rigidities be w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ]. Using Lemma 4, call the debt thresh-
      olds that limit the safe region b̄− (w1 ) and b̄− (w2 ). Abusing notation, rename the previous
      thresholds as b̄−      −             −     −
                       1 ≡ b̄ (w 1 ) and b̄2 ≡ b̄ (w 2 ). Acknowledging that a higher real wage rigidity
      imposes a tighter constraint on the government, we have ṼR− b, y T ; w1 ≥ ṼR− b, y T ; w2 for
                                                                                                    

      any amount of debt b ∈ R. Thus,

          ṼR− b̄−    T             T             T          −   − T             −   − T
                                                                                            
                 1 , y ; w 1 = ṼD y ; w 1 = ṼD y ; w 2 = ṼR b̄2 , y ; w 2 ≤ ṼR b̄2 , y ; w 1 .


      Using Lemma 5, it follows that b̄−         −
                                           2 ≤ b̄1 . This implies that S̃ (w 2 ) ⊆ S̃ (w 1 ). Moreover, assume
                                      1,−    2,−
      that w2 ∈ w−
                            
                     R , w D . Call ĥR , ĥR    ∈ R+ the labor in the economy under the wage rigidi-
      ties w1 and w2 in repayment with no borrowing, respectively. Because w2 > w−                R , under this
      wage rigidity the wage constraint binds, ensuring strictly positive unemployment in repayment
      with no borrowing. Using Lemma 1, it follows that ĥ2,−      R   < ĥ1,−
                                                                            R    ≤ h. Hence, it follows that
        −                   −
              T
                                 T
                                         
      ṼR b, y ; w1 > ṼR b, y ; w2 for any amount of debt b ∈ R. Thus,

          ṼR− b̄−    T             T             T          −   − T             −   − T
                                                                                            
                 1 , y ; w 1 = ṼD y ; w 1 = ṼD y ; w 2 = ṼR b̄2 , y ; w 2 < ṼR b̄2 , y ; w 1 .


      Using Lemma 5, it follows that b̄−     −
                                       2 < b̄1 . This implies that S̃ (w 2 ) ⊂ S̃ (w 1 ).


  ii) Let the arbitrary wage rigidities be w1 , w2 ∈ [wD , ∞). Using Lemma 4, call the debt thresholds
      that limit the safe region b̄− (w1 ) and b̄− (w2 ). Abusing notation, rename the previous thresholds

                                                      55
      as b̄−     −             −     −
           1 ≡ b̄ (w 1 ) and b̄2 ≡ b̄ (w 2 ). Using the definition of the debt threshold and the implicit
      function theorem, we know that

                                                          ∂ ṼR−       ∂ ṼD
                                                 db̄−      ∂w
                                                                   −    ∂w
                                                      =                        .
                                                 dw                ∂ ṼR−
                                                             −       ∂b


      Under linear production F (h) = h and log-utility in final consumption u(c) = ln(c) and using
                                   b̄−
      Lemma 6 we reach that ddw        = 0 because w1 , w2 ∈ [wD , ∞). In other words, b̄−          −
                                                                                             2 = b̄1 , implying
      that S̃ (w2 ) = S̃ (w1 ). Joining this with part i), we can conclude that, if w1 , w2 ∈ w−
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                    R , ∞ , then
      b̄−     −
                                                              −                −     −
        2 ≤ b̄1 and S̃ (w 2 ) ⊆ S̃ (w 1 ). Moreover, if w 1 ∈ w R , w D , then b̄2 < b̄1 and S̃ (w 2 ) ⊂ S̃ (w 1 ).




Proof of Proposition 3
For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the following claims hold:
If T BR+ ≤ 0:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, w+
                                  +            +
                        R , then b̄ (w 1 ) ≤ b̄ (w 2 ). Equivalently, D̃ (w 2 ) ⊆ D̃ (w 1 ). Moreover, if
      w2 ∈ wD , w+
                             +           +
                   R , then b̄ (w 1 ) < b̄ (w 2 ). Equivalently, D̃ (w 2 ) ⊂ D̃ (w 1 ).


  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ [wD , ∞), then b̄+ (w1 ) ≤ b̄+ (w2 ). Equivalently,
      D̃ (w2 ) ⊆ D̃ (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wD , w+
                                                            +           +
                                                   R , then b̄ (w 1 ) < b̄ (w 2 ). Equivalently, D̃ (w 2 ) ⊂
      D̃ (w1 ).

If T BR+ ≥ 0:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄+ (w2 ) ≤ b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently, D̃ (w1 ) ⊆ D̃ (w2 ). Moreover, if
      w2 ∈ w+
                        
                R , w D  , then b̄+ (w2 ) < b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently, D̃ (w1 ) ⊂ D̃ (w2 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w+
                                                                            +           +
                                                               R , ∞ , then b̄ (w 2 ) ≤ b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently,
                                                  +      
      D̃ (w1 ) ⊆ D̃ (w2 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wR , wD , then b̄+ (w2 ) < b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently, D̃ (w1 ) ⊂
      D̃ (w2 ).

Proof. Choose an arbitrary level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ and two arbitrary wage rigidities
w1 , w2 ∈ R+ such that w1 < w2 . Let us now proceed by cases:

   i) First, let the arbitrary wage rigidities be w1 , w2 ∈ 0, w+
                                                                  
                                                                 R . Using Lemma 4, call the debt thresh-
      olds that limit the default region b̄+ (w1 ) and b̄+ (w2 ). Abusing notation, rename the previous
      thresholds as b̄+      +             +     +
                       1 ≡ b̄ (w 1 ) and b̄2 ≡ b̄ (w 2 ). Acknowledging that a higher real wage rigidity
      in the relevant domain makes the value of default more likely to bind and may result in a higher



                                                       56
                                                           
      unemployment, we know that ṼD y T ; w1 ≥ ṼD y T ; w2 for any amount of debt b ∈ R. Thus,

           ṼR+ b̄+    T             T             T          +   + T             +   + T
                                                                                             
                  1 , y ; w 1 = ṼD y ; w 1 ≥ ṼD y ; w 2 = ṼR b̄2 , y ; w 2 = ṼR b̄2 , y ; w 1 .


      Using Lemma 5, it follows that b̄−         −
                                           2 ≥ b̄1 . This implies that D̃ (w 2 ) ⊆ D̃ (w 1 ). Moreover, assume
      that w2 ∈ wD , w+
                                   1     2
                         R . Call ĥD , ĥD ∈ R+ the labor in the economy under the wage rigidities w 1
      and w2 in default, respectively. Because w2 > w−      R , under this wage rigidity the wage constraint
      binds, ensuring strictly positive unemployment in default. Using Lemma 1, it follows that ĥ2D <
                                                                      
      ĥ1D ≤ h. Hence, it follows that ṼD y T ; w1 > ṼD y T ; w2 . Thus,
              +                                                +                  +           
         ṼR+ b1 , y T ; w1 = ṼD y T ; w1 > ṼD y T ; w2 = ṼR+ b2 , y T ; w2 = ṼR+ b2 , y T ; w1 .
                                                        


                                           −      −
      Using Lemma 5, it follows that b2 > b1 . This implies that D̃ (w2 ) ⊂ D̃ (w1 ).

  ii) Let the arbitrary wage rigidities be w1 , w2 ∈ w+
                                                                
                                                           R , ∞ . Using Lemma 4, call the debt thresh-
      olds that limit the default region b̄+ (w1 ) and b̄+ (w2 ). Abusing notation, rename the previous
      thresholds as b̄+     +             +      +
                      1 ≡ b̄ (w 1 ) and b̄2 ≡ b̄ (w 2 ). Using the definition of the debt threshold and
      the implicit function theorem, we know that

                                                          ∂ ṼR+       ∂ ṼD
                                                 db̄+      ∂w
                                                                   −    ∂w
                                                      =                        .
                                                 dw                ∂ ṼR+
                                                             −      ∂b


      Under linear production F (h) = h and log-utility in final consumption u(c) = ln(c) and using
                                 b̄+
      Lemma 6, we reach that ddw     = 0 because w1 , w2 ∈ w+         . In other words, b̄+     +
                                                                   
                                                              R , ∞                       2 = b̄1 , implying
      that D̃ (w2 ) = D̃ (w1 ). Joining this with part i), we can conclude that, if w1 , w2 ∈ [wD , ∞),
      then D̃ (w2 ) ⊆ D̃ (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wD , w+
                                                           
                                                          R , then D̃ (w 2 ) ⊂ D̃ (w 1 ).




Proof of Proposition 4
For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the following claims hold:

                                                                                            −
   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, min w+
                                                                                                  +         
                               R , w D   , then C̃ (w 1 ) ⊆ C̃ (w 2 ). Moreover, if w 2 ∈ w R , min   w R , w D   ,
      then C̃ (w1 ) ⊂ C̃ (w2 ).

  ii) Under T BR+ ≤ 0, F (h) = h, and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−
                                                                                     
                                                                               R , ∞ , then C̃ (w 1 ) ⊆ C̃ (w 2 ).
      Moreover, if w1 ∈ w−         +
                                    
                            R , w R , then C̃ (w 1 ) ⊂ C̃ (w 2 ).


Proof. Choose an arbitrary level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ and two arbitrary wage rigidities
w1 , w2 ∈ R+ such that w1 < w2 . Let us now proceed by cases:


                                                       57
   i) First, let the arbitrary wage rigidities be w1 , w2 ∈ 0, min w+
                                                                                       
                                                                                R , w D    . Using Lemma 4, call
                                                            −               −
      the debt thresholds that limit the safe region b̄ (w1 ) and b̄ (w2 ). Abusing notation, rename
      the previous thresholds as b̄−          −               −       −
                                        1 ≡ b̄ (w 1 ) and b̄2 ≡ b̄ (w 2 ). Using Proposition 2, it follows
      that b̄−      −
             2 ≤ b̄1 . In addition, using Lemma 4 again, call the debt thresholds that limit the default
      region b̄+ (w1 ) and b̄+ (w2 ). Abusing notation, rename the previous thresholds as b̄+               +
                                                                                                     1 ≡ b̄ (w 1 )
      and b̄+        +                                                    +      +
             2 ≡ b̄ (w 2 ). Using Proposition 3, it follows that b̄2 = b̄1 . By construction, the crisis
      region under the different wage rigidities satisfy C̃ (w1 ) ⊆ C̃ (w2 ). Moreover, assume that
      w2 w−                         . Using Proposition 2, it follows that b̄−          −
                       +         
              R , min w R , w D                                                 2 < b̄1 . Hence, it follows that
      the crisis region satisfies C̃ (w1 ) ⊂ C̃ (w2 ).

  ii) Let the arbitrary wage rigidities w1 , w2 ∈ w+              . Firstly, realize that when T BR+ ≤ 0, then
                                                               
                                                          R , ∞
      w+ R ≥ w D . Using Lemma 4, call the debt thresholds that limit the safe region b̄ (w 1 ) and
                                                                                                      −

      b̄− (w2 ). Abusing notation, recall the previous thresholds as b̄−               −            −       −
                                                                               1 ≡ b̄ (w 1 ) and b̄2 ≡ b̄ (w 2 ).
      Using Proposition 2, it follows that b̄−         −
                                                2 = b̄1 . In addition, using Lemma 4 again, call the debt
      thresholds that limit the default region b̄+ (w1 ) and b̄+ (w2 ). Abusing notation, rename the
      previous thresholds as b̄+          +             +       +
                                   1 ≡ b̄ (w 1 ) and b̄2 ≡ b̄ (w 2 ). Using Proposition 3, it follows that
      b̄+      +
        2 = b̄1 . Joining this with part i) and using Proposition 2 and Proposition 3, we can conclude
      that if w1 , w2 ∈ w−                  −     −        +        +
                                   
                             R , ∞ then b̄2 ≤ b̄1 and b̄2 ≥ b̄1 . In other words, by construction of the
      crisis region C̃ (w1 ) ⊆ C̃ (w2 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wR , wR , then b̄−
                                                                − +                      −      +     +
                                                                                    2 < b̄1 and b̄2 ≥ b̄1 . Hence,
      it follows that the crisis region satisfies C̃ (w1 ) ⊂ C̃ (w2 ).


Lemma 5. The value functions ṼR+ and ṼR− are decreasing with respect to the debt b.

Proof. Consider two different debt values b1 , b2 ∈ R such that b2 > b1 . Let (cT2 , b02 ) be the optimal
policies associated with b2 when the government can borrow. Under b1 , it is feasible for the govern-
ment to choose (cT1 , b01 ) = (cT2 + δ(b2 − b1 ) + q̃(b02 , y T )(1 − δ)(b2 − b1 ), b02 ), and this choice delivers
higher utility.
    Because b01 = b02 , continuation values are the same. To show that (cT2 + (b02 − b1 ), b02 ) is feasible and
delivers higher utility, it is then sufficient to show that the resource constraint is satisfied and that
non-tradable consumption is higher:

      cT2 + δ(b2 − b1 ) + q̃(b02 , y T )(1 − δ)(b2 − b1 ) ≤ y T − δb1 + q̃(b02 , y T )(b02 − (1 − δ)b1 )
                                                      cT2 ≤ y T − δb1 + q̃(b02 , y T )(b02 − (1 − δ)b1 )
                                                                − δ(b2 − b1 ) − q̃(b02 , y T )(1 − δ)(b2 − b1 )
                                                      cT2 ≤ y T − δb2 + q̃(b02 , y T )(b02 − (1 − δ)b2 ),

which holds since (cT2 , b02 ) is feasible under b2 . To see that non-tradable consumption is also higher,
recall from Lemma 1 that W(cT , h) is increasing in cT and decreasing in h. Since cT1 > cT2 , it follows
that cN is higher under b1 . Therefore, we can conclude that ṼR+ (b2 ) < ṼR+ (b1 ).

                                                         58
    The proof that ṼR− is decreasing in b can be obtained by differentiating the value function and, as
is the case for ṼR+ , it follows directly from the fact that a decrease in debt relaxes both the resource
constraint and the wage rigidity constraint.

Lemma 6 (Wage Constraint Lagrange Multiplier). When the wage constraint binds, the change in any
of the value functions with respect to wage rigidity is strictly negative. Moreover, under linear production
F (h) = h and log-utility in final consumption u(c) = ln(c), the change in all the value functions is the
same constant contingent on wage rigidity.

Proof. Using the envelope theorem and by definition of the Lagrange multiplier associated with the
wage constraint when binding η > 0, we know that

              ∂VD                      ∂VR−                                   ∂VR+
                  = −ηD < 0,                = −ηR− < 0,             and            = −ηR+ < 0,
              ∂w                        ∂w                                     ∂w
where the Lagrange multipliers are evaluated in the optimal solutions of each of their environments.
Now, let us take the first derivative of the utility function and the real wage function:

                                                                                        1 + µ −F 00 (h)
                                                                                                         
          ∂u          ∂C                                  ∂W
       0
     F (h) N = U 0 (C) T W cT , h                            = −W cT , h
                                                                       
                                               and                                            +               .
          ∂c          ∂c                                  ∂h                            F (h)   F 0 (h)

By definition, the Lagrange multiplier associated with the wage constraint is
                                                                                          −1
                         F 0 (h) · ∂u/∂cN                         1 + µ −F 00 (h)
                                                             
                                                   ∂C
                     η=−                  = U 0 (C) T                   +                       ,
                              ∂W/∂h                ∂c             F (h)   F 0 (h)

by the properties of the utility function, the consumption aggregator, and the production function.
Moreover, using linear production F (h) = h and log-utility in final consumption u(c) = ln(c), it can
be rewritten as
                                      
                                                            1
                                                           1+µ           !−1 −1
                                 1                1−ω               µ              1
                          η=         1+                           w 1+µ              .
                                1+µ                 ω                               w

Realize that the Lagrange muliplier η is a constant contingent on wage rigidity in all of the maximiza-
tion problems when the wage constraint binds. In other words, we have that η = ηD = ηR+ = ηR− . For
simplicity, call η the Lagrange multiplier when the wage constraint binds and using linear production
F (h) = h and log-utility in final consumption u(c) = ln(c).

Lemma 7 (Real Wage Rigidity Thresholds). For every level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ , the fol-
lowing claims hold:

   i) There exists a real wage rigidity threshold wD ∈ R+ such that if, for any wage rigidity w ≤ wD ,
                                                                                                  
      then ṼD y T ; w = ṼD y T ; 0 . Moreover, if, for any wage rigidity w > wD , then ṼD y T ; w <
                 
      ṼD y T ; 0 .

                                                     59
  ii) There exists a real wage rigidity threshold w+                                                        +
                                                         R ∈ R+ such that if, for any wage rigidity w ≤ w R ,
      then ṼR+ b̄+ (0) , y T ; w = ṼR+ b̄+ (0) , y T ; 0 . Moreover, if, for any wage rigidity w > w+
                                                         
                                                                                                      R , then
        +                          +
            +        T
                                    +        T
                                                   
      ṼR b̄ (0) , y ; w < ṼR b̄ (0) , y ; 0 .

 iii) There exists a real wage rigidity threshold w−                                                        −
                                                         R ∈ R+ such that if, for any wage rigidity w ≤ w R ,
      then ṼR− b̄− (0) , y T ; w = ṼR− b̄− (0) , y T ; 0 . Moreover, if, for any wage rigidity w > w−
                                                         
                                                                                                      R , then
        −   −                      − −
                     T
                                             T
                                                   
      ṼR b̄ (0) , y ; w < ṼR b̄ (0) , y ; 0 .

In addition, define the equilibrium trade balance in the      flexible exchange  rate regime in repayment
                                                                                                           when
                                  +                             +
                                         T     +       f lex        +      T
                                                                                           +              f lex
borrowing is allowed as T BR = y − δ b̄ (0) + q̃              b̂R b̄ (0), y ; 0 − (1 − δ)b̄ (0) , where q̃       =
                              
q̃ b̂ b̄+ (0), y T ; 0 , y T ; 0 . The following order of the thresholds is satisfied:

   i) If T BR+ ≤ 0, then w−         +
                          R ≤ wD ≤ wR .

  ii) If T BR+ ≥ 0, then w−    +
                          R ≤ wR ≤ wD .


Proof. Choose an arbitrary tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ and let us proceed by cases:

   i) Consider the following real wage rigidity threshold:
                                                                           !1+µ
                                               1−ω                 yT
                                wD ≡ W y T , h =                                  F0 h ,
                                                                                      
                                                                       
                                                 ω                 F h
                                                                                                               
      Now choose an arbitrary real wage rigidity w ≤ wD and realize that by construction, W y T , h ≥
      w. Therefore, the real wage constraint is not binding, achieving the same optimal allocations
                                                                                       
      reached in the flexible exchange rate regime, ṼD y T ; w = ṼD y T ; 0 . On the other hand,
                                                                                                          
      choose an arbitrary real wage rigidity w > wD and realize that by construction, W y T , h < w.
      In this case, the wage constraint is binding, lowering labor in equilibrium h < h and yielding
                              
      ṼD y T ; w < ṼD y T ; 0 .
                                                                                                 
  ii) Abusing notation, let b̄+ = b̄+ (0), b̂+      +                                       + T
                                                         + T
                                                                                f lex
                                             R = b̂ R b̄  , y ; 0  , and q̃ = q̃         b̂ R , y  . Consider the
      following real wage rigidity threshold:
                                                                             
                         w+
                          R ≡ W   y T
                                      − δ b̄ +
                                               +   q̃   b̂ +
                                                           R  −  (1  − δ)b̄ +
                                                                                ,h
                                                                                    1+µ
                                         T          +             +                +
                              1−ω     y    −  δ b̄   +    q̃  b̂ R − (1 −    δ)b̄
                                                                                            F0 h .
                                                                                                
                            =                                                         
                               ω                            F h

                                                     +
      Choose
           an arbitrary                     w
                          real wage rigidity    ≤ wR and realize that by construction,
      W y T − δ b̄+ + q̃ b̂+R − (1 − δ)b̄
                                          +
                                             , h ≥ w. Therefore, the real wage constraint is not bind-
      ing, achieving the same optimal allocations reached in the flexible exchange rate regime,
      b̂+              = b̂+                    +
                                                             = ṼR+ b̄+ , y T ; 0 . On the other hand,
            + T
                              + T
                                                   + T
                                                                                
        R b̄ , y ; w       R b̄ , y ; 0 and ṼR b̄ , y ; w


                                                        60
                                                    +
      choose
          an arbitrary                      w > wR and realize that by construction,
                          real wage rigidity
      W y T − δ b̄+ + q̃ b̂+R − (1 − δ)b̄
                                          +
                                             , h < w. In this case, the wage constraint is binding, low-
      ering labor in equilibrium h < h and yielding ṼR+ b̄+ , y T ; w < ṼR+ b̄+ , y T ; 0 .
                                                                                          


 iii) Abusing notation, let b̄+ = b̄+ (0) and b̄− = b̄− (0). Consider first the case in which the solution
                                                                                                   
      to the flexible exchange rate regime yields that it is optimal to buy off debt b̂R   + T            +
                                                                                       + b̄ , y ; 0 < δ b̄ .
      In this case, set w−      +                              −      +
                          R ≡ w R because by construction ṼR = ṼR and follow case ii). On the other
                              
      hand, let b̂R   + T            +
                  + b̄ , y ; 0 ≥ δ b̄ . Consider the following real wage rigidity threshold:

                                                                                !1+µ
                                              1−ω                y T − δ b̄−
                          w−      T      −
                                                                                       F0 h .
                                                                                           
                           R ≡ W y − δ b̄ , h =                          
                                                ω                   F h

      Choose an arbitrary real wage rigidity w ≤ w−                                                       −
                                                                                                 T
                                                                                                               
                                                     R and realize    that by construction, W  y   − δ b̄   , h  ≥
      w. Therefore, the real wage constraint is not binding, achieving the same optimal allocations
      reached in the flexible exchange rate regime, ṼR− b̄− , y T ; w = ṼR− b̄− , y T ; 0 . On the other
                                                                                           

      hand, choose an arbitrary real wage rigidity w > w−    R and realize that by construction,
                  −
           T
                      
      W y − δ b̄ , h < w. In this case, the wage constraint is binding, lowering labor in equilib-
      rium h < h and yielding ṼR− b̄− , y T ; w < ṼR− b̄− , y T ; 0 .
                                                                    


Finally, by construction and by definition of T BR+ , the following order is satisfied:

   i) If T BR+ ≤ 0, then δ b̂+ ≤ q̃ b̄+             +
                                                      
                                      R − (1 − δ)b̄     . This implies that
                                                   !1+µ
                              1−ω           yT
                                                          F0 h
                                                              
                         wD =                  
                               ω           F h
                                                         !1+µ
                                1−ω        y T − T BR+
                                                                F0 h
                                                                    
                              ≤                    
                                 ω            F h
                                                                                 !1+µ
                                  1−ω      y T − δ b̂+ + q̃ b̄+
                                                              R − (1 − δ)b̄
                                                                            +
                                                                                         F0 h
                                                                                             
                              =                                 
                                   ω                      F h
                              = w+
                                 R.


      Also, because b̄− (0) ≤ 0, then w−                                           −           +
                                       R ≤ w D . Finally, we arrive at the order w R ≤ w D ≤ w R .




                                                      61
  ii) If T BR+ ≥ 0, then δ b̂+ ≥ q̃ b̄+             +
                                                      
                                      R − (1 − δ)b̄     . This implies that
                                                      !1+µ
                                1−ω            yT
                                                              F0 h
                                                                  
                           wD =                   
                                 ω            F h
                                                            !1+µ
                                  1−ω         y T − T BR+
                                                                    F0 h
                                                                        
                                ≥                     
                                   ω             F h
                                                                                     !1+µ
                                  1−ω         y T − δ b̂+ + q̃ b̄+
                                                                 R − (1 − δ)b̄
                                                                               +
                                                                                             F0 h
                                                                                                 
                                =                                  
                                   ω                         F h
                                = w+
                                   R.


       Also, by Lemma 3, we know that w−     +                                     −     +
                                       R ≤ w R . Finally, we arrive to the order w R ≤ w R ≤ w D .




Proposition 5 (Smaller safe region under fixed). Assume that U (c(cT , cN )) = u(cT ) + u(cN ). For
every y T , the following claims hold: b̄− (w) ≤ b̄− (0) ∀w. Moreover, if w > w−               −
                                                                                 R , we have b̄ (w) <
b̄− (0). Equivalently, we have S (w) ⊆ S (0) ∀w and if w > w−       −        −
                                                              R , b̄ (w) < b̄ (0).


Proof. By definition of b̄− ,
                                         ṼD (y T ; 0) = ṼR− (b̄− (0) , y T ; 0)




  U (y T − δ b̄− (0) , F (h̄)) + βEV ((1 − δ)b̄− (0) , s0 ) =
                                         U (y T , F (h̄) − κ(y T ) + βE ψV (0, s0 ) + (1 − ψ)VD (y T 0 ) .
                                                                                                      


Using that preferences are separable,

 u(y T − δ b̄− (0)) + βEV ((1 − δ)b̄− (0) , s0 ) = u(y T ) − κ(y T ) + βE ψV (0, s0 ) + (1 − ψ)VD (y T 0 ) .
                                                                                                         


We also know that since H is increasing in cT and combining the last two expressions, we arrive at

  u(y T − δ b̄− (0)) + u(F (H(y T − δ b̄− (0) , w̄))) + βEV ((1 − δ)b, s0 ) ≤ u(y T ) + u(F (H(y T , w̄)))
                                                         − κ(y T ) + βE ψV (0, s0 ) + (1 − ψ)VD (y T 0 ) ,
                                                                                                        


which implies ṼD (y T ; w) ≥ ṼR− (b̄− (0) , y T ; w). By definition, ṼD (y T ; w) = ṼR− (b̄− (w) , y T ; w). Since
ṼR− is decreasing in debt, this implies b̄− (0) ≥ b̄− (w). When w > w−           R , the previous equation holds
                                              −          −
with strict inequality, and we arrive at b̄ (0) > b̄ (w).




                                                           62
 Online Addendum to “Monetary Independence and
               Rollover Crises”
                                   By Javier Bianchi and Jorge Mondragon

    In this addendum, we show that our main theoretical results hold in various extensions from our baseline
model. In Section A, we consider sticky prices. In Section B, we consider a version of the model in which there
are costs from exchange rate fluctuations, providing a rationale for adopting a fixed exchange rate or joining
a monetary union. In Section C, we consider an inflation-targeting regime, which provides an “intermediate”
regime between a flexible exchange rate regime that seeks to achieve full employment at every period and a
fixed exchange rate regime. In Section D, we show how the results can be extended in a model with a rich
maturity structure. In Section E, we consider an elastic labor supply.


A      Sticky Prices
In this section, we explore price rigidity as an alternative to wage rigidity. We assume that wages and the
price of tradables are flexible and that the nominal non-tradable price in the economy cannot go lower than
a threshold P > 0.51 Using the disequilibrium formulation of Barro and Grossman (1971), we have that firms
supply hs = F −1 (h) whenever pN > P .
    The constraint in the economy can be described as P N ≥ P . Using the optimality condition of the house-
hold and the non-tradable market clearing condition, we can construct the real non-tradable price function
as
                                                               T 1+µ
                                        T       PN     1−ω       c
                                    P(c , h) ≡       =                     .
                                                 e        ω     F (h)

Lemma A1. The real non-tradable price function is increasing in consumption of tradables and decreasing in
labor.

Proof. Taking the first derivatives with respect to the consumption of tradables and labor, we have that

                ∂P            P(cT , h)                           ∂P                   P(cT , h)
                    = (1 + µ)           >0              and          = −(1 + µ)F 0 (h)           < 0.
                ∂cT             cT                                ∂h                    F (h)

Hence, the real non-tradable price function is increasing in the consumption of tradables and decreasing in
labor.

   We will first define the government problem and the bond pricing under this new environment. The prob-
lem of the government to either default or repay debt can be described as

                                                        dVD (y T ) + (1 − d)VR (b, s) .
                                                    
                               V (b, s) = max
                                          d∈{0,1}

  51
     We could also assume that price rigidity goes in both directions, but we model the asymmetry to have a more di-
rect comparison with the model with downward wage rigidity. The approach of downward price rigidity is commonly
attributed to “social norms” and is followed, for example, by Caballero and Farhi (2017).




                                                              1
In this way, the maximization problem in default can be described as

            VD y T = max u cT , F (h) − κ y T + β E ψV 0, s0 + (1 − ψ)VD y T 0
                                                                         
                         e,cT ,h≤h

                             s.t. cT = y T
                                 P ≤ eP(cT , h).

The value of repayment transforms to

                                                         u cT , F (h) + β E V b0 , s0
                                                                                   
                       VR (b, s) =       max
                                     e,b0 ,cT ,h≤h

                                             s.t. cT = y T − δb + q b0 , b, s b0 − (1 − δ)b
                                                                                          

                                                 P ≤ eP(cT , h).

Proposition
n              A1o(Nominal Rigidities Equivalence). If the production function F (h) is linear, then if
 V, VD , VR , q, b̂ is the solution to the Markov recursive equilibrium from Definition 2 with downward nominal
wage rigidity W ∈ R+ , then it also is an equilibrium for the environment in this section when the downward
nominal non-tradable price rigidity satisfies P ≡ W /F 0 (h).

Proof. By assuming that the production function is linear, then F 0 (h) = z is a constant that does not depend on
labor. The only difference between the models is the downward nominal rigidities, so inspecting the downward
nominal wage rigidity, we have that
                                                                            1+µ
                                                                     cT
                                                                
                                          1−ω
                                     T
                        W ≤ eW(c , h) = e                                          F 0 (h) = eP(cT , h)z.
                                           ω                        F (h)

By defining the downward nominal non-tradable price rigidity P ≡ W /z , we conclude that both rigidities are
the same. Hence, the solutions are the same.

    The value of repayment can be studied as before under two different scenarios: when rollover debt is
allowed and when it is not. Let us start by analyzing the problem when new debt contracts can be issued and
hence rollover debt is allowed. Under this scenario, the bond pricing that satisfies the no-arbitrage condition on
the part of international lenders is applied. Then, the value of repayment when rollover is allowed transforms
to

                      VR+ b, y T =                           u cT , F (h) + β E V b0 , s0
                                                                                      
                                          max                                                               (A.1)
                                       e,b0 ,cT ,h≤h

                                               s.t. cT − q̃ b0 , y T            b0 − (1 − δ)b = y T − δb
                                                                                            

                                                     P ≤ eP(cT , h).

Call b̂+      T the optimal solution that solves the previous problem. As before, call the state space in which
               
       R b, y
it is optimal for the government to increase debt issuances as
                                n                                                o
                            B = b, y T ∈ R∞ × R+ : b̂+             T
                                                                    
                                                            R b, y     > (1 − δ)b .

As before, the value of repayment when rollover is not allowed can be divided into two cases. When b, y T ∈
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                            /
                                                                                                  −    T
                                                                                                         
B , the government finds if optimal to reduce debt issuances. In this case, we can say that VR b, y         =
VR+ b, y T because the government is buying back its debt. Nevertheless, if b, y T ∈ B , then the government
                                                                                 


                                                                    2
wants to increase its debt issuances. International lenders set a price of q̃ = 0, representing their reluctance to
issue new debt. In this way, the value of repayment when new debt contracts are forbidden can be expressed
as

                          VR− b, y T = max u cT , F (h) + β E V (1 − δ)b, s0
                                                                         
                                                                                                                   (A.2)
                                             e,cT ,h≤h

                                                  s.t. cT = y T − δb
                                                     P ≤ eP(cT , h).

The following lemma follows the same steps as the one stated before, following the fact that VR− is a particular
case of a VR+ maximization problem.

Lemma A2. For every tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ and debt level b, we have that VR+ b, y T ≥ VR− b, y T .
                                                                                                            


    Now, let us define the safe zone, default zone, and repayment zone as

                 b, y T ∈ R × R+ :               VD (y T ) ≤ VR− b, y T
                                                                        
             S≡
            D ≡ b, y T ∈ R × R+ :                VD (y T ) > VR+ b, y T
                                                                        

            C ≡ b, y T ∈ R × R+ :                VD (y T ) ≤ VR+ b, y T       and VD (y T ) > VR− b, y T
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                               .

Using these zones, the bond pricing, following the no-arbitrage condition for each maturity structure, can be
represented by the following recursion:

                                         1   h                                             i
                      q̃(b0 , y T ) =       E 1 − d(b0 , s0 δ + (1 − δ)q b̂ b0 , s0 , b0 , s0
                                                                                   
                                                                                                  .
                                        1+r
Finally, using the zones and the multiplicity of equilibria, the overall bond pricing can be described as
                                         
                                                                T ∈D
                                                                 
                                         
                                          0            if b, y
                                       
                           q b0 , b, s = 0              if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 1 .
                                                                 
                                         
                                         q̃(b0 , y T ) in every other case
                                         


and the optimal default decision as
                                                   
                                                         if b, y T ∈ D
                                                                  
                                                   
                                                   1
                                                   
                                                         if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 0
                                                   
                                                   0             
                                        d (b, s) =
                                                         if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 1
                                                                  
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   1
                                                   
                                                         if b, y T ∈ S
                                                                  
                                                    0
                                                   

The following proposition follows the same steps as the one stated before.

Proposition A2 (Optimal Exchange Rate Policy). Under a flexible exchange rate regime, the government chooses
an exchange rate that delivers full employment in all states.

    Let us now focus
                 n on the flexible exchange
                                          o       rate regime and solve the model. Call the flexible exchange rate
                     f lex    f lex f lex
regime solutions V         , VD , q̃       , and let us study the one-period fixed exchange rate regime shocks.
To do this, let us define the downward real non-tradable price rigidity p ≡ P /e under a fixed exchange rate


                                                              3
regime. The value of default will transform to
                              n                     h                                      io
        ṼD y T ; w = max u cT , F (h) − κ y T + β E ψV f lex 0, s0 + (1 − ψ)VDf lex y T 0
                                                                
                          cT ,h≤h

                             s.t. cT = y T
                                 p ≤ P(cT , h).

Also, the value of repayment when rollover debt is allowed is
                                              n                   h                io
                      ṼR+ b, y T ; w = max     u cT , F (h) + β E V f lex b0 , s0
                                                            
                                              b0 ,cT ,h≤h

                                                    s.t. cT − q̃ b0 , y T (b0 − (1 − δ)b) = y T − δb
                                                                         

                                                        p ≤ P(cT , h).

Finally, the value of repayment when new debt contracts of any maturity are forbidden is
                                           n                    h                   io
                      ṼR− b, y T ; w = max u cT , F (h) + β E V f lex (1 − δ)b, s0
                                                       
                                             cT ,h≤h

                                                s.t. cT = y T − δb
                                                     p ≤ P(cT , h).

The following lemmas and propositions follow the same steps stated in the previous section.

Lemma A3. The value functions ṼR+ and ṼR− are decreasing with respect to the debt b.

Lemma A4 (Debt Thresholds). For every level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R, there exist levels of debt
b̄+ (p) , b̄− (p) ∈ R, such that ṼD y T ; p = ṼR+ b̄+ (p) , y T ; p and ṼD y T ; p = ṼR− b̄− (p) , y T ; p . Further-
                                                                                                           

more, b̄+ (p) ≥ b̄− (p).
(To avoid clutter, we omit the dependence of these thresholds on y T , but it should be understood throughout that
the thresholds depend on y T .)

    Now call the regions

       S̃yT (p) ≡ −∞, b̄− (p) ,           C̃yT (p) ≡ b̄− (p) , b̄+ (p) ,                  D̃yT (p) ≡ b̄+ (p) , ∞ .
                                                                                                              
                                                                                and

   The following propositions follow the same steps stated in the paper for Proposition 2, Proposition 3, and
Proposition 4. The price rigidity thresholds follow the same narrative as in Lemma 7.

Proposition A3 (Safe Region Threshold). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities p1 < p2 , the follow-
ing claims hold:

    i) If p1 , p2 ∈ [0, pD ], then b̄− (p2 ) ≤ b̄− (p1 ). Equivalently, SyT (p2 ) ⊆ SyT (p1 ). Moreover, if p2 ∈ p−
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                      R , pD ,
       then b̄− (p2 ) < b̄− (p1 ). Equivalently, SyT (p2 ) ⊂ SyT (p1 ).

   ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if p1 , p2 ∈ p−               , then b̄− (p2 ) ≤ b̄− (p1 ). Equivalently, SyT (p2 ) ⊆
                                                                    
                                                               R , ∞
                                         −               −          −
       SyT (p1 ). Moreover, if p1 ∈ pR , pD , then b̄ (p2 ) < b̄ (p1 ). Equivalently, SyT (p2 ) ⊂ SyT (p1 ).

Proposition A4 (Default Region Threshold). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities p1 < p2 , the
following claims hold:
      f lex,+
If T BR       ≤ 0:

                                                               4
    i) If p1 , p2 ∈ 0, p+            +           +
                           
                          R , then b̄ (p1 ) ≤ b̄ (p2 ). Equivalently, Dy T (p2 ) ⊆ Dy T (p1 ). Moreover, if p2 ∈
                +         +          +
                  
         pD , pR , then b̄ (p1 ) < b̄ (p2 ). Equivalently, DyT (p2 ) ⊂ DyT (p1 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if p1 , p2 ∈ [pD , ∞), then b̄+ (p1 ) ≤ b̄+ (p2 ). Equivalently, DyT (p2 ) ⊆
      DyT (p1 ). Moreover, if p1 ∈ pD , p+          +          +
                                          
                                         R , then b̄ (p1 ) < b̄ (p2 ). Equivalently, Dy T (p2 ) ⊆ Dy T (p1 ).

      f lex,+
If T BR       ≥ 0:

   i) If p1 , p2 ∈ [0, pD ], then b̄+ (p2 ) ≤ b̄+ (p1 ). Equivalently, DyT (p1 ) ⊆ DyT (p2 ). Moreover, if p2 ∈
        p+               +          +
                
         R , pD , then b̄ (p2 ) < b̄ (p1 ). Equivalently, Dy T (p1 ) ⊂ Dy T (p2 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if p1 , p2 ∈ p+      , ∞ , then b̄+ (p2 ) ≤ b̄+ (p1 ). Equivalently, DyT (p1 ) ⊆
                                                               
                                                           R
      DyT (p2 ). Moreover, if p1 ∈ p+                  +          +
                                            
                                       R , pD , then b̄ (p2 ) < b̄ (p1 ). Equivalently, Dy T (p1 ) ⊂ Dy T (p2 ).

Proposition A5 (Crisis Region Expansion). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities p1 < p2 , the
following claims hold:
                                                                               − +
    i) If p1 , p2 ∈ 0, p+
                                                                                   
                        R , then C̃y T (p1 ) ⊆ C̃y T (p2 ). Moreover, if p2 ∈ pR , pR , then C̃y T (p1 ) ⊂ C̃y T (p2 ).

                 f lex,+
                         ≤ 0, F (h) = h, and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ p−
                                                                                 
  ii) Under T BR                                                            R , ∞   , then C̃yT (p1 ) ⊆ C̃yT (p2 ).
      Moreover, if p1 ∈ p−      +
                                 
                            ,
                           R Rp    , then C̃ y T (p 1 ) ⊂ C̃ y T (p 2 ) .

    Figure 12 compares the crisis region under rigid wages and rigid prices, and shows that these two forms of
rigidities yield very similar implications.


                                        (a) Sticky Wages                                                                                      (b) Sticky Prices
                        5.0

                                                                                                                               6.0
                                                                                             Real nontradable price rigidity




                                                 Crisis                                                                                                Crisis
                                                 Region           Default Region                                                                       Region           Default Region
                        4.0
   Real wage rigidity




                                                                                                                               5.0




                                                                                                                               4.0
                        3.0



                                                                                                                               3.0

                        2.0
                                 Safe Region                                                                                           Safe Region
                                                                                                                               2.0


                        1.0
                           0.0    0.1          0.2          0.3        0.4         0.5                                           0.0    0.1          0.2          0.3        0.4         0.5
                                                     Debt                                                                                                  Debt

                                   Figure 12: Regions change under different downward nominal rigidities

      Notes: The tradable endowment is fixed at its long-run level. The grid for the real non-tradable price rigidity is
      set to its level in default corresponding to the real wage rigidity grid.




                                                                                         5
B     Devaluation Costs
In this section, we explore a version of the model in which the government can choose the exchange rate every
period, but a cost is associated with exchange rate fluctuations. We consider two variants: in one version are
costs from current depreciations, and in another version are costs from future expected depreciations. Both
versions provide a rationale for joining a monetary union or fixing the exchange rate.


B.1     Costs from Current Depreciations
We assume that exchange rate devaluations above a “natural” level e > 0 incur a penalty Φ (e − e) ≥ 0 that
satisfies Φ(0) = Φ0 (0) = 0 and Φ0 (·) > 0. Using the downward nominal rigidity constraint and the properties
of the devaluation utility cost, the optimal exchange rate can be expressed as
                                                         (              )
                                                              w
                                        e(cT ) = e · max            , 1 .                              (B.1)
                                                           W cT , h

   We will first define the government problem and the bond pricing under this new environment. The prob-
lem of the government to either default or repay debt can be described as

                                                        dVD (y T ) + (1 − d)VR (b, s) .
                                                    
                               V (b, s) = max
                                          d∈{0,1}

In this way, the maximization problem in default can be described as

          VD y T = max   u cT , F h − Φ e cT − e + β E ψV 0, s0 + (1 − ψ)VD y T 0
                                                                          
                     T e,c

                       s.t. cT = y T .

The value of repayment transforms to

                                      u cT , F h − κ y T − Φ e cT − e + β E V b0 , s0
                                                                               
               VR (b, s) = max0   T
                           e,b ,c

                              s.t. cT = y T − δb + q b0 , b, s b0 − (1 − δ)b .
                                                                           


    The value of repayment can be studied as before under two different scenarios: when rollover debt is
allowed and when it is not. Let us start by analyzing the problem when new debt contracts can be issued and
hence rollover debt is allowed. Under this scenario, the bond pricing that satisfies the no-arbitrage condition on
the part of international lenders is applied. Then, the value of repayment when rollover is allowed transforms
to
                                                                                      0 0
                   VR+ b, y T = max           T                   T
                                                                                    
                                          u c   , F   h    − Φ e c    − e   + β E  V b , s                   (B.2)
                                e,b0 ,cT

                                   s.t. cT − q̃ b0 , y T b0 − (1 − δ)b = y T − δb.
                                                                     


   Call b̂+      T the optimal solution that solves the previous problem. As before, call the state space in
                  
          R b, y
which it is optimal for the government to increase debt issuances as
                                n                                                 o
                            B = b, y T ∈ R∞ × R+ : b̂+             T
                                                                    
                                                            R b, y     > (1 − δ)b   .



                                                             6
As before, the value of repayment when rollover is not allowed can be divided into two cases. When b, y T ∈
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                  /
B , the government finds it optimal to reduce debt issuances. In this case, we can say that VR− b, y T =
                                                                                                              

VR+ b, y T because the government is buying back its debt. Nevertheless, if b, y T ∈ B , then the government
                                                                                     

wants to increase its debt issuances. International lenders set a price of q̃ = 0, representing their reluctance to
issue new debt. In this way, the value of repayment when new debt contracts are forbidden can be expressed
as

                 VR− b, y T = max      T                 T                            0
                                                                                 
                                T
                                    u c  , F h    − Φ e c    − e  + β E  V (1 − δ)b, s                            (B.3)
                                 e,c

                                  s.t. cT = y T − δb.

    The following lemma follows the same steps as the one stated before, following the fact that VR− is a
particular case of the VR+ maximization problem.
Lemma B5. For every level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ , there exist levels of debt b̄+ (w) , b̄−
                                                                                                  y T (w) ∈ R+
                                                                                 yT
                T        +   +         T              T        −   −          T                        +
such that ṼD (y ; w) = VR b̄yT (w) , y ; w and ṼD (y ; w) = VR byT (w) , y ; w . Furthermore, byT (w) ≥
 −
byT (w).

     Now, let us define the safe zone, default zone, and repayment zone as

                  b, y T ∈ R × R+ :          VD (y T ) ≤ VR− b, y T
                                                                    
             S≡
             D ≡ b, y T ∈ R × R+ :           VD (y T ) > VR+ b, y T
                                                                    

             C ≡ b, y T ∈ R × R+ :           VD (y T ) ≤ VR+ b, y T       and VD (y T ) > VR− b, y T
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                           .

Using these zones, the bond pricing, following the no-arbitrage condition, can be represented by the following
recursion:

                        0 T       1      h
                                                  0 0
                                                                   
                                                                           0 0
                                                                                0 0 i
                    q̃(b , y ) =      E 1 − d(b , s δ + (1 − δ)q b̂ b , s , b , s         .
                                 1+r
Finally, using the zones and the multiplicity of equilibria, the overall bond pricing can be described as
                                         
                                                        if b, y T ∈ D
                                                                 
                                         
                                         
                                           0
                            q b0 , b, s = 0
                                       
                                                        if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 1
                                                                 
                                         
                                         q̃(b0 , y T ) in every other case
                                         


and the optimal default decision as
                                              
                                                    if b, y T ∈ D
                                                             
                                              
                                              1
                                              
                                                    if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 0
                                              
                                              0             
                                   d (b, s) =                               .
                                                    if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 1
                                                             
                                              
                                              
                                              1
                                              
                                                    if b, y T ∈ S
                                                             
                                               0
                                              


    The following proposition relies that under a flexible exchange rate, the downward nominal rigidity can
be ignored. In addition, when there are no devaluation costs, then the objective functions coincide in both
environments. Hence the maximization problems are the same.
                                            n                                  o
Proposition B6 (No Devaluation Costs). If V f lex , VDf lex , q f lex , b̂f lex is a recursive equilibrium under a flex-

                                                           7
ible exchange rate regime from Section 3.2, then it is also a recursive equilibrium in the environment when there
are no devaluation costs Φ(·) = 0.

    Let usnnow focus on the no      o devaluation costs environment. Call the no devaluation costs environment
              f lex     f lex f lex
solutions V         , VD , q̃        , and let us study the one-period devaluation cost shock. The value of default
will transform to
                      n                                                     h                                        io
                                                                                           0              f lex   T0
 ṼD y T = max               T                  T           T                    f lex
                                                                                       
                 T
                       u    c  , F h    − κ   y     − Φ e  c    − e   + β E   ψV       0, s    + (1 − ψ)V D     y
               c
               s.t. cT = y T .

Also, the value of repayment when rollover debt is allowed is
                                      n                                          h               io
                                                                                            0 0
                 ṼR+ b, y T = max         T                     T                   f lex
                                                                     
                                       u c   , F   h    − Φ  e  c    − e   + β E   V       b , s
                               b0 ,cT

                                s.t. cT − q̃ b0 , y T (b0 − (1 − δ)b) = y T − δb.
                                                     


Finally, the value of repayment when new debt contracts are forbidden is
                                 n                                      h                       io
               ṼR− b, y T = max     T                   T                  f lex             0
                                                            
                              T
                                  u c  , F h    − Φ e  c     − e  + β E   V       (1 − δ)b, s
                                 c
                                 s.t. cT = y T − δb.

The following lemmas and propositions follow the same steps stated in the previous section.

Lemma B6. The value functions ṼR+ and ṼR− are decreasing with respect to the debt b.

Lemma B7 (Debt Thresholds). For every level of tradable
                                                      endowment y T ∈ R, there exists levels
                                                                                          of debt that
                   + −
                                                                               
                                            T
                                                  +    + T           T
                                                                             −    − T
currently matures b , b ∈ R, such that ṼD y = ṼR b , y and ṼD y = ṼR b , y . Furthermore,
 +     −
b ≥b .
(To avoid clutter, we omit the dependence of these thresholds on y T , but it should be understood throughout that
the thresholds depend on y T .)

     Now call the regions

        S̃yT (w) ≡ −∞, b̄− (w) ,         C̃yT (w) ≡ b̄− (w) , b̄+ (w) ,     and D̃yT (w) ≡ b̄+ (w) , ∞ .
                                                                                                    


Lemma B8 (Devaluation Costs Ordering). For every level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ and level of debt
b ∈ R, the devaluation and its penalty needed when borrowing is not allowed is at least as high as when rollover
is allowed.

Proof. Because ṼR− is a particular problem of ṼR+ and full employment is achieved in both, it follows that
                   −                                    −
W ĉ+                                                             +
                                                                 
     R , h ≥ W ĉR , h . This implies by (B.1) that e ĉR ≥ e ĉR . Moreover, because of the properties of
the devaluation penalty, Φ−      +
                          R ≥ ΦR .

    The following propositions follow the same steps stated in the paper for Proposition 2, Proposition 3, and
Proposition 4. The wage rigidity thresholds follow the same narrative as in Lemma 7. We use Lemma B8 to
argue that the devaluation incurred in the no borrowing scenario is deeper than the one in which a rollover is
allowed. Using the properties of the devaluation utility cost, a deeper devaluation implies a higher utility loss.


                                                           8
Proposition B7 (Safe Region Threshold). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the
following claims hold:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄− (w2 ) ≤ b̄− (w1 ). Equivalently, SyT (w2 ) ⊆ SyT (w1 ). Moreover, if w2 ∈
        w−                −           −
                
         R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently, Sy T (w 2 ) ⊂ Sy T (w 1 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−                     , then b̄− (w2 ) ≤ b̄− (w1 ). Equivalently,
                                                                         
                                                                   R , ∞
                                                    −
      SyT (w2 ) ⊆ SyT (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wR , wD , then b̄ (w2 ) < b̄− (w1 ). Equivalently, SyT (w2 ) ⊂
                                                                        −
                                                             

      SyT (w1 ).

Proposition B8 (Default Region Threshold). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the
following claims hold:
      f lex,+
If T BR       ≤ 0:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, w+            +           +
                          
                         R , then b̄ (w 1 ) ≤ b̄ (w 2 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 2 ) ⊆ Dy T (w 1 ). Moreover, if w 2 ∈
               +         +          +
                 
        wD , wR , then b̄ (w1 ) < b̄ (w2 ). Equivalently, DyT (w2 ) ⊂ DyT (w1 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ [wD , ∞), then b̄+ (w1 ) ≤ b̄+ (w2 ). Equivalently,
      DyT (w2 ) ⊆ DyT (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wD , w+          +           +
                                                      
                                                     R , then b̄ (w 1 ) < b̄ (w 2 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 2 ) ⊆
      DyT (w1 ).
      f lex,+
If T BR       ≥ 0:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄+ (w2 ) ≤ b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently, DyT (w1 ) ⊆ DyT (w2 ). Moreover, if w2 ∈
        w+                +           +
                
         R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 1 ) ⊂ Dy T (w 2 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w+                    , then b̄+ (w2 ) ≤ b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently,
                                                                        
                                                                    , ∞
                                                    +        R +
      DyT (w1 ) ⊆ DyT (w2 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wR , wD , then b̄ (w2 ) < b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently, DyT (w1 ) ⊂
      DyT (w2 ).

Proposition B9 (Crisis Region Expansion). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the
following claims hold:
                                                                                        −
   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, w+                                                                     +
                                                                                             
                           R , then C̃y T (w 1 ) ⊆ C̃y T (w 2 ). Moreover, if w 2 ∈ w R , w R , then C̃y T (w 1 ) ⊂
      C̃yT (w2 ).
                  f lex,+
                          ≤ 0, F (h) = h, and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−
                                                                                   
  ii) Under T BR
                           − +                                               R , ∞ , then C̃y T (w 1 ) ⊆ C̃y T (w 2 ).
      Moreover, if w1 ∈ wR , wR , then C̃yT (w1 ) ⊂ C̃yT (w2 ).


B.2     Costs from Future Depreciations
In this section, we consider a version of the model in which the costs from depreciating the exchange rate arise
from the expectation of future depreciations, rather than from the current one. We assume that every period,
there is a cost incurred today whenever there is positive expected depreciation. Following the section above,
assume an exogenous long-run level of exchange rate e > 0 and that there is penalty Φ = (Eet+1 − e) ≥
0 associated with an expected exchange rate above this level. We assume the following increasing convex
function as the expected devaluation penalty: Φ (Eet+1 − e) = φ (Eet+1 − e)2 .




                                                          9
    Using the downward nominal wage rigidity constraint, the equilibrium exchange rate policy can be de-
scribed as a function of tradable consumption and labor:
                                                                          
                                            T                    W
                                         e(c , h) = max                  ,e .
                                                              W (cT , h)

In this setup, under a discretionary optimal policy, the government will choose to deliver the devaluation that
is necessary to achieve full employment ex post. This devaluation will be excessive from an ex ante point of
view, in the spirit of Barro and Gordon (1983). A government would like to promise a lower depreciation in
the future, but ex post, the optimal policy is always to achieve full employment by depreciating the exchange
rate. In a Markov equilibrium, the government will take into consideration how its current choices affect future
exchange rate policies because this will affect the current devaluation costs.
    Let us denote the equilibrium devaluation penalty in repayment and default scenarios as
                                                   2                                       2
                                                                    ΦD y T ≡ φ e y T , h − e ,
                                                                                      
                 ΦR (b, s) ≡ φ e ĉ (b, s) , h − e        and

where the equilibrium consumption in repayment is defined as
                                                                                   
                        ĉ (b, s) = y T − δb + q b̂ (b, s) , b, s b̂ (b, s) − (1 − δ)b .

First, the maximization problem of the government between defaulting or repaying debt remains unchanged
as

                                      V (b, s) = max VR (b, s) , VD y T .
                                                                      


Nevertheless, the value of default and repayment will incorporate the costs of devaluating in future periods.
The maximization problem in default can be written as

VD y T = max  u cT , F (h) − κ y T + β E ψ V 0, s0 − ΦR 0, s0 + (1 − ψ) VD y T 0 − ΦD y T 0
                                                                                   
          T  c
           s.t. cT = y T .

Meanwhile the value of repayment can be written as

                                              u cT , F (h) + β E V b0 , s0 − ΦR b0 , s0
                                                                                    
                         VR (b, s) = max
                                      0   T
                                     b ,c

                                    s.t. cT − q b0 , b, s b0 − (1 − δ)b = y T − δb
                                                                        


The value of repayment can be studied as before under two different scenarios: when rollover debt is allowed
and when it is not. Let us start by analyzing the problem when new debt contracts can be issued and hence
rollover debt is allowed. Under this scenario, the bond pricing that satisfies the no-arbitrage condition on the
part of international lenders is applied. Then, the value of repayment when rollover is allowed transforms to

                       VR+ b, y T = max     u cT , F h + β E V b0 , s0 − ΦR b0 , s0
                                                                               
                                     0
                                    b ,c T


                                     s.t. cT − q̃ b0 , y T b0 − (1 − δ)b = y T − δb.
                                                                       


Call b̂+      T the optimal solution that solves the previous problem. As before, call the state space in which
               
       R b, y




                                                        10
it is optimal for the government to increase debt issuances as
                                n                                                   o
                            B ≡ b, y T ∈ R × R+ :           b̂+       T
                                        
                                                              R (b, y   ) > (1 − δ)b  .

As before, the value of repayment when rollover is not allowed can be divided into two cases. When (b, y T ) ∈
                                                                                                             / B,
                                                                                           −             +
the government finds it optimal to reduce debt issuances. In this case, we can say that VR (b, y ) = VR (b, y T )
                                                                                                T

because the government is buying back its debt. Nevertheless, if (b, y T ) ∈ B , then the government wants to
increase its debt issuances. International lenders set the price of debt to zero representing their reluctance to
issue new debt. In this way, the value of repayment when new debt contracts are forbidden can be expressed
as

               VR− b, y T = max   u cT , F h + β E V (1 − δ)b, s0 − ΦR (1 − δ)b, s0
                                                                              
                             T c
                               s.t. cT = y T − δb.

    Table 3 shows how an economy with a flexible exchange rate but which incurs these expected devaluation
costs remains relatively immune to a rollover crisis, as in the baseline model.


                            Table 3: Sensitivity to Expected Devaluation Costs

        Devaluation penalty φ                             Benchmark        0.20     0.40     0.60     0.80
        Average spread                                            2.40     2.01     1.37     1.51    1.43
        Average debt-income                                      29.61    28.52    25.58    26.14   25.04
        Spread volatility                                         1.29     1.11     0.95     1.00    1.09
        Unemployment increase                                     0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00
        Fraction of time in crisis region                          0.80    0.62     0.45     0.46     0.37
        Fraction of defaults due to rollover crisis                0.96    1.28     1.16     0.68     0.92
    Notes: All parameter values correspond to the benchmark calibrations for flexible exchange rate regimes. The
    benchmark calibration uses φ = 0.0; that is, there are no penalties from expected depreciations.




                                                        11
C     Inflation Targeting
In this section, we present a version of the model in which the government adopts an inflation-targeting regime.
The goal is to consider a regime that falls in the middle between a fully flexible exchange rate regime that
achieves full employment at every period and a fixed exchange rate regime that fully stabilizes the nominal
exchange rate. In this intermediate regime, the economy has monetary autonomy, yet inflation-targeting acts
as a monetary policy constraint that limits the ability to achieve full employment.
    In line with the inflation targeting regime, we assume there is a long-run aggregate consumption price
level P > 0. Using the final consumption aggregator, we can construct the final consumption price aggregator
as
                                                                                                            1+µ
                                                    1               µ                 1                µ 
                              T      N                        T                                  N           µ
                                                                  1+µ                               1+µ
                        P P ,P               ≡ ω    1+µ   P               + (1 − ω)   1+µ   P                     .

Hence, the inflation-targeting condition that must be satisfied can be expressed as P P T , P N = P . Define
                                                                                               

the real aggregate price function as
                                                                                      1+µ
                                                                            cT
                                                                  
                                                T
                                                     1
                                             P c ,h ≡                     T
                                                                                             .
                                                      ω               c (c , F (h))

Lemma C9. The inflation-targeting condition yields an exchange rate policy e = P /P cT , h .
                                                                                          

Proof. The real aggregate price function is increasing in the consumption of tradable goods and decreasing
in labor. Furthermore, realize that the final consumption price aggregator with the law of one price and the
optimality conditions from the households and firms can be rewritten as
                                                                                      µ ! 1+µ
                                                                              PN
                                                                                   1+µ   µ
                                               1                     1
                             N
                               
                    P e, P         =e ω       1+µ   + (1 − ω)       1+µ
                                                                              e
                                                                                                        µ
                                                                                                               1+µ
                                                                                                 1+µ ! 1+µ           µ
                                                                                          cT
                                                                                     
                                               1                     1        1−ω
                                   = e ω     1+µ   + (1 − ω)       1+µ                                       
                                                                               ω         F (h)
                                                              1+µ
                                              cT
                                         
                                     e
                                   =
                                     ω  c (cT , F (h))
                                   = eP cT , h .
                                              


Hence, the exchange rate policy follows e = P /P cT , h .
                                                       

    Define the aggregate price real wage function as F cT , h ≡ W cT , h /P cT , h . In this way, the down-
                                                                                   

ward nominal wage rigidity using the exchange rate that follows the inflation-targeting condition transforms
to W ≤ P F cT , h .
                   

Lemma C10. The aggregate price real wage function is increasing in the consumption of tradables and decreasing
in labor.

Proof. Realise that the aggregate price real wage function can be rewritten as
                                                                                            !1+µ
                              W cT , h                                        c cT , F (h)
                                         
                          T
                       F c ,h =            = (1 − ω)                                              F 0 (h).
                                P (cT , h)                                        F (h)


                                                                    12
Taking the partial derivatives for the aggregate price real wage function, we find that
                                                 !1+µ                    !µ 
                                    c cT , F (h)            c cT , F (h)        F 0 (h)
                                                                                         
       ∂F
           = ω(1 − ω)(1 + µ)                                                                >0             and
       ∂cT                              F (h)                      cT            cT
                                         !1+µ          "                                      !µ         #
        ∂F                  c cT , F (h)                  F 00 (h)             c  c  T , F (h)
                                                                                                   F 0 (h)
           = ω(1 − ω)                           F 0 (h)            − (1 + µ)                                 < 0,
        ∂h                     F (h)                      F 0 (h)                      cT          F (h)

because F (·) is concave, and thus F 00 (·) < 0. In other words, the aggregate price real wage function is increas-
ing in the consumption of tradables and decreasing in labor.

   We will first define the government problem and the bond pricing under this new environment. The prob-
lem of the government to either default or repay debt can be described as

                                                              dVD (y T ) + (1 − d)VR (b, s) .
                                                          
                               V (b, s) = max
                                             d∈{0,1}

In this way, the maximization problem in default can be described as

             VD y T = max u cT , F h − κ y T + β E ψV 0, s0 + (1 − ψ)VD y T 0
                                                                       
                          cT ,h≤h

                             s.t. cT = y T
                                W ≤ P F cT , h .
                                              


The value of repayment transforms to

                                                     u cT , F h + β E V b0 , s0
                                                                            
                        VR (b, s) =     max
                                      b0 ,cT ,h≤h

                                             s.t. cT = y T − δb + q b0 , b, s         b0 − (1 − δ)b
                                                                                                  

                                                  W ≤ P F cT , h .
                                                                 


The value of repayment can be studied as before under two different scenarios: when rollover debt is allowed
and when it is not. Let us start by analyzing the problem when new debt contracts can be issued and hence
rollover debt is allowed. Under this scenario, the bond pricing that satisfies the no-arbitrage condition on the
part of international lenders is applied. Then, the value of repayment when rollover is allowed transforms to

                       VR+ b, y T =                       u cT , F (h) + β E V b0 , s0
                                                                                   
                                          max                                                                       (C.1)
                                        b0 ,cT ,h≤h

                                              s.t. cT − q̃ b0 , y Tb0 − (1 − δ)b = y T − δb
                                                                               

                                                     W ≤ P F cT , h .
                                                                   


   Call b̂+      T the optimal solution that solves the previous problem. As before, call the state space in
                  
          R b, y
which it is optimal for the government to increase debt issuances as
                                n                                                o
                            B = b, y T ∈ R∞ × R+ : b̂+             T
                                                                    
                                                            R b, y     > (1 − δ)b .

As before, the value of repayment when rollover is not allowed can be divided into two cases. When b, y T ∈
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                            /
                                                                                                  −    T
                                                                                                         
B , the government finds it optimal to reduce debt issuances. In this case, we can say that VR b, y         =
VR+ b, y T because the government is buying back its debt. Nevertheless, if b, y T ∈ B , then the government
                                                                                 


                                                                  13
wants to increase its debt issuances. International lenders set a price of q̃ = 0, representing their reluctance to
issue new debt. In this way, the value of repayment when new debt contracts are forbidden can be expressed
as

                         VR− b, y T = max u cT , F (h) + β E V (1 − δ)b, s0
                                                                        
                                                                                                              (C.2)
                                         cT ,h≤h

                                            s.t. cT = y T − δb
                                               W ≤ P F cT , h .
                                                             


The following lemma follows the same steps as the one stated before, following the fact that VR− is a particular
case of the VR+ maximization problem.

Lemma C11. For every tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ and debt level b, we have that VR+ b, y T ≥ VR− b, y T .
                                                                                                             


    Now let us define the safe zone, default zone, and repayment zone

                 b, y T ∈ R × R+ :          VD (y T ) ≤ VR− b, y T
                                                                   
             S≡
            D ≡ b, y T ∈ R × R+ :           VD (y T ) > VR+ b, y T
                                                                   

            C ≡ b, y T ∈ R × R+ :           VD (y T ) ≤ VR+ b, y T       and VD (y T ) > VR− b, y T
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                          .

Using these zones, the bond pricing following the no-arbitrage condition can be represented by the following
recursion
                                     1   h                                             i
                    q̃(b0 , y T ) =     E 1 − d(b0 , s0 δ + (1 − δ)q b̂ b0 , s0 , b0 , s0
                                                                               
                                                                                              .
                                    1+r
Finally, using the zones and the multiplicity of equilibria, the overall bond pricing can be described as
                                         
                                                        if b, y T ∈ D
                                                                 
                                         
                                         
                                           0
                            q b0 , b, s = 0
                                       
                                                        if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 1
                                                                 
                                         
                                         q̃(b0 , y T ) in every other case
                                         


and the optimal default decision as
                                            
                                                   if b, y T ∈ D
                                                            
                                            
                                            1
                                            
                                                   if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 0
                                            
                                            0              
                                 d (b, s) =                                .
                                                   if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 1
                                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            1
                                            
                                                   if b, y T ∈ S
                                                            
                                             0
                                            


Now define the real aggregate wagenrigidity as w ≡ W /P     o and let us now focus on the wage rigidity environ-
                                       f lex    f lex f lex
ment w = 0. Call the solutions to it V       , VD , q̃       , and let us study the one-period rigidity shock. The
value of default will transform to
                              n                                h                                     io
          ṼD y T = max u cT , F (h) − κ y T + β E ψV f lex 0, s0 + (1 − ψ)VDf lex y T 0
                                                                           
                      cT ,h≤h

                         s.t. cT = y T
                             w ≤ F(cT , h).


                                                        14
Also, the value of repayment when rollover debt is allowed is
                                            n                   h                io
                       ṼR+ b, y T = max      u cT , F (h) + β E V f lex b0 , s0
                                                          
                                       b0 ,cT ,h≤h

                                             s.t. cT − q̃ b0 , y T (b0 − (1 − δ)b) = y T − δb
                                                                  

                                                 w ≤ F(cT , h).

Finally, the value of repayment when new debt contracts are forbidden is
                                         n                     h                  io
                        ṼR− b, y T = max u cT , F (h) + β E V f lex (1 − δ)b, s0
                                                      
                                      cT ,h≤h

                                         s.t. cT = y T − δb
                                              w ≤ F(cT , h)

The following lemmas and propositions follow the same steps stated in the previous section.

Lemma C12. The value functions ṼR+ and ṼR− are decreasing with respect to the debt b

Lemma C13 (Debt Thresholds). For every level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R, there exists levels of debt that
currently matures b̄+ , b̄− ∈ R, such that ṼD y T = ṼR+ b̄+ , y T and ṼD y T = ṼR− b̄− , y T . Furthermore,
                                                                                                

b̄+ ≥ b̄− .
(To avoid clutter, we omit the dependence of these thresholds on y T , but it should be understood throughout that
the thresholds depend on y T .)

    Now, call the regions

        S̃yT (w) ≡ −∞, b̄− (w) ,       C̃yT (w) ≡ b̄− (w) , b̄+ (w) ,      and D̃yT (w) ≡ b̄+ (w) , ∞ .
                                                                                                   


The following propositions follow the same steps stated in the paper for Proposition 2, Proposition 3, and
Proposition 4. The wage rigidity thresholds follow the same narrative as in Lemma 7.

Proposition C10 (Safe Region Threshold). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the
following claims hold:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄− (w2 ) ≤ b̄− (w1 ). Equivalently, SyT (w2 ) ⊆ SyT (w1 ). Moreover, if w2 ∈
        w−                −           −
                
         R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently, Sy T (w 2 ) ⊂ Sy T (w 1 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−              , ∞ , then b̄− (w2 ) ≤ b̄− (w1 ). Equivalently,
                                                                         
                                                                   R
      SyT (w2 ) ⊆ SyT (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ w−                       −           −
                                                            
                                                      R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently, Sy T (w 2 ) ⊂
      SyT (w1 ).

Proposition C11 (Default Region Threshold). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the
following claims hold:
      f lex,+
If T BR       ≤ 0:

    i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, w+     , then b̄+ (w1 ) ≤ b̄+ (w2 ). Equivalently, DyT (w2 ) ⊆ DyT (w1 ). Moreover, if w2 ∈
                            
                           R
         wD , w+           +           +
                 
                R , then b̄ (w 1 ) < b̄ (w 2 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 2 ) ⊂ Dy T (w 1 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ [wD , ∞), then b̄+ (w1 ) ≤ b̄+ (w2 ). Equivalently,
      DyT (w2 ) ⊆ DyT (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wD , w+          +           +
                                                      
                                                     R , then b̄ (w 1 ) < b̄ (w 2 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 2 ) ⊆
      DyT (w1 ).

                                                         15
      f lex,+
If T BR       ≥ 0:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄+ (w2 ) ≤ b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently, DyT (w1 ) ⊆ DyT (w2 ). Moreover, if w2 ∈
        w+                +           +
                
         R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 1 ) ⊂ Dy T (w 2 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w+             , ∞ , then b̄+ (w2 ) ≤ b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently,
                                                                        
                                                    +        R +
      DyT (w1 ) ⊆ DyT (w2 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wR , wD , then b̄ (w2 ) < b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently, DyT (w1 ) ⊂
      DyT (w2 ).

Proposition C12 (Crisis Region Expansion). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the
following claims hold:
                                                                                              −
   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, w+                                                                            +
                                                                                                    
                                            T (w 1 ) ⊆ C̃y T (w 2 ).                    ∈
                           R  , then   C̃ y                          Moreover, if w 2       w R , w R , then C̃y T (w 1 ) ⊂
      C̃yT (w2 ).
                  f lex,+
                          ≤ 0, F (h) = h, and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−
                                                                                         
  ii) Under T BR                                                                   R  , ∞ , then C̃yT (w1 ) ⊆ C̃yT (w2 ).
      Moreover, if w1 ∈ w−         +
                                    
                             R , w R , then C̃y T (w 1 ) ⊂ C̃y T (w 2 ).




                                                           16
D     Maturity Choice
In this section we expand our baseline model to show that our theoretical results hold when the government
chooses a portfolio of bonds with different maturities.
    Define the set of different debt maturities in the beginning of the period t as bt ≡ {bt,n }∞
                                                                                                n=0 , where bt,n
represents the amount of the government’s debt due n periods ahead. In this sense, when the government has
access to international markets, it chooses a new portfolio of debt with different maturities bt+1 . Then, the
budget constraint of the government in period t can be described as
                                                               ∞
                                                               X
                                    cTt   =   ytT   − bt +           qt,n (bt+1,n−1 − bt,n ) ,
                                                               n=1

where qt,n is the price of the bond in period t that matures n periods ahead.
   We will first define the government problem and the bond pricing under this new environment. The prob-
lem of the government to either default or repay debt can be described as

                                                              dVD (y T ) + (1 − d)VR (b, s) .
                                                          
                               V (b, s) = max
                                               d∈{0,1}

We will assume that if the government defaults, then it will default on all of its portfolios of different debt
maturities. In addition, we will assume that when the government reenters international financial markets,
then its portfolio resets to zero for all of the different debt maturities. In this way, the maximization problem
in default can be described as

              VD y T = max u cT , h − κ y T + β E ψV 0, s0 + (1 − ψ)VD y T 0
                                                                       
                           e,cT ,h≤h

                               s.t. cT = y T
                                    W ≤ eW cT , h ,
                                                 


where 0 is an infinite vector with zeros for all entries. The value of repayment transforms to

                                                        u cT , h + β E V b0 , s0
                                                                              
                      VR (b, s) =         max
                                    e,b0 ,cT ,h≤h
                                                                           ∞
                                                                           X
                                              s.t. cT = y T − b0 +               qn b0 , b, s b0n−1 − bn
                                                                                                        
                                                                           n=1
                                                    W ≤ eW cT , h ,
                                                                 


where qn b0 , b, s is the bond pricing that is contingent not only on the future portfolio of debt maturities b0
                  

but also on the current portfolio of debt maturities b and the sunspot ζ .
    The value of repayment can be studied under two different scenarios: when rollover debt is allowed and
when it is not. Let us start by analyzing the problem when new debt contracts can be issued and hence rollover
debt is allowed. Under this scenario, the bond pricing that satisfies the no-arbitrage condition on the part of
international lenders is applied. As before, call this fundamental bond pricing qn b0 , y T for every single bond
                                                                                           




                                                                  17
with maturity n. Then, the value of repayment when rollover is allowed transforms to

                     VR+ b, y T =                        u cT , h + β E V b0 , s0
                                                                              
                                        max                                                                                      (D.1)
                                     e,b0 ,cT ,h≤h
                                                                               ∞
                                                                               X
                                                     T        T
                                                                                     q̃n b0 , y T       b0n−1 − bn
                                                                                                                    
                                             s.t. c = y − b0 +
                                                                               n=1
                                                                       T
                                                             
                                                 W ≤ eW c , h .

       +
Call b̂R b, y T the optimal solution to new portfolio debt maturities that solve the previous problem. Call the
               

state space in which it is optimal for the government to create new debt contracts that incur in a positive flux
of resources from international lenders as
                                              ∞
                 (                                                                              )
                                              X               T +                     
                         T      ∞                           T                     T
                                                                                   
             B=     b, y ∈ R × R+ :              q̃n b̂ b, y , y      b̂R,n−1 b, y − bn > 0 .
                                                n=1

       T
         
If b, y ∈ B , we can say that the government finds it optimal in that state to overall incur more debt overall
with international lenders. In other words, the government increases its net debt issuances.
    The value of repayment when rollover is not allowed can be divided into two cases. When b, y T ∈
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                           / B , the
government finds it optimal to reduce net debt issuances, changing its portfolio of different debt maturities. In
this case, we can say that VR− b, y T = VR+ b, y T because the international lenders are being repaid instead
                                                   

of being asked for more net debt. Nevertheless, if b, y T ∈ B , then the government wants to increase its
                                                             

net debt issuances. International lenders set a price of q̃n = 0 for all different maturities n, representing their
reluctance to issue new debt. In this way, the value of repayment when new debt contracts of any maturity are
forbidden can be expressed as

                          VR− b, y T = max u cT , h + β E V {bn }∞       0
                                                                       
                                                                 n=1 , s                                                         (D.2)
                                           e,cT ,h≤h

                                                s.t. cT = y T − b0
                                                         W ≤ eW cT , h .
                                                                      


    The following lemma follows the same steps as the one stated before, with the difference that now the
option of choice is not a single debt level but a portfolio of different debt maturities.

Lemma D14. For every tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ and debt portfolio b = {bn }∞      ∞
                                                                             n=0 ∈ R , we have that
VR+ b, y T ≥ VR− b, y T .
                      


   Now, let us define the safe zone, default zone, and repayment zone contingent to the portfolio of different
debt maturities as

               S(b) ≡ y T ∈ R+ :         VD (y T ) ≤ VR− b, y T
                                                                          

               D(b) ≡ y T ∈ R+ :         VD (y T ) > VR+ b, y T
                                                                          

               C(b) ≡ y T ∈ R+ :         VD (y T ) ≤ VR+ b, y T                 and VD (y T ) > VR− b, y T
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                             .

Using these zones, the probability of defaulting for each forward period using the optimal portfolio of different




                                                                  18
debt maturities can be defined as
                                        "Z                                                                                           #
                                                                                                 
             pn (b0 , y T ) ≡ (1 − π)                        pn−1 b̂ b0 , y           T0
                                                                                             , y T 0 dF (b00 , y T 0 )dF (y T 0 |y T )
                                                                                         
                                             S(b0 )∪C(b0 )
                                        "Z                                                                        #
                                                                                         
                                                     pn−1 b̂ b0 , y          T0
                                                                                    , y T 0 dF (y T 0 |y T ) ,
                                                                                
                                 +π
                                                0
                                             S(b )


for every forward period n ∈ N and where p0 = 1. Taking these probabilities, the bond pricing following the
no-arbitrage condition for each maturity structure can be represented by the following recursion:
                                             n
                               0 T         1
                                                  p n b0 , y T ,
                                                              
                         q̃n (b , y ) =                            for every n ∈ N.
                                          1+r

Finally, using the zones and the multiplicity of equilibria, the overall bond pricing can be described as
                                          
                                          0
                                          
                                                         if y T ∈ D (b)
                           qn b0 , b, s = 0
                                       
                                                          if y T ∈ C (b) and ζ = 1
                                          
                                          q̃ (b0 , y T ) in every other case
                                          
                                              n


and the optimal default decision as
                                              
                                              
                                              1              if y T ∈ D (b)
                                              
                                                              if y T ∈ C (b)
                                              
                                              0                                             and ζ = 0
                                   d (b, s) =
                                              
                                              
                                              1              if y T ∈ C (b)                 and ζ = 1
                                              
                                                0                  yT   ∈ S (b)
                                              
                                                              if

    The following proposition follows the same steps as the previous one.
Proposition D13 (Optimal Exchange Rate Policy). Under a flexible exchange rate regime, the government
chooses an exchange rate that delivers full employment in all states

    Let us now focusnon the flexiblenexchange  o∞ rate
                                                    o regime and solve the model. Call the flexible exchange
                         f lex    f lex  f lex
rate regime solutions V        , VD , q̃n            , and let us study the one-period fixed exchange rate regime
                                                n=1
shocks. The value of default will transform to
                              n                                h                                   io
          ṼD y T = max u cT , F (h) − κ y T + β E ψV f lex 0, s0 + (1 − ψ)VDf lex y T 0
                                                                           
                      cT ,h≤h

                         s.t. cT = y T
                             w ≤ W cT , h .
                                         


Also, the value of repayment when rollover debt is allowed is
                                          n                   h                io
                     ṼR+ b, y T = max      u cT , F (h) + β E V f lex b0 , s0
                                                       
                                        b0 ,cT ,h≤h
                                                                                    ∞
                                                                                    X
                                               s.t. cT = y T − b0 +                       q̃nf lex b0 , y T       b0n−1 − bn
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                    n=1
                                                                    T
                                                     w ≤ W(c , h).


                                                                        19
Finally, the value of repayment when new debt contracts of any maturity are forbidden is then
                                          n                    h                      io
                      ṼR− b, y T = max    u cT , F (h) + β E V f lex {bn }∞        0
                                                       
                                                                             n=1 , s
                                      b0 ,cT ,h≤h

                                            s.t. cT = y T − b0
                                                w ≤ W(cT , h).

For convenience, define the portfolio of current, not yet matured debt as b−0 = {bn }∞
                                                                                     n=1 . The following lemmas
and propositions follow the same steps stated in the previous section, with the difference that besides fixing
a tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ , we also fix a portfolio of current, not yet matured debt b−0 ∈ R∞ . The
important level of debt to study is the current debt matured in the period b0 ∈ R. We focus on this amount of
debt and define the regions studied before.

Lemma D15. The value functions ṼR+ and ṼR− are decreasing with respect to debt that currently matures b0

Lemma D16 (Debt Thresholds). For every level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R and portfolio of current, not
                                                                                        −
yet matured debt b−0 ∈ R∞ , there exists levels of debt that currently mature b̄+                              T =
                                                                                                                
                                                                                  0 , b̄0 ∈ R, such that ṼD y
ṼR+ b̄+            T and Ṽ     T = Ṽ −     b̄−           T . Furthermore, b̄+ ≥ b̄− .
                                                         
        0 , b−0 , y          D y        R       0 , b−0 , y                    0      0
(To avoid clutter, we omit the dependence of these thresholds on y T , but it should be understood throughout that
the thresholds depend on y T .)

    Now call the regions in the space of the debt maturing in the current period as
    b                                   b                                                 b
  S̃yT−0 (w) ≡ −∞, b̄−                C̃yT−0 (w) ≡ b̄−         +
                                                                                                  ≡ b̄+
                                                                                                             
                     0 (w) ,                         0 (w) , b̄0 (w) ,          and     D̃y−0
                                                                                            T (w)     0 (w) , ∞ .

The following propositions follow the same steps stated in the paper for Proposition 2, Proposition 3, and
Proposition 4 by adding a given arbitrary distribution of debt not maturing in the current period b−0 . The
wage rigidity thresholds follow the same narrative as in Lemma 7.

Proposition D14 (Safe Region Threshold). For every y T , b−0 ; and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 ,
the following claims hold:
                                                                            b              b
   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄−              −                         −0               −0
                                     0 (w 2 ) ≤ b̄0 (w 1 ). Equivalently, Sy T (w 2 ) ⊆ Sy T (w 1 ). Moreover, if w 2 ∈
                                                                b−0             b−0
        w−                −            −
                
         R , w D , then b̄0 (w 2 ) < b̄0 (w 1 ). Equivalently, Sy T (w 2 ) ⊂ Sy T (w 1 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−               , ∞ , then b̄−               −
                                                                          
                                                                    R                0 (w 2 ) ≤ b̄0 (w 1 ). Equivalently,
        b−0           b−0                                                                                      b−0
      SyT (w2 ) ⊆ SyT (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wR , wD , then b̄−
                                                       −                            −
                                                                         0 (w 2 ) < b̄0 (w 1 ). Equivalently, Sy T (w 2 ) ⊂
        b
      SyT−0 (w1 ).

Proposition D15 (Default Region Threshold). For every y T , b−0 ; and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 ,
the following claims hold:
      f lex,+
If T BR       ≤ 0:
                                                                                b−0             b−0
    i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, w+              +              +
                           
                           R , then b̄0 (w 1 ) ≤ b̄0 (w 2 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 2 ) ⊆ Dy T (w 1 ). Moreover, if
                                                                      b−0           b−0
        w2 ∈ wD , w+            +            +
                       
                     R , then b̄0 (w 1 ) < b̄0 (w 2 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 2 ) ⊂ Dy T (w 1 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ [wD , ∞), then b̄+                        +
                                                                                0 (w 1 ) ≤ b̄0 (w 2 ). Equivalently,
       b             b−0                                                                                    b−0
                                                     wD , w+          +            +
                                                            
      Dy−0
         T (w 2 ) ⊆ Dy T (w 1 ). Moreover, if w 1 ∈        R , then b̄0 (w 1 ) < b̄0 (w 2 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 2 ) ⊆
        b
      Dy−0
        T (w 1 ).




                                                           20
      f lex,+
If T BR       ≥ 0:
                                                                          b              b
   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄+             +                         −0            −0
                                    0 (w 2 ) ≤ b̄0 (w 1 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 1 ) ⊆ Dy T (w 2 ). Moreover, if w 2 ∈
                                                                b−0            b−0
        w+                +            +
                
         R , w D , then b̄0 (w 2 ) < b̄0 (w 1 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 1 ) ⊂ Dy T (w 2 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w+             , ∞ , then b̄+              +
                                                                       
                                                                  R               0 (w 2 ) ≤ b̄0 (w 1 ). Equivalently,
       b             b−0                                                                                     b−0
                                                     w+                +            +
                                                            
      Dy−0
         T (w 1 ) ⊆ Dy T (w 2 ). Moreover, if w 1 ∈   R , w D , then b̄0 (w 2 ) < b̄0 (w 1 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 1 ) ⊂
         b
       Dy−0
         T (w 2 ).



Proposition D16 (Crisis Region Expansion). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the
following claims hold:
                                  b−0            b−0                              −                b−0
   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, w+                                                                +
                                                                                        
                       R , then C̃y T (w 1 ) ⊆ C̃y T (w 2 ). Moreover, if w 2 ∈ w R , w R , then C̃y T (w 1 ) ⊂
         b
       C̃yT−0 (w2 ).

                f lex,+                                                                b−0            b−0
                        ≤ 0, F (h) = h, and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−
                                                                            
  ii) Under T BR                                                        R , ∞ , then C̃y T (w 1 ) ⊆ C̃y T (w 2 ).
                          − +           b             b
      Moreover, if w1 ∈ wR , wR , then C̃yT−0 (w1 ) ⊂ C̃yT−0 (w2 ).




                                                         21
E     Elastic Labor Supply
In this section, we expand the baseline model to allow for an elastic supply of labor. While the amount of hours
will continue to be demand determined when wage rigidity is binding, the amount of hours will not be fixed at
w̄ when wage rigidity is slack because households will adjust their labor supply. In this setup, the household
problem is to solve
                                      ( "∞                       #)
                                            X
                                max
                                 N T
                                        E0      β t U (ct , ht )
                                ht ,ct ,ct
                                                        t=0
                                     s.t.    PtT cTt
                                                  + PtN cN      T T
                                                         t = Pt yt + Wt ht + φt + Tt
                                                       −µ              −µ − µ1
                                             ct = ω cTt     + (1 − ω) cN
                                                                       t           .

The first-order conditions are
              1+µ                                                       1+µ
                ct                                                    ct
           ω T          Uc (t) = λt PtT                (1 − ω)                    Uc (t) = λt PtN             − Uh (t) = λt Wt .
               ct                                                     cN
                                                                       t

Let us drop the time subscript and define the real wages and nontradable prices as w = W/P T and pN =
P N /P T . Joining the first-order conditions, we have
                                     1+µ                                                                          1+µ
                                cT                                                                            cN
                                                                                                       
                     1−ω                                                    w     1               −Uh
                                               = pN               &            =
                      ω         cN                                          pN   1−ω               Uc          c

Recall the first-order condition of the firm and the market clearing of non-tradable goods pN F 0 (h) = w and
cN = F (h), respectively. Hence,
                                                                                           1+µ
                                                              0             Uc          c
                                      1 = (1 − ω)F (h)                                               .
                                                                           −Uh        F (h)

Assumption E1. The production function and utility functions can be described respectively as

                                                                                      c1−σ    h1+ν
                             F (h) = hα                 and            U (c, h) =          −χ      .
                                                                                      1−σ     1+ν

    It will be useful to establish the following lemma, which is analogous to Lemma 1 in the main text.

Lemma E17. Under a flexible exchange rate regime, the real wage function is increasing with respect to the
                                                                                                  dh
consumption of tradables, and optimal labor supply is increasing in the consumption of tradables, dc T > 0 and
∂W
∂cT > 0 , respectively.

Proof. Define the function F(cT , h) from joining the first-order conditions from the households and firms as

                                                                           −µ                ! 1+µ−σ
                                                                      cT
                                                                                                   −µ
                                                                  
                       T             α(1−σ)−(1+ν)                                                                χ
                   F(c , h) ≡ h                               ω                  + (1 − ω)               =             .
                                                                      hα                                      α(1 − ω)




                                                                       22
Therefore,
                                                                                                                      
             dh    ∂F/∂cT   h                        1+µ
               T
                 =        = T                                                                                         .
             dc    −∂F/∂h  c                                                                        1−ω        cT µ
                                                                                                                 
                                α(1 + µ) + ((1 + ν) − α(1 − σ)) 1 +                                  ω         hα


In other words,

                           cT dh                          1+µ
                                  =                                                                           .
                            h dcT
                                                                   
                                                                                        1−ω         cT µ
                                                                                                      
                                    α(1 + µ) + ((1 + ν) − α(1 − σ)) 1 +                  ω          hα

          1−ω       cT µ
                      
Because    ω        hα      > 0, then

                           0 < α(σ + µ) + (1 + ν)
                             = α(1 + µ) + (1 + ν) − α(1 − σ)
                                                                                                      µ 
                                                                                                 cT
                                                                                          
                                                                                      1−ω
                             < α(1 + µ) + ((1 + ν) − α(1 − σ)) 1 +                                             .
                                                                                       ω         hα
                dh
In other words, dc T > 0.


    Now, also realize that
                                                                 1+µ                              1+µ
                                                          cT                                    cT
                                                                                          
                                     T   1−ω                             0            1−ω
                            W(c , h) = α                                F (h) =                         .
                                          ω              F (h)                         ω        h1+αµ

So,

                                                                  cT          1 + αµ cT dh
                                                                                     
                            ∂W    α(1 + µ)           1−ω
                                =                                        1−                   .
                            ∂cT      h                ω           hα           1+µ    h dcT

Therefore,

                                     cT dh
                                
                        1 + αµ                                          1 + αµ
             1−                           T
                                            =1−                                              cT  µ 
                         1+µ          h dc        α(1 + µ) + ((1 + ν) − α(1 − σ)) 1 + 1−ω ω      hα
                                                                             cT µ
                                                                                    
                                              ((1 + ν) − α(1 − σ)) 1 + 1−ω ω     hα     − (1 − α)
                                            =                                            cT  µ  .
                                              α(1 + µ) + ((1 + ν) − α(1 − σ)) 1 + 1−ω ω     hα


          1−ω
                  cT µ
Because    ω         hα     > 0, then

                            0 < ασ + ν
                                 = σ + ν − (1 − α)σ
                                 = σ + ν + (1 − α)(1 − σ) − (1 − α)
                                 = ((1 + ν) − α(1 − σ)) − (1 − α)
                                                                   T µ 
                                                               1−ω    c
                                 < ((1 + ν) − α(1 − σ)) 1 +                   − (1 − α).
                                                                 ω    hα
                    ∂W
In other words,     ∂cT   > 0.

                                                                  23
    Finally, we can conclude that when downward nominal wage rigidity is not binding, then the real wage
function is increasing with respect to the consumption of tradables, and optimal labor is increasing in the
consumption of tradables.

    To ease the formulation, define the equilibrium labor function in terms of the consumption of tradables as
ĥ cT , which satisfies the following first-order condition:
     

                                                                                                     !µ !            !
                                                                                            cT              ĥ0 cT
                                                                                  
                          ((1 + ν) − α(1 − σ))                                 1−ω
              1=       α+                                             1+                                                  cT .
                                 1+µ                                            ω        ĥ (cT )α          ĥ (cT )

Acknowledge that from Lemma E17, we know that this function satisfies ĥ0 (·) > 0.
   Now, we will define the government problem and the bond pricing under this new environment. The
problem of the government to either default or repay debt can be described as

                                                                  dVD (y T ) + (1 − d)VR (b, s) .
                                                              
                                   V (b, s) = max
                                                   d∈{0,1}

In this way, the maximization problem in default can be described as

           VD y T =                            u cT , F (h) − κ y T + β E ψV 0, s0 + (1 − ψ)VD y T 0
                                                                                               
                             max
                         e,cT ,h≤ĥ(cT )

                                   s.t. cT = y T
                                        W ≤ eW(cT , h).

The value of repayment transforms to

                                                              u cT , F (h) + β E V b0 , s0
                                                                                        
                        VR (b, s) =             max
                                       e,b0 ,cT ,h≤ĥ(cT )

                                                      s.t. cT = y T − δb + q b0 , b, s            b0 − (1 − δ)b
                                                                                                              

                                                             W ≤ eW(cT , h).

    The value of repayment can be studied as before under two different scenarios: when rollover debt is
allowed and when it is not. Let us start by analyzing the problem when new debt contracts can be issued and
hence rollover debt is allowed. Under this scenario, the bond pricing that satisfies the no-arbitrage condition on
the part of international lenders is applied. Then, the value of repayment when rollover is allowed transforms
to

                       VR+ b, y T =                                  u cT , F (h) + β E V b0 , s0
                                                                                              
                                                 max                                                                             (E.1)
                                           e,b0 ,cT ,h≤ĥ(cT )

                                                        s.t. cT − q̃ b0 , y T        b0 − (1 − δ)b = y T − δb
                                                                                                 

                                                              W ≤ eW(cT , h).

    Call b̂+      T the optimal solution to the previous problem. As before, call the state space in which it is
                   
           R b, y
optimal for the government to increase debt issuances as
                                 n                                              o
                            B = b, y T ∈ R × R+ : b̂+             T
                                                                   
                                                           R b, y     > (1 − δ)b .

As before, the value of repayment when rollover is not allowed can be divided into two cases. When b, y T ∈
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                           /

                                                                         24
B , the government finds it optimal to reduce debt issuances. In this case, we can say that VR− b, y T =
                                                                                                              

VR+ b, y T because the government is buying back its debt. Nevertheless, if b, y T ∈ B , then the government
                                                                                     

wants to increase its debt issuances. International lenders set a price of q̃ = 0, representing their reluctance to
issue new debt. In this way, the value of repayment when new debt contracts are forbidden can be expressed
as

                      VR− b, y T =                       u cT , F (h) + β E V (1 − δ)b, s0
                                                                                       
                                          max                                                                  (E.2)
                                      e,cT ,h≤ĥ(cT )

                                                s.t. cT = y T − δb
                                                        W ≤ eW(cT , h).

    The following lemma follows the same steps as the one stated before, following the fact that VR− is a
particular case of the VR+ maximization problem.

Lemma E18. For every tradable endowment y T ∈ R+ and debt level b, we have that VR+ b, y T ≥ VR− b, y T .
                                                                                                      


    Now, let us define the safe zone, default zone, and repayment zone as

                 b, y T ∈ R × R+ :           VD (y T ) ≤ VR− b, y T
                                                                    
             S≡
            D ≡ b, y T ∈ R × R+ :            VD (y T ) > VR+ b, y T
                                                                    

            C ≡ b, y T ∈ R × R+ :            VD (y T ) ≤ VR+ b, y T       and VD (y T ) > VR− b, y T
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                           .

Using these zones, the bond pricing following the no-arbitrage condition can be represented with the following
recursion
                                     1   h                                             i
                    q̃(b0 , y T ) =     E 1 − d(b0 , s0 δ + (1 − δ)q b̂ b0 , s0 , b0 , s0
                                                                               
                                                                                              .
                                    1+r
Finally, using the zones and the multiplicity of equilibria, the overall bond pricing can be described as
                                         
                                                        if b, y T ∈ D
                                                                 
                                         
                                         
                                           0
                            q b0 , b, s = 0
                                       
                                                        if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 1
                                                                 
                                         
                                         q̃(b0 , y T ) in every other case
                                         


and the optimal default decision as
                                            
                                                        if b, y T ∈ D
                                                                 
                                            
                                            1
                                            
                                                        if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 0
                                            
                                            0                   
                                 d (b, s) =                                     .
                                                        if b, y T ∈ C and ζ = 1
                                                                 
                                            
                                            
                                            1
                                            
                                                        if b, y T ∈ S
                                                                 
                                             0
                                            


    Let us now focus
                 n on the flexible exchange
                                         o        rate regime and solve the model. Call the flexible exchange rate
                    f lex    f lex f lex
regime solutions V        , VD , q̃        and let us study the one-period fixed exchange rate regime shocks. The




                                                             25
value of default will transform to
                               n                           h                                      io
        ṼD y T = max            u cT , F (h) − κ y T + β E ψV f lex 0, s0 + (1 − ψ)VDf lex y T 0
                                                                       
                    cT ,h≤ĥ(cT )

                            s.t. cT = y T
                                w ≤ W(cT , h).

Also, the value of repayment when rollover debt is allowed
                                              n                   h                io
                      ṼR+ b, y T =             u cT , F (h) + β E V f lex b0 , s0
                                                           
                                      max
                                      b0 ,cT ,h≤ĥ(cT )

                                                 s.t. cT − q̃ b0 , y T (b0 − (1 − δ)b) = y T − δb
                                                                      

                                                      w ≤ W(cT , h).

Finally, the value of repayment when new debt contracts are forbidden is
                                           n                     h                  io
                      ṼR− b, y T = max     u cT , F (h) + β E V f lex (1 − δ)b, s0
                                                        
                                     cT ,h≤ĥ(cT )

                                             s.t. cT = y T − δb
                                                  w ≤ W(cT , h).

The following lemmas and propositions follow the same steps stated in the previous section.
Lemma E19. The value functions ṼR+ and ṼR− are decreasing with respect to the debt b
Lemma E20 (Debt Thresholds). For every level of tradable endowment y T ∈ R, there exists levels of debt that
currently matures b̄+ , b̄− ∈ R, such that ṼD y T = ṼR+ b̄+ , y T and ṼD y T = ṼR− b̄− , y T . Furthermore,
                                                                                                

b̄+ ≥ b̄− .
(To avoid clutter, we omit the dependence of these thresholds on y T , but it should be understood throughout that
the thresholds depend on y T .)

    Now, call the regions

        S̃yT (w) ≡ −∞, b̄− (w) ,        C̃yT (w) ≡ b̄− (w) , b̄+ (w) ,       and D̃yT (w) ≡ b̄+ (w) , ∞ .
                                                                                                     


The following propositions follow the same steps stated in the paper for Proposition 2, Proposition 3, and
Proposition 4. The wage rigidity thresholds follow the same narrative as in Lemma 7.
Proposition E17 (Safe Region Threshold). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the
following claims hold:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄− (w2 ) ≤ b̄− (w1 ). Equivalently, SyT (w2 ) ⊆ SyT (w1 ). Moreover, if w2 ∈
        w−                −           −
                
         R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently, Sy T (w 2 ) ⊂ Sy T (w 1 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−              , ∞ , then b̄− (w2 ) ≤ b̄− (w1 ). Equivalently,
                                                                         
                                                                   R
      SyT (w2 ) ⊆ SyT (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ w−                       −           −
                                                            
                                                      R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently, Sy T (w 2 ) ⊂
      SyT (w1 ).
Proposition E18 (Default Region Threshold). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the
following claims hold:
      f lex,+
If T BR       ≤ 0:

                                                           26
   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, w+            +           +
                          
                         R , then b̄ (w 1 ) ≤ b̄ (w 2 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 2 ) ⊆ Dy T (w 1 ). Moreover, if w 2 ∈
               +         +          +
                 
        wD , wR , then b̄ (w1 ) < b̄ (w2 ). Equivalently, DyT (w2 ) ⊂ DyT (w1 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ [wD , ∞), then b̄+ (w1 ) ≤ b̄+ (w2 ). Equivalently,
      DyT (w2 ) ⊆ DyT (w1 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wD , w+          +           +
                                                      
                                                     R , then b̄ (w 1 ) < b̄ (w 2 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 2 ) ⊆
      DyT (w1 ).
      f lex,+
If T BR       ≥ 0:

   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ [0, wD ], then b̄+ (w2 ) ≤ b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently, DyT (w1 ) ⊆ DyT (w2 ). Moreover, if w2 ∈
        w+                +           +
                
         R , w D , then b̄ (w 2 ) < b̄ (w 1 ). Equivalently, Dy T (w 1 ) ⊂ Dy T (w 2 ).

  ii) Under F (h) = h and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w+                    , then b̄+ (w2 ) ≤ b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently,
                                                                        
                                                                    , ∞
                                                    +        R +
      DyT (w1 ) ⊆ DyT (w2 ). Moreover, if w1 ∈ wR , wD , then b̄ (w2 ) < b̄+ (w1 ). Equivalently, DyT (w1 ) ⊂
      DyT (w2 ).

Proposition E19 (Crisis Region Expansion). For every y T and taking arbitrary wage rigidities w1 < w2 , the
following claims hold:
                                                                                        −
   i) If w1 , w2 ∈ 0, w+                                                                     +
                                                                                             
                           R , then C̃y T (w 1 ) ⊆ C̃y T (w 2 ). Moreover, if w 2 ∈ w R , w R , then C̃y T (w 1 ) ⊂
      C̃yT (w2 ).
                  f lex,+
                          ≤ 0, F (h) = h, and u(c) = ln(c); if w1 , w2 ∈ w−
                                                                                   
  ii) Under T BR
                           − +                                               R , ∞ , then C̃y T (w 1 ) ⊆ C̃y T (w 2 ).
      Moreover, if w1 ∈ wR , wR , then C̃yT (w1 ) ⊂ C̃yT (w2 ).




                                                          27
F     Nominal Debt
In this section, we start from the simplified version of the model from Section 3.5.1 that has deterministic
income, βR = 1, permanent exclusion after default and one-period debt. In addition, we consider a cost from
depreciating the currency as in section B. The resource constraint for tradables is given by

                                                             b    b0
                                                cT = y T −     +q                                          (F.1)
                                                             e    e

    Notice in this equation how an increase in e reduces real payments to foreigners and increase tradable
consumption.
    Denote E(b) the optimal exchange rate as a function of the level of debt e0 = E(b0 ) . From investors’ side,
notice that arbitrage implies that the fundamental bond price must satisfy
                                                                  e
                                               q(b0 )(1 + r) =          .
                                                                 E(b0 )

If investors are pessimistic, the value of repayment for the government is
                                                               
                       −                       b            b W
                      VR (b) = max         T
                                       u y − ,H y − ,  T
                                                                    − ψ(e/ē) + βVR+ (0).                  (F.2)
                                  e,b0         e            e e

The value of default is
                                              u(y T , H y T , We ) − κ − ψ(e/ē)
                                                                
                                    D
                                V       = max                                                              (F.3)
                                           e                 1−β
Inspecting (F.2), one can observe how the increase in e not only raises employment through the reduction in
the real wage rigidity constraint but also through the increase in tradable consumption (by effectively reducing
debt repayment to foreigners). The effect of a devaluation is therefore stronger under repayment than under
default, and hence contribute to reduce the vulnerability to a debt crisis.




                                                        28
