NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CREDIT, MONEY, AND AGGREGATE DEMAND

Ben S. Bernanke

Alan S. Blinder

Working Paper No. 2534

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1988

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2534
March 1988

Credit,

Money, and Aggregate Demand

ABSTRACT

Standard models of aggregate demand treat money and credit
asymmetrically; money is given a special status, while loans,
bonds, and other debt instruments are lumped together in a "bond market"
and suppressed by Walras' Law. This makes bank liabilities central to
the monetary transmission mechanism, while giving no role to bank assets.
We show how to modify a textbook IS-UI model so as to permit a more
balanced treatment. As in Tobin (1969) and Brunner-Meltzer (1972), the
key assumption is that loans and bonds are imperfect substitutes. In the
modified model, credit supply and demand shocks have independent effects
on aggregate demand; the nature of the monetary transmission mechanism is
also somewhat different. The main policy implication is that the
relative value of money and credit as policy indicators depends on the
variances of shocks to money and credit demand. We present some evidence
that money-demand shocks have become more important relative to
credit-demand shocks during the 1980s.

Ben Bernanke
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

Alan Blinder
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

Whether or not they use the name, most macroeconomists use something
like IS/LM to organize their thinking about how various events affect

aggregate demand. No one boasts about the microfoundations of this simple
model, no one Interprets it literally, and no one thinks It directly suitable
for econometric estimation. But its utility for telling simple yet coherent
stories about the transmission of monetary, fiscal, and other shocks is
evident. Furthermore, IS/LN analysis often does seem to describe what happens
to the economy, at least In a rough way.

Of course, any simple model may sometimes be too simple. A case in
point is the IS/LM model's asyninetric treatment of money and credit. The LM
curve treats money as a special asset while assuming that all debt
instruments can be lumped together in a "bond market,N which Is conveniently

suppressed by Wairas' Law. This approach makes bank liabilities central to
the monetary transmission mechanism, while giving no role to bank assets.

There are both theoretical and empirical reasons to question this
asyninetric treatment. A growing theoretical literature stresses the

importance of intermediaries In the provision of credit. According to this
alternative view, banks and other credit-granting institutions specialize in
gathering Information and monitoring the performance of borrowers In ways
that elude the anonymous auction market. Because they can finance activities
that cannot be financed in the bond market, loans by banks and other
Intermediaries acquire a special status. If financial Intermediation Is
reduced, either by rationing or by price, aggregate supply and demand may be

affected.1 Empirically, the well—documented instability of econometric
money-demand equations, itself probably a product of deregulation and
innovation by financial intermediaries, has reduced the utility of money as a

1

measure of and guide to central bank policy. Finally, a series of papers by
Benjamin Friedman has argued that a particular measure of credit correlates

with nominal GNP as well -—

or

as badly -- as money does. All of this

suggests that the traditional focus on money may be inappropriate.
However, credit will not mount a serious challenge to money as a
transmission mechanism until we have a simple macro model

that does for the

"credit view" what IS/LM does for the prevailing "money-only"

view, that Is,

provides a framework for thinking through how various shocks affect the
economy. We have developed several such models, of varying complexity, In our

research to date, but discuss only the demand side of the simplest one here.
Though It has a simple graphical representation like IS/IM, the model permits
us to pose a richer array of questions than the traditional money-only
framework.

I. The Model
The LM curve Is a portfolio—balance condition for a two—asset world:
asset—holders choose between money and bonds. Tacitly,

loans and other forms

of customer-market credit are viewed as perfect substitutes for
auction-market credit ("bonds"), and financial markets clear only by price.
Models with a distinct role for credit arise when either of these assumptions
is abandoned.

Credit rationing may or may not be important empirically;

but it Is not

necessary to rationalize a credit channel for monetary transmission and is

not considered further here.2 We base our model Instead on the notion that
customer- and auction—market credit are imperfect substitutes
Informational

problems, differences

because of

in liquidity, or the high transactions

costs of raising funds in the open market. (One factor does not preclude the

2

others.) In some cases, there may be no substitute for customer-market
credit. But to minimize the departure from IS/IN, we deal with the

Intermediate case of Imperfect substitutability. In this regard, we follow
in the tradition of Tobin (1969) and Brunner and Meltzer (1972).

Our model has three assets: money, bonds, and loans. Only the loan
market needs explanation. We assume that both borrowers and lenders choose
between bonds and loans according to the Interest rates on the two credit
instruments. If p is the interest rate on loans and i Is the interest rate on

bonds, then loan demand is: Ld —

L(p,
-

captures

1, y) .
4+

The dependence on GNP (y)

the transactions demand for credit, which might arise, for example,

from working capital or liquidity considerations.3
To understand the genesis of loan supply, consider the following
simplified bank balance sheet (which Ignores net worth):

assets

liabilities

deposIts, 0

reserves, R
bonds, B°
loans, IS

Since reserves consist of required reserves tO, plus excess reserves, E, the

+ E — O(1—r).

banks' adding-up constraint is: Bb +

Assuming that desired

portfolio proportions depend on rates of return on the available assets (zero
for excess reserves), we have:

—

with

A(p,
+

1)D(1—r),

-

similar equations for the shares of Bb and E. Thus the condition for

clearing the loan market is:
(1) L(p, i, y) —

A(p,

i)D(1—t).

The money market is described by a conventional IN curve. Suppose banks
hold excess reserves equal to e(i)O(1-t).4 Then the supply of deposits (we
ignore cash) is equal to bank reserves, R, times the money multiplier, m(1) —

3

+ r)r1.

The demand for deposits arises from the transactions

motive and depends on the interest rate, income, and total wealth, which Is

constant and therefore suppressed: O(1,y). Equating the two gives:

(2) D(l,y) —

Implicitly,

m(i)R.
+

D(f,y) and L(p, 1, y) define the nonbank public's demand function

for bonds since money demand

plus

bond demand minus loan demand must equal

total financial wealth.
The remaining market Is the goods market, which we suninarize in a

conventional IS curve, written generically as:5

(3) y • Y(1, p)

II. Graphical Representation
Use (2) to replace D(1-w) on the righthand side of (1) by (1-r)m(1)R.

Then (1) can be solved for p as a function of 1, y, and R:6
(4) p

— •(i,
+

Finally,

y, R)

+-

substitute (4) Into (3) to get:
(5) y —

Y(1, •(f, y, R)),

which, In deference to Don Patinkin (1956), we call the CC curve (for
'coninodIt1es and creditTM). It is easy to see that the CC curve is negatively

sloped like an IS curve, and for much the same reasons. However, it Is
shifted by monetary policy (R) and by credit-market shocks that affect either
the L(.) or x(.)

functions,

while the IS curve is not. The CC and LN curves

are shown together in Figure 1.

Our CC curve

reduces to the IS

curve if loans and bonds are assumed to

be perfect substitutes either to borrowers (Lp-—*) or to lenders (Ap-...), or

4

C

L

M

C

y

if commodity demand

is

insensitive to the loan rate (Yp—O) --

which would

make the loan market irrelevant to IS/1.M.7 This clarifies the special
'assumptions implicit in the money-only view.

The opposite extreme, or Hcredjt_onlyN view, would arise if money and

bonds were perfect substitutes (°i-'—) which would make the LM curve
horizontal. Keynes' explanation for the liquidity trap is, of course, well
known. We think of high substitutability as more likely to arise from
financial innovations which create new money substitutes. However, even with

a liquidity trap, monetary policy still matters because It influences the CC
curve.

Now

let

us turn to the intermediate cases represented by Figure 1.

III. Comparative Statics8
Most conventional shocks work in our model just as they do in IS/LM. For
example, an expenditure shock shifts the CC curve along a fixed LM curve, and

a money-demand shock shifts the LM curve along a fixed

are familiar and

that

need not be

CC curve. The effects

discussed. The only noteworthy difference is

a rise In bank reserves might conceivably raise the rate of Interest In

the credit model.9 Graphically, the autigulty arises because an Increase in R
shifts both the CC and U4 curves outward. Economically, the credit channel
makes monetary policy more expansionary than In IS/LM and

the transactions deaand for money by more

Greater Interest attaches

to

upward shift in the credit supply

than

In

the

therefore raises

conventional model.

issues that elude the IS/IN model. An

function, x(.) (which might correspond, for

example, to a decrease in the perceived riskiness of loans) shifts the CC
curve outward along a fixed LM curve, thereby raising I and y. The

Interest

rate on loans, p, falls, however. An upward shift In the credit demand

5

function, L(.),whlch might correspond to a greater need for working capital,
has precisely the opposite effects.

We find It difficult to think of or identify major shocks to credit
demand, that is, sharp increases or decreases in the demand

for

loans at

given interest rates and GNP. But shocks to credit supply are easy to
conceptualize and to find in actual history. For example, Bernanke's (1983)
explanation for the length of the Great Depression can be thought of as a
downward shock to credit supply stemeing from the increased riskiness of

loans and banks concern for liquidity In the face of possible runs.
According to the model, such a shock should reduce credit, GNP, and the
interest rate on government bonds while raising the interest rate on loans.

Another notable example with the same predicted effects is the credit
controls of March—July 1980. In this instance Ntight moneys should, and
apparently did, reduce Interest rates on government bonds.

IV. Implications for Monetary Policy
We turn next to the traditional target and Indicator issues of monetary

policy. The so—called monetary indicator problem arises If the central bank
sees its Impact on aggregate demand

financial-sector

only with a lag but sees its impacts on

variables like interest rates, money, and credit more

promptly. What does our model say about the suitability of money or credit As
indicators?

Table 1 shows the qualitative responses of GNP, money, credit, and bond
interest rates to a wide variety of shocks, assuming that bank reserves is
the policy instrument.10 Columns (1) and (2) display a conclusion familiar
from IS/LM: money is a good qualitative indicator of future GNP movements
except when money demand shocks are empirically important. Columns (1) and

6

Table 1
Effects of Shocks on Observable Variables

(1)
Tvii-rim

(2)

Money

(3)
Credit

(4)

Interest
Rate (on bonds'

1.

Rise In bank reserves

+

+

+

-

2.

Rise in money demand

-

+

-

+

3.

Rise In

credit supply

+

+

+

+

4.

RIse in credit demand

-

-

+

-

5.

Rise in coiiinodity demand

+

+

+

+

(3) offer the càrresponding conclusion for credit: credit Is a good

qualitative
demand.

indicator except when there are

As we just indicated, money demand

important
shocks

shocks to credit

appear to have been very

Important in the 1980s while it is hard to think of major credit demand

shocks. If this empirical judgment Is correct, credit may be a better
indicator than money.
What about the target question, i.e., about the choice between

stabilizing

money versus stabilizing credit? Rather than try to conduct a

complete Poole (1970) style analysis, we simply ask whether pollcymakers
would respond NcorrectlyN (i.e.,

In

a stabilizing way) to various shocks if

they were targeting money or targeting credit.
Consider first an expansionary IS shock. Table 1 (row 5) shows that bot
money and credit would rise If bank reserves were unchanged. Hence a central
bank trying to stabilize either money or credit would contract bank reserves
which Is the correct stabilizing response. Either policy works, at least

qualitatively. A similar analysis applies to shocks to the supply of credit
or to the money *iltiplier.
But suppose the demand for money increases (row 2), which sends a
contractionary Impulse to GNP. Since this shock raises N, a monetarist
central bank would contract reserves in an effort to stabilize money, which
would destabilize GNP. This, of course, is the familiar Achilles heel of

monetarism. Notice, however, that this same shock would make credit contraC
So a central bank trying to stabilize credit would expand reserves. In this

case, a credit—based policy is superior to a money-based
The opposite is true, however, when

4

there are

policy

credit demand

shocks. Ro

tells us that a contractionary (for Gt4P) credit demand shock lowers

the

money supply but raises credit. Hence a monetarist central bank would turn

7

expansionary, as it should, while a creditist central bank would turn
contractionary, which it should not.
We therefore reach a conclusion similar to that reached in discussing
indicators: If money demand shocks are more Important that credit demand
shocks, then a policy of targeting credit is probably better than a policy of
targeting money.

V. Empirical Evidence
The foregoing discussion suggests that the case for credit turns on
whether credit demand Is, or is becoming, relatively more stable than money

demand. We conclude with some evidence that this is true, at least since
1979.11

Table

the

2 shows the simple correlations between GNP growth and growth of

two financial

aggregates during three periods. Money was obviously much

more highly correlated with income than was credit during the period of
stable money demand, 1953-1973. But the two financial aggregates were on a
more equal footing during 1974:1-1979:3. Further changes came during the
period of unstable money demand, 1979:4—1985:4; money-GNP correlations
dropped sharply while money-credit correlations fell only slightly, giving a

clear edge to credit.12
More direct evidence on the relative magnitudes of money-demand and

credit-demand shocks was obtained by comparing the residuals from estimated

structural money

demand and credit demand functions like D(.) and L(.) in our

model. We used the logarithmic partial adjustment model, with adjustment In
nominal terms, which we are not eager to defend but which was designed to fit

money demand. Hence, our procedure seems clearly biased toward finding
relatively larger credit shocks than money shocks.

8

TABLE 2

Simple Correlations of Growth Rates of GNP with Growth
Rates of Financial Aggregates, 1973-1985 (a) (b)

Period

With Credit

With Money

1953:1 —

1973:4

.51,.37

.17,.11

1974:1 —

1979:3

.50,.54

.50,.51

1979:4 —

1985:4

.11,.34

.38,.47

(a) Growth rates are first differences of natural logarithms.

(b) Correlations In nominal terms come
second.

first;

correlations In real terms cone

unsurprlsThgly, estimates for the entire 1953-1985 period rejected
parameter stability across a 1973:4/1974:1 break, so we concentrated on the
latter period.13 4ich to our amazement, we estimated moderately sensible
money and credit demand equations for the 1974:1-1985:4 perIod on the first
try (standard errors are in parentheses):
10gM —

-.06

+ .939logM_1

(.34) (.059)

-

.2221 + .O83logP + .Ol2logy
(.059)
(.089) (.052)
SEE — .00811

logC —

DW —

2.04

-1.75 + .885logC1 —.424p + .5141 + .O75logP +
(.285) (.389) (.086)
(0.63) (.076)
DW — 2.44
SEE — .00797
+ .2921ogy
(.107)

Here y Is real GNP, P is the GNP deflator, p Is the bank prime rate, and i is
the three-month Treasury bill rate. Although the Interest rate coefficients
in the credit equation are individually insignificant, they are jointly
significant, have the correct signs, and are almost equal
-—

suggesting

in

absolute value

a specification In which the spread between p and I determines

credit demand. Notice that the residual variances in the two equations are
about equal.

Since the sample was too short to test reliably for parameter stabIlity,
we examined the residuals from the two equations over two subperlods with
these results:

period

variance of
money residual

1974:1-1979:3

.265 x

1979:4-1985:4

.888 x

i-

variance of
credit residual

.687

i0

.435 x

The differences are striking. By this crude measure, the variance of money
demand shocks was much smaller than that of credit demand shocks during the

9

first subperiod but much larger during the second.
The evidence thus supports the idea that money-demand shocks became much

more Important relative to credit-demand shocks In the 1980s. But that does

not

mean we should start ignoring money and focusing on credit. After all, it

is perfectly conceivable that the relative sizes of money-demand and
credit-demand shocks will revert once again to what they were earlier.
Rather, the message of this paper

Is that

a more syninetric treatment of money

and credit is feasible and appears warranted.

10

FOOTNOTES

*prjnceton University. We are grateful to the NSF for supporting this
research.
1See, among others, Stlglitz and Weiss (1981), Bernanke (1983), Blinder and
Stiglitz (1983), and Blinder (1987).
2Bllnder (1987) offers a model In which there Is rationing and no substitute
for bank credit.

3Regarding the latter, Mishkin (1976) argues that, if a large part of wealth
is Illiquid, consumers may want to borrow against this Illiquld wealth In
order to maintain an adequate buffer stock of liquid financial assets.

4For simplicity we assume that only 1, not p, influences the demand for
excess reserves.

5The Interest rates in (3) should be real rates. But a model of aggregate
demand takes both the price level and inflation as given; so we take the
expected inflation rate to be constant and suppress it.

6p Is an Increasing function of I as long as the interest elasticity of the
money multiplier is not too large.
7The loan market might still affect aggregate supply, however. See Blinder
(1987).

8Most comparative statics results require no assumptions other than the ones

we have already made. But, in a few cases, we encounter theoretical
ambiguities that do not arise in IS/tM. Virtually all of these are of the
following type: some comparative-statics derivative Is the sum of several

terms, one of which has the Hwrongs sign. Every such case can be resolved by
Invoking one of the following three plausible assumptions:

11

1. The Income elasticities of the demand functions for money and
loans are not too different.
2. The absolute elasticities of loan supply and loan demand with

respect to the two interest rates, p and i, are not too different, I.e., It
is mostly the differential, p—i, that matters.
3. The Interest elasticity of the money multiplier is not too
large.

If output is fixed on the supply side, y would be replaced by P in Figure 1
and in the text discussion that follows.
9This cannot happen if assumptions 1 and 3 In footnote 8 hold.
10And that the aggregate supply curve Is not vertical. If It is, replace y by
P.

111n what

follows,

wmoneyu is Ml, HcreditN Is an aggregate Invented by one of

us: the sum of intermediated borrowing by households and businesses (derived
from Flow-of-Funds data). For details and analysis of the latter, see Blinder
(1985).

12Similar

findings emerged when we controlled for many variables via a

vector-autoregression and looked at correlations between VAR residuals.

13Estlmation was by instrtental variables. Instruments were current, once,
and twice lagged logs of real government purchases, real exports, bank

reserves, and a supply shock variable which is a weighted average of the
relative prices of energy and agricultural products.

12

Bernanke, Ben S., "Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
Propagation of the Great Depression," American Economic Review,
June, vol. 73, No. 3, pp. 257—76.
Blinder, Alan S., "Credit Rationing and Effective Supply Failures,"
Economic Journal, June 1987, pp. 327-352.
Blinder, Alan S., "The Stylized Facts About

Credit

Aggregates," mlmeo,

Princeton, June 1985.
Blinder, Alan and Joseph E. Stiglltz, "Money, Credit Constraints, and
Economic Activity," American Economic Review, May 1983, pp. 297—302.
Brunner, Karl and Alan H. Meltzer, "Money, Debt, and Economic Activity,"
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 80, No. 5, Septeeter/October 1972,
pp. 951—977.

Mishkin, Frederic S., "Illiquidity, Consumer Durable Expenditure, and Monetary
Policy," American Economic Review, 1976, pp. 642-654.

Patinkin, Don, Money Interest, and Prices, Harper and Row, 1956.
Poole, William, "Optimal

Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments In a Simple

Stochastic Macro ModeL" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970,
pp. 197-216.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with
Imperfect

Information,"

American Economic Review, June 1981,

pp. 393-410.
Tobin, James, "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,"
Money, Credit and Banking 2, Noveeber 1970, pp. 4.61—72.

13

Journal

of

