NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY AND REACHING FOR INCOME
Kent Daniel
Lorenzo Garlappi
Kairong Xiao
Working Paper 25344
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25344

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

We thank Bo Becker (discussant), Paul Tetlock, Terrance Odean, Michaela Pagel, Julian Thimme
(discussant), Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (discussant), Boris Vallee, Jeffrey Wurgler (discussant),
David Solomon, Michael Weber (discussant), and participants in the NBER Behavioral Finance
Meeting, the Duke/UNC Asset Pricing Conference, SFS Cavalcade, LBS Summer Symposium,
the HEC-McGill Winter Finance Workshop, EFA 2018 Meetings, and the Rising Five-Star
Workshop for helpful comments and discussions. We thank Adrien Alvero and Antony Anyosa
for excellent research assistance. We also thank Terrance Odean for sharing the individual
investor data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Kent Daniel, Lorenzo Garlappi, and Kairong Xiao. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Policy and Reaching for Income
Kent Daniel, Lorenzo Garlappi, and Kairong Xiao
NBER Working Paper No. 25344
December 2018
JEL No. E50,G11,G4
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of monetary policy on investors' portfolio choices and asset prices. Using
data on individual portfolio holdings and on mutual fund flows, we find that a low-interest-rate
monetary policy increases investors' demand for high-dividend stocks and drives up their prices.
The increase in demand is more pronounced among investors who fund consumption using
dividend income. To explain these empirical findings, we develop an asset pricing model in
which investors have quasi-hyperbolic time preferences and use dividend income as a
commitment device to curb their tendency to over-consume. When accommodative monetary
policy lowers interest rates, it reduces the income stream from bonds and induces investors who
want to keep a desired level of consumption to ``reach for income'' by tilting their portfolio
toward high-dividend stocks. Our finding suggests that low-interest-rate monetary policy may
influence the risk premium of income-generating assets, lead to under-diversification of investors'
portfolios, and cause redistributive effects across firms that differ in their dividend policy.
Kent Daniel
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 421
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
kd2371@columbia.edu
Lorenzo Garlappi
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
Canada
lorenzo.garlappi@sauder.ubc.ca

Kairong Xiao
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris 822
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
kairong.xiao@gsb.columbia.edu

1

Introduction

A common stock’s total return can be broken down into two components: dividends and
capital gains. In frictionless capital markets, Miller and Modigliani (1961) show that
rational investors should be indifferent between these two sources of return. Thus, a firm’s
dividend policy should be irrelevant. However, this core tenet of academic finance is at
odds with a large body of popular retail investment advice that advocates a “rule of thumb”
of living off an income stream while keeping the principal untapped.1 Investors who follow
such a rule of thumb will naturally exhibit a preference for assets that pay dividends.
In this paper, we investigate the implications of investors’ tendency to live off income
for portfolio choices and asset prices. We hypothesize that, as monetary policy becomes
more accommodative, investors who live off their portfolio income may not be able to
sustain their consumption because income from bank deposits and short-term bonds falls
with interest rates. As a result, investors may move into higher income assets such as highdividend stocks. Moreover, the resulting demand pressure from income-seeking investors
may drive up the prices of these assets. We refer to the conjecture that monetary policy
affects the preference for current income as the “reaching-for-income” hypothesis.2
Using data on individual portfolio holdings and mutual fund flows, we document evidence supporting the reaching-for-income hypothesis. Specifically, using individual portfolio holdings from a large discount broker covering 19,394 accounts over a period ranging
from 1991 to 1996, we find that a 1% decrease in the Fed Funds rate leads to about a
1% increase in the holdings of high-dividend-paying stocks over the next six months. The
increase in demand for high-dividend-paying assets is much more pronounced for retirees
who tend to live off dividend income for consumption. Similarly, using data on mutual
fund flows from 1991 to 2016, we document rotations of fund flows from bond funds to
equity funds following a decrease in the Fed Funds rates. The inflows to equity are concentrated in funds with high income yields: a 1% decrease in the Fed Funds rates leads
1

Living off income is a popular retail investment advice. For example, in a November 2016 Forbes
article called “How To Make $500,000 Last Forever” Brett Owens writes: “The only dependable way to
retire and stay retired is to boost your payouts so that you never have to touch your capital.”
2
In a December 2016 Fidelity Viewpoints article, “A New Era For Dividend Stocks,” Morrow et al.
(2016) emphasize the link between interest rates and demand for dividend-paying stocks as follows: “As
bond interest rates fell to 50-year nominal lows in recent years, many investors looked beyond the bond
market for income producing investments. This caused an increase in the value of dividends on a stand
alone basis, apart from their role in equity valuations.” See https://www.fidelity.com/viewpoints/
investing-ideas/dividend-stocks-rates-rise (accessed on December 28, 2017).

2

to a 5.18% increase in the assets under management of high-income mutual funds over a
period of three years.
This increase in demand for high-dividend stocks impacts the prices of these assets
in ways that do not appear to be fully anticipated by the market: high-dividend-yield
stocks exhibit positive risk-adjusted returns following periods of monetary easing and
negative or negligible abnormal returns following a period of monetary policy tightening,
consistent with investors reacting with a lag to these policy changes. We examine the
performance of a dynamic long-short strategy that buys high-dividend stocks and shorts
low-dividend stocks following periods of monetary loosening (i.e., following negative Fed
Fund rate shocks) and reverses the positions following episodes of monetary tightening.
Over the 1987–2015 period, this strategy generates an annualized Sharpe ratio of about
0.18, comparable to that of the “High-Minus-Low” portfolio designed to exploit the value
premium in the cross-section.3
These empirical findings raise several theoretical questions. According to standard
portfolio choice theory, absent taxes or other transaction costs, investors should be indifferent between capital gains and cash dividends and only care about total returns.
Similarly, the standard life-cycle theory also predicts that investors should make their
consumption-saving decisions based their permanent income rather than current income.
Given this benchmark, why do investors live off their current income stream? More importantly, what is the implication for monetary policy if investors do behave differently
from the standard portfolio choice and life-cycle theory?
To answer these questions, we first provide a microfoundation for the consumption
rule of “living off income.” We show that this consumption rule can be an optimal commitment device for an investor with quasi-hyperbolic preferences to limit the tendency to
over-consume.4 We then embed the consumption rule of “living off income” into an asset
pricing model. We show that in the presence of this consumption rule, the optimal portfolio exhibits patterns that are consistent with the empirical findings documented above.
Specifically, the income yield of an asset matters for portfolio choice and the demand for
3

In the same time period, the Sharpe ratios of the “High-Minus-Low” and the “Small-Minus-Big”
portfolios are 0.23 and 0.12 respectively.
4
While we motivate the “living off income” rule of thumb as a commitment device for an agent with
hyperbolic preferences, there are other frictions or biases that could lead to this rule. We discuss some of
these other possibilities toward the end of Section 4.1, but note here that the underlying mechanism that
drives the “living off income” rule is not critical for our findings; all that is critical is that some investors
follow such a rule, for some reason.

3

income-generating assets varies with the level of interest rates. Finally, we show that when
agents “reach-for-income,” monetary policy has real effects on the risk premium in an otherwise frictionless economy. Specifically, when monetary policy lowers the income from
bonds, the demand pressure from reaching-for-income investors leads to higher valuation
and a lower risk premium for high-dividend stocks.
This paper contributes to four strands of literature. The first strand studies the financial channels of monetary transmission (Nagel, 2016; Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl,
2017a,b; Xiao, 2018; Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl, 2018). This literature shows that
monetary policy affects asset prices and the financial system in ways not explained by
the New Keynesian paradigm. Specifically, this paper is closely related to the studies on
the “reaching-for-yield” hypothesis, according to which a low-interest-rate policy induces
investors to move into risky assets in a bid to boost total returns (Rajan 2006; Hanson
and Stein 2015; Bekaert et al. 2013; Becker and Ivashina 2015; Gertler and Karadi 2015;
Hau and Lai 2016; Choi and Kronlund 2017; Di Maggio and Kacperczyk 2017; Lian et al.
2017). In contrast, in our paper we examine the “reaching-for-income” hypothesis. This
hypothesis is that a low-interest-rate policy increases the demand for assets with high current income. The implications of the reaching-for-income hypothesis differ from those of
reaching for yield insofar as investors have a special preference for dividend yields above
and beyond their contribution to total returns. Our empirical results suggest that this
is indeed the case. Moreover, we show that reaching for income may have implications
for the cross-section of asset prices and ultimately, the allocation of capital between firms
with different dividend policies.
Although reaching for income is a distinct phenomenon from reaching for yield, in some
cases it may have similar implications for the riskiness of a portfolio: when accommmodative monetary policy lowers bond yields below the dividend yield of the stock market,
reaching-for-income investors may substitute from bonds to stocks, thus increasing overall portfolio risk. Therefore, investors’ tendency to reach for income could provide an
additional channel for the reaching-for-yield phenomenon.
The second strand of literature to which this paper contributes examines the demand
for dividends in an economy. Miller and Modigliani (1961) show that dividend policy is
irrelevant for equity values in a perfect capital market with rational investors. In light
of this benchmark, Black (1976) argues that the observed practice of investors exhibiting a strong preference for dividends is puzzling. The voluminous body of literature that

4

attempts to explain why dividends matter can be organized in two broad groups. The
first group relaxes the perfect capital markets assumption by introducing asymmetric information (Bhattacharya 1979; John and Williams 1985; Miller and Rock 1985) or agency
problems between corporate insiders and outside shareholders (Easterbrook 1984; Jensen
1986; Fluck 1998, 1999; Myers 1998; Gomes 2001; and Zwiebel 1996). The second group
relaxes the assumption that investors are fully rational. Shefrin and Statman (1984) suggest that self-control problems, loss aversion, or regret aversion may generate a demand
for dividends. In our model, we formalize the self-control motive suggested by Shefrin and
Statman (1984), and show that if investors have time-inconsistent preferences, and they
constrain themselves to consume only out of dividends, they can increase their ex ante
utility. Empirically, we provide new evidence that may help to differentiate among theories of the demand for dividends. Specifically, by showing that demand for dividends is
time-varying over monetary cycles and linked to the consumption and saving decisions of
retail investors, we provide evidence consistent with the hypothesis that the preference for
dividends may reflect the presence of self-control motives in households’ portfolio choices.
In doing so, we also contribute to a large body of empirical literature that examines how
investors’ responses to dividend policy differ from the rational benchmark. In particular,
Baker and Wurgler (2004a) find that there is strong variation over time in the demand for
dividends. Although they do not take a strong stand on the source of the variation in the
demand for dividends, Baker and Wurgler (2004a) show that firms appear to “cater” to
this variation by changing the level of dividends that they distribute. Consistent with this
hypothesis, Jiang and Sun (2015) show that high-dividend yield firms have longer duration,
in the sense that their prices move up more strongly in response to interest rate declines
than do the prices of low-dividend yield firms. This interesting result is inconsistent with
the hypothesis that high-dividend yield firms should have shorter durations because they
have lower anticipated dividend growth. Hartzmark and Solomon (2017) demonstrate
that investors appear to make buy/sell decisions based on price changes as opposed to
cum-dividend returns. They present strong evidence showing that many investors behave
as if they believe dividends are “free” in the sense that paying dividends would not lead
to a reduction in prices. Like us, they show that demand for dividends is systematically
higher in periods of low interest rates, but attribute this to the “free-dividend fallacy.”
We provide a distinct mechanism based on the commitment value of dividends for timeinconsistent investors. We show that investors demand more dividends in periods of low
interest rates because the value of dividends as a commitment device goes up as income

5

from bonds becomes insufficient to sustain the optimal level of consumption. We also
provide empirical evidence consistent with this hypothesis.
The third strand of literature to which our paper relates studies households’ consumption and saving decisions over the life-cycle. Standard life-cycle theories suggest that
agents should not distinguish between capital and income when making spending choices
(Statman 2017). In contrast to the standard life-cycle theory, Baker, Nagel, and Wurgler (2007) and Kaustia and Rantapuska (2012) find that investors usually only spend
their dividends but rarely dip into capital. We contribute to this literature by showing
theoretically that such behavior is an optimal response to the over-consumption problem.
In doing so, we add to the study of the self-control problem in the behavioral life-cycle
literature (McCarthy 2011; Carlson et al. 2015). Our paper also relates to Graham and
Kumar (2006), which finds that older investors with lower labor income hold stocks with
higher dividend yields than younger investors with higher labor income. We find that older
investors not only hold more dividend-paying stocks on average, they are also more likely
to reach for income when interest rates fall.
The fourth strand of literature to which we contribute studies the implications of
behavioral biases on asset prices, and more specifically, the role of time-inconsistent preferences. The assumption of exponential discounting has been challenged by mounting
experimental evidence (Chung and Herrnstein 1967; Ainslie 1975). These studies suggest
instead that subjective discount functions are approximately hyperbolic, thus implying
time-inconsistency. Shefrin and Statman (1984) show that agents with non-exponential
discount functions prefer to constrain their own future choices (see also O’Donoghue and
Rabin (1999)), and Laibson (1997) illustrates how a partially illiquid asset may be used
as a commitment device. In our model, investors use portfolio income as a commitment
device. Luttmer and Mariotti (2003) study an exchange economy with time-inconsistent
agents and show that subjective rates of time preference affect the equilibrium risk-free
rate but not the instantaneous risk-return trade-off. In our setting, we show that the
self-control motive introduces an additional trade-off between high and low income that
leads to optimal portfolios that differ from those of time-consistent investors.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide empirical evidence that low-interest-rate monetary policy induces investors to “reach for income.” In
Section 3, we show that investor reaching for income behavior is reflected in asset prices.
In Section 4, we develop an asset pricing model to interpret the empirical findings. Sec-

6

tion 5 discusses the implications of reaching for income for portfolio under-diversification,
capital reallocation, and risk-taking. Section 6 concludes. Appendix A contains proofs
of propositions and Appendix B contains a detailed description of the data used in our
empirical analysis.

2

Empirical evidence of reaching for income

In this section we provide empirical evidence on the effect of monetary policy on the
demand for dividend-paying stocks. Section 2.1 describes our data. Section 2.2 provides
evidence from individual portfolio holding data and Section 2.3 provides evidence based
on mutual fund flows data.

2.1

Data

Our analysis is based on two main datasets.5 The first dataset consists of individual portfolio holdings gathered from a large discount broker. This dataset has been previously
used by Barber and Odean (2000) and includes monthly observations on portfolio holdings for 78,000 households between 1991 and 1996. For each household, we observe the
number of assets and asset type held in its portfolio. We restrict our analysis to common
stock holdings and focus on a smaller subset of 19,394 households for whom we have demographic information. The average household in this dataset holds approximately $34,000
in common stock. Table 1 reports summary statistics for the investor portfolio dataset.
We merge the portfolio holding dataset to the CRSP stock database by the Committee on
Uniform Security Identification Procedures (CUSIP) number. This allows us to associate
prices and dividend payments to the assets in each individual portfolio. The dividend
yield of a stock is calculated by dividing the dollar value of dividends per share of stock
by the share price before the dividend is paid. If a stock pays multiple dividends within a
year, the annual dividend yield is the sum of the dividend yield over the whole year. The
average dividend yield of the stocks in the merged sample is 2.1%. The 90th percentile
dividend yield is 5.7%. In our sample, 23.7% of stock positions belong to account holders
who are retirees, 42.6% are married, 75.3% hold at least a bank card, and 58% are male.
5

Appendix B contains a detailed description of the variables used in our analysis.

7

We label a stock as a “high income yield” stock if it is in the top decile of the dividend
yield distribution in a given month. We define the time-t “change in holding of a stock,”
∆Holdingi,j,t , as the six-month change in stock i’s position in account j scaled by the
average of the current and the 6-month lagged holding of stock i in the same account j:
∆Holdingi,j,t =

Qi,j,t − Qi,j,t−6
,
(Qi,j,t + Qi,j,t−6 )/2

(1)

where Qi,j,t represents the number of stocks i held in account j at time t.
The second dataset consists of monthly data on U.S. mutual funds from the Center for
Research in Security Prices (CRSP). Our sample includes all equity mutual funds from
January 1991 to December 2016 covering a total of 23,166 fund share classes. The summary
statistics of this sample are reported in Table 2. Net flows is defined as the net growth in
fund assets adjusted for price changes. Formally, it is calculated as:
F lowi,t =

T N Ai,t − T N Ai,t−1 × (1 + Ri,t )
,
T N Ai,t−1

(2)

where T N Ai,t is fund i’s total net assets at time t, Ri,t is the fund’s return over the prior
month.
We measure the income of a mutual fund by the income yield, defined as the annual
dividend income distribution divided by the value of a mutual fund’s share. The average
income yield in our data is 1.3% for the equity funds sample and 3.8% for the bond funds
sample. The 90th percentile income yield is 2.8% for the equity funds sample and 6.2%
for the bond funds sample.
Finally, we measure the stance of monetary policy using the Fed Funds rate (FFR)
data available from the Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) website. An important
channel through which monetary policy affects investors’ income is through the level of
interest on bank deposits. To construct measures of local deposit rates paid by banks,
we combine the Call Report, the quarterly regulatory filings on bank balance sheets, with
the FDIC Summary of Deposits, the annual survey of branch office deposits for all FDICinsured institutions. Specifically, we construct a measure of deposit rates of each bank
by dividing bank interest payments on deposits by total deposits held at the end of each
quarter. We average across all the banks in a metropolitan statistical area (MSA) to
obtain an MSA-level measure of deposit rates. Each bank’s deposit rate is weighted by
the amount of deposits of this bank’s branches in the MSA.
8

2.2
2.2.1

Evidence from individual portfolio holding data
“Living off income”

We begin our analysis by showing that, based on evidence gathered from individual stock
holding data, some investors do appear to follow the rule of “living off income.” We
follow Baker et al. (2007) and construct a measure of net withdrawal from brokerage
accounts as a proxy of consumption. Specifically, for each account j and month t, we
calculate the net withdrawal Wj,t as the change in account balance, Aj,t , adjusted for
capital gain, Gj,t , and dividends, Dj,t :
Wj,t = Aj,t−1 + Gj,t + Dj,t − Aj,t .

(3)

Figure 1 shows a scatter plot of monthly net withdrawal against contemporaneous
dividend income (Panel A) and capital gains (Panel B) for each household of our dataset.
The horizontal axis reports the dividend income/capital gains and the vertical axis reports
the net withdrawal. Panel A shows that dividend income data cluster around two clear
sets. The first set of observations lines up along the 45-degree line. These observations
represent investors who withdraw their portfolio dividend income almost one-for-one, likely
for consumption reasons. The second set of observations lines up along the horizontal line
corresponding to zero withdrawals. These points represent investors who do not withdraw
dividends, but instead reinvest them in their portfolios.
Panel B shows the scatter plot of net withdrawal against contemporaneous capital
gains. In contrast to Panel A, we find no evidence that investors regularly withdraw their
capital gain. If anything, a higher capital gain is associated with lower withdrawal. This
is consistent with Baker et al. (2007) and Kaustia and Rantapuska (2012) who show that
individual investors treat dividend income and capital gains differently for consumption
decisions.
To better understand which type of investors are likely to live off income, we relate the
dividend-withdrawing behavior to demographic information. Specifically, we first define a
“dividend-withdrawal month” as a month when the withdrawal amount is between 90% and
110% of an investor’s contemporaneous dividend income.6 We then classify an individual
6

We leave a margin of error of 10% because withdrawal and dividends may be measured with error. In
the data, 19% of the household-month observations are “dividend withdrawal events”.

9

as a “withdrawer” if the frequency of “dividend-withdrawal month” is above the median
among all investors, and “non-withdrawers” otherwise. Finally, we estimate a logistic
regression of the “withdrawers” indicator on a set of demographic variables such as a
retiree dummy, labor income, home-owner dummy, married dummy, bank card owner
dummy, and vehicle owner dummy.
Table 3 reports the estimation results. We find that investors who have retired or have
lower labor income are more likely to be dividend withdrawers. This finding does not
seem to be attributable to a wealth effect, as proxies of wealth such as home ownership
and vehicle ownership are not associated with a higher likelihood of being a withdrawer.
A more likely interpretation of these results is that, consistent with Baker et al. (2007),
individuals view labor income and dividends as close substitutes but treat dividend income
and capital gains very differently.

2.2.2

Reaching for Income

If investors indeed follow the rule of “living off income,” monetary policy may affect
their portfolio decisions. Specifically, when low-interest-rate monetary policy reduces the
interest income from deposits and bonds, these investors may want to “reach for income”
by buying high dividend stocks to compensate for the low interest income received on
deposits and bonds.
We first show that the relative current income of bonds and stocks vary over monetary
cycles. Figure 2 plots the income yield of the aggregate U.S. stock market and that of two
commonly-held debt instruments—3-month certificates of deposit and 10-year Treasury
bonds—from 1954 to 2016. The income yield of stocks are measured by the dividend-price
ratio. We also report the level of Fed Funds rates as a measure of the stance on monetary
policy. The figure shows that the income yield of debt instruments strongly co-moves with
the Fed Funds rates, while that of equity does not. During periods of monetary easing,
equity becomes relative more attractive as a source of current income. In particular, while
the ultra-easy monetary policy of the most recent decade has lowered bond yields towards
zero, income yields of equity have stayed around 3%.7
7

The lack of co-movement between equity income yields and nominal debt instrument yields is partly
due to the fact that equity is a real asset.

10

Given that low-interest-rate monetary policy reduces the interest income from deposits
and bonds, some investors may “reach for income” by buying more high-dividend stocks.
To test this hypothesis, we use the individual stock holding data and examine whether
a reduction in the Fed Funds rates is associated with an increase in the holding of highdividend stocks. Specifically, we regress the change in holdings, ∆Holdingi,j,t , of stock i
in account j over a 6-month period as defined in (1), on: (i) the three-year changes in the
Fed Funds rates, ∆F F Rt ; (ii) a high-dividend dummy HighDivi,j,t that takes the value
of one if a stock is in the top income yield decile for a given month; (iii) an interaction
term ∆F F Rt × HighDivi,j,t ; and (iv) a set of control variables Xi,j,t that account for
stock characteristics and demographic variables. The stock characteristics include: a highrepurchase dummy, market beta, book-to-market ratio, the past 1-year and 3-year returns,
log market capitalization, profit margin, and return on equity (ROE). The demographic
variables include home ownership, marital status, and gender of the holder of account j.
Formally, we estimate the following regression:
∆Holdingi,j,t = β1 ∆FFRt + β2 High Divi,t + β3 ∆FFRt × High Divi,t + γ 0 Xi,j,t + εi,j,t . (4)
Column 1 of Table 4 presents the result for the entire sample. The coefficient of
the interaction term, β3 , is negative and significant. This implies that the demand for
dividends appears to change over monetary cycles: a 1% decrease in the Fed Funds rates
is associated with a 0.946% increase in the holding of high-dividend stocks.
Columns 2 and 3 of Table 4 separate the sample into retirees and non-retirees, respectively, and re-estimate regression (4). The results show that the impact of monetary
policy on dividend-stock holdings in the retiree subsample is twice as large as that of
the non-retiree sample: the interaction coefficient β3 is −1.568 in the retiree sample and
−0.669 in the non-retiree sample, with the difference statistically significant at the 1%
level. This is consistent with the idea that retirees follow the investment rule of “living
off dividends.” When low-interest-rate monetary policy reduces the income from deposits
and bonds, retirees are more likely to reach for income and buy high-dividend stocks.
Cash dividends and share repurchases are two main ways companies can distribute
earnings to investors. Unlike cash dividends, which boost investors’ current income, share
repurchases benefit most investors through capital gains. Therefore, under the reaching for
income hypothesis, one would expect different results when considering share repurchases
as opposed to cash dividends. To test this conjecture, in the regressions of Table 4 we
11

include a dummy variable, High Repurchase, which equals 1 if a stock lies in the top
decile of the distribution of share repurchases, as well as its interaction with the three-year
change in the Fed Funds rates. We find that low interest rates do not increase the demand
for high-repurchase stocks. If anything, low interest rates seem to reduce the demand for
high-repurchase stocks possibly due to a substitution effect toward high-dividend stocks.
This result suggests that investors do seem to treat cash dividends differently from share
repurchase.

2.2.3

Identifying monetary policy impacts through local bank deposit rates

A common challenge in studying the effect of monetary policy is the difficulty in disentangling monetary policy changes from other confounding macro factors affecting the common
policy rate that applies to an entire economy. To address this challenge, we exploit crossregion variations in bank deposit rates, which represent an important transmission channel
of monetary policy. Drechsler et al. (2017a) show that, although there is only one monetary policy for the whole country, the transmission to local deposit rates differs across
regions. Specifically, deposit rates in regions with a more competitive banking sector are
more sensitive to changes in the Fed Funds rates. Therefore, monetary policy has a different impact on the local deposit rate, depending on the market power of local banks.
Given the importance of local deposits rates as a source of current income for investors, we
can sharpen our empirical identification by exploiting the cross-region variations in bank
deposit rates.
To do so, we construct a measure of local deposit rates using the weighted average of
deposits rates of banks with branches in each Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). We
map investors to local MSAs based on their zip codes. We then regress the changes in
holdings of stock i by household j in MSA m at time t, ∆Holdingi,j,m,t , on: (i) the threeyear changes in local deposit rates, ∆DepRatesm,t ; (ii) a high-dividend dummy HighDivi,t
that takes the value of one if stock i is in the top income yield decile for a given month t;
(iii) an interaction term ∆DepRatesm,t × HighDivi,t ; (iv) an interaction between changes
in the Fed Funds rates and the high dividend dummy ∆F F Rt × HighDivi,t ; (v) a set of
control variables Xi,j,m,t that control for stock characteristics and demographic variables;
and (vi) time fixed effects and MSA fixed effects. Column 1 of Table 5 reports the results

12

from estimating the following model:
∆Holdingi,j,m,t = β1 ∆DepRatesm,t + β2 High Divi,t + β3 ∆F F Rt × High Divi,t +
β4 ∆DepRatesm,t × High Divi,t + γ 0 Xi,j,m,t + εi,j,m,t .

(5)

The coefficient β4 of the interaction term ∆DepRatesm,t × HighDivi,t is negative and
significant, indicating that demand for dividends is negatively related to local deposit
rates. The magnitude is more than twice as large as that of the interaction term ∆F F Rt ×
HighDivi,t estimated in Table 4. Furthermore, the coefficient β3 in (5) is still negative but,
unlike the estimate in Table 4, becomes statistically insignificant. This result suggests that
local bank deposit rates provide a more accurate measure of available sources of income
for local investors than the Fed Funds rates.
To assess whether withdrawers are more likely to reach for income when interest rates
fall, we estimate the same regression model of equation (5) separately for withdrawers
and non-withdrawers. Columns 2 and 3 in Table 5 report the result. We find that the
reaching-for-income phenomenon is entirely driven by the withdrawer sample. For the nonwithdrawer sample, neither the local deposit rates nor the Fed Funds rates significantly
affect the holding of high-dividend paying stocks.

2.3

Evidence from mutual fund flows data

To gain a better understanding of the magnitude of the reaching-for-income hypothesis,
in this section we test the hypothesis using data on mutual fund flows.

2.3.1

Mutual fund flows and monetary policy

We study the effect of monetary policy on mutual fund flows using two separate approaches.
First, we consider the fund flow dynamics in response to changes in Fed Fund rates. Second,
we analyze the response of flow to interest rates in panel regressions. The former approach
focuses mainly on the time dimension, while the latter focuses mainly on the cross-section
dimension.
Fund flow dynamics. As monetary policy changes the relative income yields between
equity and bonds, we may expect income-seeking investors to rebalance their portfolios

13

across different types of mutual funds. To test this conjecture, we estimate the “impulse
response” of mutual fund flows to the current and lagged changes in the Fed Funds rates,
∆F F R. Specifically, we estimate the following regression:
F lowsi,t = β1 ∆F F Rt,t−1 + β2 ∆F F Rt−1,t−2 + . . . + β10 ∆F F Rt−9,t−10 + γ 0 Xi,t + εi,t , (6)
where ∆F F Rt,t−1 denotes the change in Fed Fund rates from time t−1 to t and Xi,t denotes
a set of control variables that may be important drivers of fund flows.8 The cumulative
P
fund flows up to n years to a 1% change in the Fed Funds rates is nk=1 βk .
We estimate model (6) separately for equity, bond, and balanced funds. Within each
type of funds, we further classify funds in the top decile of income yield as “high-income
funds” and the remaining ones as “low-income funds.” Figure 3 reports cumulative fund
flows in response to a 1% reduction in the Fed Funds rates over different time horizons.
Each panel in the figure represents a different type of fund. In each panel, the red solid
line represents the cumulative fund flows for high-income funds while the blue dashed line
represents low-income funds. Comparing across fund types, we find that a reduction in
the Fed Funds rates is associated with inflows to equity funds (Panel A) and outflows from
bond funds (Panel B). Balanced funds (Panel C) experience both inflows and outflows
depending on the level of income yields. This finding is consistent with the evidence
reported in Figure 2: equity becomes a more attractive source of income when interest
rates fall. Within each fund type, we note that high-income funds receive larger inflows
or experience smaller outflows following a reduction in the Fed Funds rates. In terms of
magnitude, following a 1% reduction in the Fed Funds rates, high-income equity funds
receive an inflow of 5% of assets under management (AUM) by the fifth year than lowincome equity funds.
We also see that investors respond to monetary policy changes in a slow and persistent
manner. Two reasons may lead to the observed persistence of investors’ responses to monetary policy changes. First, investors are likely to adjust their portfolios only periodically,
thus generating a delayed response to changes in monetary policy. Second, investors may
be holding long-term bonds that were issued before a change in monetary policy. Income
yields therefore may change slowly as long-term bonds gradually mature and are replaced
by newly issued bonds.
8

The control variables are the fund returns in the past year, the fund return volatility, the log assets
under management, fund expenses, and a time trend.

14

Panel regressions. To complement the evidence from the dynamics of fund flows illustrated in Figure 3, we estimate the following panel regression:
Flowsi,t = β1 High Incomei,t + β2 ∆FFRt × High Incomei,t + τi + τt + γ 0 Xi,t + εi,t ,

(7)

in which we relate the monthly fund flows into fund i, F lowsi,t , to: (i) a high-income
dummy, High Income i,t , taking the value of one if fund i has an income yield in the top
decile in a given month; (ii) an interaction term between the high-income dummy and
the three-year changes in the Fed Funds rates, ∆F F Rt × High Income i,t ;9 (iii) fund and
time fixed effects, τi , τt , and (iv) a set of control variables Xi,t that may be important
drivers of fund flows.10 We are interested in the coefficient of the interaction term, β2 ,
which, following a 1% change in the Fed Funds rates, measures the additional fund flows
that high-income funds receive relative to low-income funds. If low-interest rate monetary
policy indeed leads investors to reach for income, we should expect a negative value for
the coefficient β2 .
Table 6 reports the regression results. Columns 1 and 2 include the whole sample
of equity and bond funds respectively. The coefficient β1 of the High Income dummy is
positive and significant, indicating that high-income funds on average attract more flows.
Specifically, if an equity fund has an income yield in the top decile among all the funds in
a given month, it receives 0.284% more flows in the same month. This finding is consistent
with the idea that investors exhibit a preference for current income.
Most importantly, the coefficient of the interaction term, β2 , in regression (7) is negative
and significant, which means that high-income funds receive more inflows when interest
rates fall. This finding indicates that investors do reach for income in periods of low
interest rates. The economic magnitude is large as well: a 1% decrease in the Fed Funds
rate leads to a 5.18% (0.144% per month × 36 months) cumulative increase in assets
under management for high-dividend equity funds over a period of three years, compared
to low-income equity funds. This magnitude is consistent with the findings in Figure 3.
9

From Figure 3 we see that investors respond to monetary policy changes in a slow and persistent
manner. Therefore, we consider a three-year horizon in the construction of the variable ∆F F R, as it
seems to capture the most salient effects of monetary policy change on portfolio flows. Our results are
robust to alternative horizons in the construction of ∆F F R.
10
These control variables are: fund returns, volatility, the interaction between volatility and the threeyear change in the Fed Funds rates, assets under management, expenses, income tax, and the interaction
between income tax and a high-income dummy.

15

Note that these findings are obtained after controlling for characteristics of the fund
such as its return and volatility, fund size, expenses, and changes in taxes. Controlling
for volatility and its interaction with the changes of the Fed Funds rates is particularly
important to allay the concern that our results are driven by investors’ desire to reach for
yield by investing in riskier assets when interest rates are lower.
Columns 3–6 in Table 6 split the sample of equity and bond funds by investor type,
that is, retail versus institutions. The results show that the coefficient of the interaction
term β2 is statistically significant only for the subset of retail investors, indicating that only
such investors have a tendency to reach for income when the Fed Funds rates decline. This
effect is not present among institutional investors. The difference between the estimates for
retail and institutional investors is significantly different from zero at the 5% significance
level for the equity fund sample.

2.3.2

Discussion

The above results can help differentiate among theories that have been proposed to explain
the “dividend puzzle” (Black 1976), that is, the observation that investors do exhibit a
strong preference for dividends despite the irrelevance of dividend policy in perfect capital
markets with rational agents (Miller and Modigliani 1961). Two broad groups of theories
have been proposed to explain this puzzle. The first group of theories relaxes the assumption of perfect capital markets and introduces institutional frictions such as asymmetric
information (Bhattacharya 1979; John and Williams 1985; Miller and Rock 1985) and
agency problems between corporate insiders and outside shareholders (Easterbrook 1984;
Jensen 1986; Fluck 1998, 1999; Myers 1998; Gomes 2001; and Zwiebel 1996). The second
group of theories relaxes the investor rationality assumption and argues that investors’ behavioral reasons, such as self-control motives, loss aversion, or regret aversion, can generate
the observed demand for dividends (Shefrin and Statman 1984; Thaler 1999).
If institutional frictions were the source of the demand for dividends, then one would
expect institutional investors to exhibit a similar, if not stronger, preference for dividends.
We do not find evidence of this in our data. As shown in columns 2 and 3 of Table 6,
institutional investors do not reach for income, in contrast to retail investors. To the extent
that retail investors are likely to be more subject to behavioral biases than institutional
investors, our results lend support to the second group of theories that explain the dividend
puzzle as a departure from investor rationality.
16

Furthermore, our findings help to differentiate among different behavioral theories proposed as explanations for the dividend puzzle. In particular, the fact that investors reach
for income when monetary policy is accommodative seems to corroborate the prediction
of theories that rely on self-control. For example, if investors follow the conventional rule
of “living off dividends” as a way to control a tendency to over-consume, a natural consequence would be that a low-interest-rate monetary policy would increase the demand for
dividend-paying assets by lowering the income from bonds. In Section 4, we build a simple
model with hyperbolic discounting to formalize this intuition. In contrast, it is difficult to
conceive that monetary policy would affect investor loss or regret aversion in such a way
as to generate the observed pattern of an increased demand for dividend-paying assets in
low-interest-rate periods.

2.3.3

Robustness

Table 7 presents a set of robustness checks to the baseline regression in Table 6. Specifically,
we consider: (i) an alternative definition of monetery policy changes, and (ii) alternative
ways to characterize high-dividend funds.
In our baseline results reported in Table 6, we only consider changes in short-term
interest rates. A possible concern with this choice is that monetary policy not only affects
short-term rates but also influences long-term rates through the expectation of future
policy. As such, a decrease in the long-term interest rates may also induce investors to
reach for income. To account for this possibility, we re-estimate regression (7) by including
an interaction term between the changes of the term spread and the high-income dummy.
The term spread is measured as the difference between the ten-year Treasury yield and
the Fed Funds rates. We report the results in columns 1 and 2 of Table 7. We find that
a decrease in the term spread also leads to additional flows into high-income funds with a
magnitude similar to that of the change in the short-term rates.
Columns 3 to 4 of Table 7 consider different ways to characterize high-income funds.
In our baseline regression in Table 6, we split the sample into two groups, high- versus
low-income funds. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 7 split the sample into ten deciles. Using
this alternative classification, we find results that are consistent with those of columns 1
and 2.

17

Columns 5 and 6 of Table 7 classify mutual funds into high- and low-income funds
based on fund names. In the data, about 10% of equity funds have “dividends,” “income,”
or “yield” in their names. Most of these funds seek to generate a high income to cater to
income-seeking investors.11 Using the information inferred from fund names, we classify
a fund as a high-income fund if its name contains “dividends,” “income,” or “yield”. For
bond funds, we use “high dividends,” “high income,” or “high yield” to identify highincome funds.12 Under this classification, we find that a reduction in the Fed Funds rates
is associated with significantly larger flows into funds whose name alludes to a high-income
focus.

3

Asset pricing implications

The tendency of investors to reach for income may imply a role for monetary policy in the
determination of equilibrium asset prices. We hypothesize that by increasing the demand
for dividends, low-interest rate monetary policy may drive up the valuation of dividendpaying stocks relative to that of non-dividend-paying stocks.
We first follow Baker and Wurgler (2004b) to construct an empirical measure of dividend
premium, defined as the difference between the (equal-weighted averages of the) log marketto-book ratios of dividend-paying stocks and non-dividend-paying stocks in each year. We
relate this dividend premium measure to the stance of monetary policy.
Figure 4 reports the relationship between the annual changes in the dividend premium
and the annual changes in the Fed Funds rates from 1963 to 2016. As the figure shows,
a decrease in the Fed Funds rates is associated with an increase in the relative valuation
of dividend-paying stocks versus non-dividend paying stocks. This is consistent with an
increase in demand for dividends at times when the Fed Funds rates fall.
To formally test whether high-dividend stocks may outperform low-dividend stocks
when interest rates are declining, we divide the sample period from 1963 to 2016 into
rising and declining interest rate environments based on the three-year change in the Fed
11

For instance, a Pittsburgh-based asset management company, Federated, manages a fund called Federated Strategic Value Dividend Fund. As indicated by the fund name, this fund “seeks a higher dividend
yield than that of the broad equity market.”(From the 2017 Prospectus of Federated Strategic Value
Dividend Fund)
12
Because many bond funds contain the generic string “fixed income,” a single word “income” would
not be sufficient to identify high-income funds.

18

Fund rates leading up to month t, ∆F F Rt . For each sub-sample we compute excess returns
(alphas) from the five-factor model of Fama and French (2016). It is well known (see Fama
and French 1993) that dividend decile portfolios do not exhibit risk-adjusted average excess
returns. However, Table 8 shows that conditional on the monetary policy stance, dividendsorted portfolios do exhibit significant risk-adjusted excess returns. Specifically, during
times of decreasing Fed Funds rates, high-dividend portfolios have positive and significant
alphas while low-dividend portfolios have negative and significant alphas. During times of
increasing Fed Funds rates, the opposite pattern occurs.
To assess the robustness of these findings, we construct abnormal returns of each dividend decile portfolio based on the CAPM and the Fama-French 3-factor, 4-factor, and
5-factor models.13 We then estimate the following regression model:
αi,t = β1 ∆FFRt + β2 ∆FFRt × DivDecilei + ζi + εi,t ,

(8)

where αi,t is the abnormal return of portfolio i in month t. DivDecilei is the decile of each
portfolio and ζi represents decile fixed-effects. Table 9 reports the results. The interaction
coefficient β2 is negative and significant for all asset pricing models we consider, providing
consistent evidence that declining interest rates are associated with positive excess returns
for high-dividend portfolios.
These patterns in alphas suggest a simple trading strategy that longs high-dividend
stocks and shorts low-dividend stocks when rates are declining, and reverses the position
when rates are rising. Figure 5 shows the cumulative returns for this strategy from 1956
to 2015. Over the 1987–2015 period, this strategy earned a monthly Fama-French 5-factor
alpha of 44 basis points, and generated an annual Sharpe ratio of about 0.23, a value
comparable to that of a strategy that exploits the value premium in the cross-section. In
contrast, this strategy does not perform as well in the period before the Great Disinflation
of the 1980s and 1990s, possibly because bond yields were much higher than stock dividend
yields, thus muting investors’ incentive to reach for income.
Finally, to assess the persistence of the impact of monetary policy on excess returns
we construct the impulse response of excess returns to Fed Funds rates. Specifically, we
regress the monthly excess returns αi,t of each decile portfolio i on the lagged annual
13

The result is robust to allowing factor loadings to be a function of the Fed Funds rates. The result is
presented in the Online Appendix.

19

changes in the Fed Funds rates over the past ten years:
αi,t = βi,1 ∆FFRt,t−1 + βi,2 ∆FFRt−1,t−2 + ... + βi,10 ∆FFRt−9,t−10 + εi,t .

(9)

Figure 6 plots the estimated coefficients βi,t as a function of t for the two lowest and the two
highest dividend decile portfolios. The figure shows that monetary policy has a persistent
impact on excess returns. This is likely due to the persistence of mutual fund inflows and
of the stock-buying pressure from individual investors. Comparing the impulse response
of excess returns in Figure 6 to the impulse response of mutual fund flows in Figure 3, we
find that excess returns switch from positive to negative around year 3, about two years
before the time in which fund flows to high-dividend equity funds peak in Figure 3. This
finding suggests that some investors might still flow into high-dividend funds even when
high-dividend stocks are overpriced and the expected excess returns in the future are likely
to be negative.
In summary, the empirical analysis of the previous two sections shows that monetary
policy affects investors’ choice between high- and low-dividend stocks and that the changes
in demand for dividends significantly impact asset prices. These results are surprising in
light of the irrelevance of dividend policy and raise important questions regarding both
the functioning of markets and agent rationality. Why do investors have a preference
for dividends? Why does monetary policy affect this preference? In the next section we
propose a model of “reaching for income” to potentially address these questions.

4

A model of “reaching for income”

In this section we analyze the theoretical foundations and implications for the reaching-forincome hypothesis. In Section 4.1 we propose a possible microfoundation of the living-offincome rule, based on the notion of time-inconsistency of agents’ preferences. In Section 4.2
we show that, in an economy in which a fraction of agents follow the living-off-income rule,
monetary policy, by influencing the interest income from bonds, can affect the equilibrium
risk premium of high dividend-paying assets.

20

4.1

A microfoundation of reaching-for-income behavior

Let us consider an asset market consisting of N assets. In this section we take the asset
returns as given and denote by Rt the N × 1 vector of asset returns. In Section 4.2
we determine these returns endogenously in an a general equilibrium with heterogeneous
agents. Let θt be a N ×1 vector of portfolio weights invested in each of the risky assets. We
consider an agent with quasi-hyperbolic discounting preference who solves the following
lifetime consumption and portfolio problem (Harris and Laibson 2001)
max

−1
{Cτ ,θτ }T
τ =t

u(Ct ) + Et

T
X

βδ τ +1−t u(Cτ +1 )

(10)

θt> 1 = 1,

(11)

τ =t

subject to the dynamic budget constraint
Wt+1 = (Wt − Ct )Rp,t+1 (θt ),

where Rp,t+1 (θt ) denotes the return of portfolio θt at time t+1, that is, Rp,t+1 (θt ) = θt> Rt+1 .
In (10), the parameter β captures the intensity of the agent’s psesent bias, that is, the
extent to which the agent values immediate rewards at the expense of long-term intentions.
When β < 1, the agent’s preferences are time-inconsistent. At any time t the discount
rate between any two periods from t + 1 onward is δ, but the discount rate from t to
t + 1 is βδ < δ. This implies that the agent consistently plans to be patient in the future
(when the discount rate is δ) but as the future arrives, he changes his mind and becomes
impatient, discounting the immediate future at a rate βδ. This in turn implies that the
agent plans to save in the future but, as the future arrives, he systematically reneges on
his promise and consumes more than he would have done if he were able to commit to his
original plan.14
In the presence of time-inconsistent preferences, commitment may become valuable to
the agent. A prevalent commitment device in this situation is to use current income to
discipline consumption, as suggested by the popular advice “live off income, do not dip
into the principal.” Financial advisors usually suggest investors direct the interest and
dividend income into a bank account for daily consumption while keep their principal in a
14

Smaller value of β implies a more severe present bias while β = 1 corresponds to the time-consistent
case.

21

brokerage account that is inconvenient for immediate or impulsive spending.”15 Motivated
by this practice, we allow the agent in our model to choose to adopt the consumption rule
of “living off income”:16
0 ≤ Ct+1 ≤ It+1 (θt ), t = 0, . . . , T − 2,

(12)

where It+1 (θt ) is the income generated by portfolio θt at time t + 1, that is, the sum of
dividends and interest. The constraint (12) imposes that future consumption Ct+1 cannot
exceed the income It+1 (θt ) generated by the portfolio inherited from time t. Therefore,
the current “self” can constrain the future “self” by choosing a portfolio θt which delivers
at time t + 1 a level of income that constrains future consumption.
At the same time, however, the consumption rule limits the flexibility of the agent to
adjust consumption to ex-post portfolio returns. When the agent wants to consume more
because of high portfolio returns, portfolio income inefficiently caps consumption. In other
words, the agent faces a trade-off between commitment and flexibility.
The following proposition characterizes the solution of the problem (10)–(12) for an
investor with CRRA preferences.
Proposition 1. Let us consider an investor with CRRA preferences, u(C) = C 1−γ /(1−γ),
with γ > 1 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, and an asset market consisting of
N assets with return vector Rt and dividend-yield vector Yt . Let it ≡ It /Wt denote the
income to wealth ratio at time t. Then the optimal portfolio, θt∗ , and consumption, Ct∗ ,
that solve the problem (10)–(12) for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 are given by
θt∗ = arg max Bt (θt )

(13)

Ct∗ = ξt∗ (it ) Wt ,

(14)

θt

15

As an example, consider the following quote that appeared in a popular financial advice website The
Balance: “One way you can avoid the temptation to dip into your seed corn is to use what I call a central
collection and disbursement account. Doing so results in the dividends, interest, profits, rents, licensing
income, or other gains you see being deposited into a bank account dedicated to disbursements, not the
brokerage accounts or retirement trusts that hold your investments [ .... ] It erects a barrier between you
and your principal.” (Kennon 2016)
16
Note that the constraint does not bind in the last period t = T because, in a finite horizon problem
without bequest, the agent has to consume his entire wealth.

22

where Bt (θt ) is given by
" 1−γ
#
Rp,t+1 (θt )
Bt (θt )1−γ
≡ Et
κV,t+1 (it+1 )1−γ ,
1−γ
1−γ

(15)

with Rp,t+1 (θt ) = θt> Rt+1 the portfolio return, it+1 the next period income to wealth ratio
is given by
Yp,t+1 (θt )
it+1 =
, t = 0, . . . , T − 1,
(16)
Rp,t+1 (θt )
with Yp,t+1 (θt ) = θt> Yt+1 the portfolio dividend yield, and κV,t+1 (it+1 ) the agent’s continuation value from time t + 1 onwards, given by

1
 (ξ ∗ )1−γ + δ(1 − ξ ∗ )1−γ B (θ∗ )1−γ  1−γ
,
t+1
t+1
t+1
t+1
κV,t+1 (it+1 ) =
1,

for t = 0, . . . , T − 2

.

for t = T − 1
(17)

The consumption wealth ratio ξt∗ (it ) is given by
ξt∗ (it )



xt
= min it ,
1 + xt



1

, where xt ≡ (βδ)− γ Bt (θt∗ )

γ−1
γ

> 0.

(18)

The agent’s value function at time t, Jt (Wt , it ), is
Jt (Wt , it ) = Wt1−γ

κJ,t (it )1−γ
,
1−γ

(19)

where κJ,t (it ) represents the certainty equivalent wealth given by
κJ,t (it ) = (ξt∗ )1−γ + βδ(1 − ξt∗ )1−γ Bt (θt∗ )1−γ

1
 1−γ

.

(20)

As the proposition illustrates, the solution of the problem is recursive and proceeds
backward, starting with the boundary condition (17) for the continuation value κV,T = 1.
Comparing the continuation value from t + 1 onwards, equation (17), and time-t certainty
equivalent wealth (20), we note that at each time t, the agent’s discount factor for times
t + 1 and onward is equal to δ while the discount rate between time t and t + 1 is equal to
∗
βδ. Therefore, the consumption wealth ratio chosen by the agent at time t + 1, ξt+1
, will
be higher than what the agent would have preferred at time t. This is the manifestation
of time-inconsistency: the agent plans to save in the future, but as the future arrives,

23

the agent consumes more than planned. Anticipating that the time-t + 1 self will become
impatient at time t+1, the time-t self tries to affect the choice set of his future self through
his current portfolio choice at time-t and the imposition of the self-control constraint (12).
To illustrate the solution derived in Proposition 1, we implement the model for the
case of two risky assets and a risk-free asset. We assume that the two risky assets have
identical binomial return distributions in each period, but differ in their dividend yields.
We denote by H the risky asset with the higher dividend yield and by L the risky asset
with the low dividend yield.17
The imposition of the self control constraints, while allowing the current-self to discipline the consumption temptation of his future-self, comes at a cost of limiting his flexibility. Figure 7 illustrates the trade-off between commitment and flexibility. We report
time-1 consumption as a function of time-1 wealth for an agent with time-inconsistent preferences in the two-period example. The black line, C1fc , is the first-best case consumption
from the standpoint of the time-0 self obtained by setting β = 1 in the time-1 portfolio
choice problem. The blue line, C1unc , is the consumption that will be chosen by time-1
self. Note that C1unc > C1fc always, indicating that, in the unconstrained case, the agent
consumes more than the time-0 planned optimal consumption. The red line, C1con , is the
consumption of an agent who commits to consume not more than the portfolio income.
The income from the portfolio is the dashed-dotted line, I1 , set to unity in the figure. Intuitively, the self-control constraint reduces the over-consumption problem in low-wealth
states, but limits the flexibility of choosing high consumption in high-wealth states. The
trade-off between the benefit and cost of the self-control constraint depends on the severity
of the over-consumption problem and the value of flexibility.
Figure 8 shows the time-0 certainty equivalent wealth, κJ from equation (20). We
assume that the agent faces a current self-control constraint at time 0, and consider three
con
possible cases for the time-1 consumption: (i) unconstrained, κunc
J ; (ii) constrained, κJ ;
and (iii) first-best case, κfc
J . For each case we report the certainty equivalent wealth as
the value of the present bias parameter β varies. Low value of β corresponds to a high
level of distortion in consumption induced by time inconsistency, while β = 1 represents
1

17

2

Specifically, we assume that the return on asset i = H, L in each period is either Riu = eµi + 2 σi +σi
1 2
or Rid = eµi + 2 σi −σi with equal probability 1/2, and that the joint probability of (RH , RL ) is 1/4(1 + ρ)
u
u
d
d
u
d
for (RH , RL ) = (RH
, RL
) and (RH , RL ) = (RH
, RL
) and 1/4(1 − ρ) for (RH , RL ) = (RH
, RL
) and
d
u
(RH , RL ) = (RH , RL ). This ensures that the return correlation is equal to ρ. We assume that µH = µL
and σH = σL . We take the gross risk-free rate Rf = 1 + rf and the dividend yields YH > YL to be
constant over time.

24

the time-consistent case. The black line, κfc
J , shows the first-best-case certainty equivalent
wealth. When time-inconsistency is severe (low β), the constrained certainty equivalent
unc
wealth, κcon
J , is higher than the unconstrained one, κJ , while the opposite is true if the
time-inconsistency is less severe (β close to one). This implies that it is optimal for an
agent to commit to a self-control constraint if he has a strong tendency to over-consume
due to high present-time bias, that is, low β.
Figure 9 repeats the analysis of Figure 8 and reports certainty equivalent wealth as a
function of stock return volatility. Intuitively, flexibility is more valuable when volatility
is high and therefore a constraint is more harmful. Consistent with this intuition, the
certainty equivalent wealth in the presence of a self-control constraint is higher than the
unconstrained case for low levels of return volatility but lower than the unconstrained case
for high levels of return volatility.
In summary, the analysis in this section provides a potential microfoundation of the
consumption rule of “living off income” by showing that this rule can be an optimal
commitment device for an agent with a hyperbolic discounting preference. Other frictions
or behavioral biases may also lead to such a consumption rule. For example, prior to 1975,
the NYSE set large minimum trade commissions that were almost always binding (Jones,
2002).18 The rule of living off income is a plausible response to such high transaction
costs. While transaction costs are now too low to provide a plausible explanation for the
“living off income” rule of thumb, we cannot exclude that such a rule became established
in the fixed-commission period, and that investors continue to follow it despite being
sub-optimal.19 Another related explanation for living-off-income is the “mental effort”
involved in liquidating asset positions. Our empirical analysis on individual trading data
shows that infrequent traders do not exhibit a stronger tendency to reach for income than
frequent traders, a result inconsistent with the mental effort explanation.20 Combining
our empirical evidence with the discussion of financial advisors such as Kennon (2016)
and Owens (2016), it appears that disciplining consumption is arguably a more plausible
reason underpinning the rule of “living off dividends.”
Specifically, Jones reports that, between March 3, 1959 and December 5, 1968, trades of less than $400
paid a minimum commission of $3 plus 2% of the amount traded. For trades between $400 and $2,400, the
minimum commission was $7 plus 1% of the amount traded. Jones also reports that commission rebates
were strictly prohibited by the exchange.
19
We thank Terry Odean for pointing this out to us.
20
The result is presented in the Online Appendix.
18

25

Regardless of the fundamental reasons underlying the consumption rule of “live off
dividends,” the analysis of the next section shows that as long as some investors follow
such a rule, monetary policy will have an impact on portfolio allocations and the risk
premium, even in an economy in which prices are fully flexible.

4.2

Implications of living off income for monetary policy

In this section, we analyze the equilibrium implication for monetary policy in an economy
in which a fraction of investors follow the consumption rule of living off income.
We consider an endowment economy populated by two types of agents: agents of the
first type make their consumption and savings decisions based on their permanent income,
while agents of the second type have a hyperbolic discounting preference and follow the
consumption rule of “living off current income” as discussed in Section 4.1. Time is discrete
and runs over two periods, t = 0, 1, 2.
Monetary policy. We model monetary policy as determining the nominal risk-free rates
in the economy, rt$,f = rtf + πt where rtf denotes the net real rate and πt inflation. To keep
the model simple, we do not model the optimization problem of the monetary authority,
and, as in Stein (2012), we abstract away price stickiness and assume instead that prices
are fully flexible. In this setting, monetary policy de facto changes the evolution of the
price level, or more precisely, the inflation rate πt . Notice that monetary policy does not
affect the real endowment process in our model. Therefore, in the absence of any nominal
friction, monetary policy is completely neutral. However, as we show below, the presence
of a fraction of agents following the “living off income” rule introduces a nominal friction
in the model that renders money non-neutral. As a consequence, monetary policy has a
real effect on the equilibrium risk premium.
Endowment. The economy consists of two risky endowment trees, j = L, H. The
agent can trade financial assets that represent claims on the endowment trees. Asset L
is the low-dividend risky asset and asset H is the high-dividend risky asset. We assume
that risky dividends follow a multiplicative binomial process over the horizon, that is, the
dividend growth can take values uj or dj at each time with
1

1

2

2

uj = eµj − 2 σj +σj , and dj = eµj − 2 σj −σj j = L, H.

26

(21)

The high-dividend asset has a higher current dividend level and thus a lower dividend
growth rate than the low-dividend assets, that is, µH < µL . We assume that dividend
growth of the two assets have a correlation equal to ρ and the following joint probability
distribution
1
1
Pr(uL , uH ) = Pr(dL , dH ) = (1 + ρ), and Pr(uL , dH ) = Pr(dL , uH ) = (1 − ρ).
4
4

(22)

This guarantees that the correlation between the dividend growth of asset H and L is
indeed equal to ρ. Denoting by Ptj the price of asset j ∈ {H, L} at time t, we have that
the one period return R̃j,t1 is given by
R̃j,t+1 =

j
j
Dt+1
+ Pt+1

Ptj

,

j = H, L.

(23)

In addition to the two risky endowment trees, there is also a short-term risk-free bond for
each period that pays a pre-determined dividend at maturity, Dtf = 1, for t = 0, 1, 2. The
f
risk-free rate for the horizon ending at time t = 1, 2 is defined as Rtf = 1 + rtf = Dtf /Pt−1
.
At time 0 agents are endowed with a share of each of the assets and choose consumption
and portfolio composition to maximize their lifetime expected utility. Specifically, at each
date t = 0, 1 agents optimally choose their consumption and allocate their savings in a
portfolio composed of the three dividend-generating assets. At time t = 2 agents consume
all the dividends produced by the assets they hold.
Preferences. We assume that both agents have the same attitude toward atemporal risk,
captured by CRRA preferences. However, their time-discounting attitude differ. Agent A
has quasi-hyperbolic discounting as discussed in Section 4, while agent B has exponential
discounting. Specifically, each agent h = A, B solves the following problem



max E0 u(Ch,0 ) + βh δh u(Ch,1 ) + βh δh2 u(Ch,2 ) , βA < 1, βB = 1,

(24)

subject to a budget constraint for t = 0, 1
H
Ch,t = Wh,t − nfh,t Ptf − nLh,t PtL − nH
h,t Pt
f
L
L
H
H
Wh,t+1 = nfh,t Dt+1
+ nLh,t (Dt+1
+ Pt+1
) + nH
h,t (Dt+1 + Pt+1 ),

27

(25)
(26)

with njh,t , j ∈ {H, L, f } denoting, respectively, agent h’s demand for asset H, asset L, and
f
short-term Treasuries. The initial endowment of Treasuries ,S−1
, risky assets, S L and S H ,
and its distribution across agents, determines the initial wealth of agents:
f
Wh,0 = ωh (S−1
D0f + S L (D0L + P0L ) + S H (D0H + P0H )),

(27)

where ωh denotes agent h’s share of total wealth.
In (24), βA < 1, while βB = 1, denoting that agent A suffers from present bias, as
discussed in Section 4. Agent A responds to this bias by imposing a self-control constraint
$
on the nominal amount of next-period consumption, that is the nominal consumption CA,t
is bounded by the net income available at time t, 0, 1, that is


$,f
$,H
$
+ nLA,t−1 Dt$,L + nH
CA,t
≤ nfA,t−1 Πt − Pt−1
A,t−1 Dt ,

(28)

$
where CA,t
= CA,t Πt is the consumption in terms of time t dollars and Πt is the time-t
price level. Because the bond has a real dividend of 1 at time t, the nominal dividend
$,f
of the bond is Πt at time t. Pt−1
is the nominal price of the short-term bond at time
$,f
t − 1. Πt − Pt−1 is the nominal interest income. Note that the self-control constraint is
automatically satisfied at time t = 2 because each agent has to consume the total asset
dividends at the terminal date.

The following proposition illustrates that a change in the nominal risk-free rate on the
income constraint (28) affects the agents real consumption/savings ratio.
Proposition 2. Let Πt denote the time-t price level. Then self-control constraint (28) on
nominal consumption is equivalent to a constraint on the ratio of real consumption to real
savings, that is,
CA,t
f
l
H
≤ θA,t−1
rt$,f + θA,t−1
dpLt + θA,t−1
dpH
t ,
WA,t−1 − CA,t−1

(29)

j
where θh,t
, j ∈ {H, L, f } is the portfolio holding in asset j:

j
θA,t

njA,t Ptj
=
,
WA,t − CA,t

Dj

(30)

dpjt = P j t is the dividend yield of asset j = H, L, and rt$ is the nominal risk-free rate at
t−1
time t.
28

The expression of the constraint (29) in the proposition shows that an increase in the
nominal interest rate rt$,f at time t relaxes the income constraint. The source of nominal
friction in the model comes from the fact that agents think about bond income in nominal
terms rather than in real terms. Hence, the presence of investors who follow the nominal
consumption rule (28) is the reason why monetary policy has a real effect in our otherwise
frictionless economy.
Equilibrium. Given an endowment process of treasuries S f and risky assets S L and
S H , an equilibrium is characterized by a set of prices {Pf,t , PH,t , PL,t } and allocation (consumption and portfolio rules) such that both agents maximize expected utility (24) subject
to (25), (26), and (28) and markets clear
nfA,t + nfB,t = Stf

(31)

nLA,t + nLB,t = S L

(32)

H
H
nH
A,t + nB,t = S .

(33)

Portfolio composition. To understand the effect of the self-control constraint on asset
demand, we first first derive the optimal portfolio of both agents taking returns as given.
Figure 10 illustrates the agents’ portfolio holdings of the high- and low-dividend stocks at
time t = 0 for each level of nominal interest rates.21 Notice that, for the unconstrained
agent A, the holdings of both assets are unaffected by the level of the nominal interest rate,
unc
that is θH
= θLunc .22 In contrast, the constrained agent exhibits clear reaching-for-income
con
> θLcon .
behavior, holding a much larger fraction of the high-dividend-paying assets, θH
Furthermore, the sensitivity of the holding of the high-dividend asset is larger than that
of the low-dividend asset. As the nominal risk-free rate r$,f decreases, the agent shifts his
portfolio more aggressively toward the high-dividend-paying asset.
Equilibrium risk premia. The demand patterns induced by the presence of the selfcontrol constraint have implications for equilibrium asset prices in this economy. In the
spirit of Baker and Wurgler (2004b), we define the equilibrium dividend premium as the
the ratio of the risk premium—the expected excess return over the risk-free rate—of the
low-dividend yield stock and that of the high-dividend yield stock. Intuitively, this measure
captures the relative valuation high- versus low-dividend yield assets in the economy.
21

We assume that the return distribution is as described in Section 4.1, footnote 17.
In general equilibrium, the unconstrained agent’s portfolio is also affected by monetary policy because
the asset prices adjust in equilibrium.
22

29

Figure 11 plots the relationship between the equilibrium dividend premium and the
nominal risk-free rate at time t = 0. The red line is the dividend premium as a function of
the risk-free rates when the time-inconsistent agent is subject to a self-control constraint,
while the blue line is the dividend premium when there is no self-control constraint. Note
that risk premia are inversely related to prices. In equilibrium, a lower risk-free rate
represents lower income yield from the bond. When the risk-free rate is low, the reachingfor-income behavior of the time-inconsistent agent bids up the price of the high dividend
yield asset (H) relative to that of the low-dividend yield asset (L) thus implying a higher
dividend premium. These findings are qualitatively consistent with our empirical finding
in Figure 4.23
To show the effect of the consumption rule, we also solve an unconstrained version of
the equilibrium in which no agents follow the consumption rule of “living off income.” As
shown in Figure 11, the equilibrium dividend premium in such an economy is unaffected
by the level of the nominal risk free rate. In the unconstrained equilibrium, monetary
policy is completely neutral.
Note that, in our model, monetary policy affects the risk premium of assets. This is in
contrast to standard New Keynesian models in which monetary policy works by influencing
the real risk-free rates. This feature of our model is consistent with a growing body of
evidence that documents the impact of monetary policy shocks on asset prices through
the risk premium channel (Bernanke and Kuttner 2005, Gertler and Karadi 2015; Hanson
and Stein 2015). Unlike the standard New Keynesian model, in which the main friction is
price stickiness, in our model, prices are fully flexible and the key friction is the presence
of a non-negligible fraction of agents that consume out of their nominal income. This
mechanism places our model within the class of models that studies the financial channel
of monetary policy transmission.24
23
Notice, however, that the variations in the dividend premium from our model are very small. This is
an artifact of the two-period model we consider. In a two-period model, the dividend yield is high because
in each period the dividend represents a large fraction of the price. Therefore, the variation in the bond
interest rates has a small effect on the relative risk premium of the two stocks. A better calibration can be
achieved in a model with bequest motives or infinitely lived agents in which the dividend yields of stocks
can be made comparable to the income yield from bonds.
24
See Drechsler et al. (2017b) for a survey.

30

5

Discussion

Our analysis highlights a new channel through which monetary policy impacts the financial
sector of an economy. In what follows we discuss the relevance of these effects for portfolio
diversification, capital allocation, and investors’ risk-taking behavior.
Portfolio under-diversification. Accommodative monetary policy may induce underdiversification of investors’ portfolios. As Figures 10 shows, a fully diversified portfolio in
our model would have equal weights in both the high- and low-dividend stocks. However,
as accommodative monetary policy depresses the risk-free rates, “reaching-for-income”
investors demand more high-dividend stocks and sell low-dividend stocks. The overall
portfolio standard deviation increases sharply, as illustrated in Figure 12. In the data,
stocks that pay a high dividend usually concentrate in certain sectors such as utilities
and telecommunications. Reaching for income would lead to excessive exposure to these
sectors. Furthermore, firms’ high-dividend yields might be a consequence of financial
distress that, by depressing prices, inflates dividend yields. Reaching for income may then
over-expose investors’ portfolios to distress-related events.
Risk-taking. When accommodative monetary policy lowers bond yields below those of
the stock market, “reaching-for-income” investors may substitute stocks for bonds, which
increases their overall portfolio risk. As Figures 10 illustrates, when the risk-free rate
is below a certain threshold, a further cut in interest rates would increase the weight of
both high- and low- dividend stocks. This is because bonds are unattractive in terms
of their current income, and investors are substituting into both high- and low-dividend
stocks. This increases the overall portfolio risks in a non-linear fashion. In equilibrium,
higher demand bids up asset prices, which may lead to a risk premium that is too low to
compensate for the associated risks.
As low interest rates drive up prices of high-dividend assets, dividend yields fall and
become less attractive to these “reaching-for-income” investors. These investors may reach
to alternative asset classes such as junk bonds, preferred securities, and real estate investment trusts (REITs). Many of these instruments may attract income-oriented investors
who ignore the contribution of these tools to overall portfolio risk.
Capital reallocation. In Section 3, we show that monetary policy affects the crosssection of dividend-sorted portfolios. This has implications for the allocation of capital
across firms with different dividend payout policies. If accommodative monetary policy
31

lowers the cost of capital of high-dividend paying companies, it may have redistributive
effects in the economy. In times of monetary policy easing, high-dividend paying companies
will find it cheaper to raise capital than low-dividend paying companies.
Catering. In Section 3, we show that low-interest rate monetary policy leads to higher
valuation of dividend-paying stocks. Catering to such demand, firms may initiate dividends
to boost their share prices. We find suggestive evidence of this in the data. Figure 13 plots
the level of the Fed Funds rates (right axis) and the fraction of firms that initiate cash
dividends in the following year (left axis). Panel A considers cash dividends while Panel B
refers to share repurchases. From Panel A we note that more firms initiate cash dividends
when the Fed Funds rates are lower. In contrast, Panel B shows that the likelihood of
initiating share repurchases does not exhibit the same correlation with the Fed Funds
rates. The different pattern between cash dividends and share repurchases is consistent
with the hypothesis that low-interest rates increase the demand for current income rather
than capital gains. In aggregate, however, the catering behavior of firms does not seem
to be able to satisfy all of the excess demand as asset prices of dividend-paying firms still
rise. A possible reason is that it may be costly for some firms to change their dividend
payout policy, e.g., Lintner (1956).
To summarize, we argue that through investors’ tendency to “reach for income,” monetary policy may lead to unintended consequences on the financial sector such as portfolio
under-diversification, capital reallocation, and excessive risk-taking.

6

Conclusion

This study documents empirical evidence that accommodative monetary policy induces
investors to reach for income: we find that a 1% decrease in the Fed Funds rate would lead
to a cumulative 5.18% inflow over three years to mutual funds with high income yields over
a three-year period, and a 0.946% increase in holdings of high-dividend-paying stocks over
a six-month period. The investors who reach for income are mainly investors who live off
dividend income for consumption. By exploiting regional variations in bank deposit rates,
we show that such effects are not driven by latent macroeconomic variables that correlate
with monetary policy.

32

Through its influence on the demand of high-dividend stocks, monetary policy affects
the prices of these assets. High-dividend stocks exhibit positive risk-adjusted returns in
periods of accommodative monetary policy, and negative or negligible abnormal returns in
periods of tightening monetary policy. A trading strategy that longs high-dividend stocks
when rates are falling and shorts them when rates are rising earns an annual Sharpe ratio
of about 0.18.
We propose an asset pricing model to explain these empirical results. We show that the
consumption rule of “living off income” naturally arises as a commitment device to control
over-consumption. Monetary policy, by influencing the interest income from bonds, will
impact the demand of dividend-paying stocks in a way that is consistent with what we
observed in the data.
Overall, our results add to a growing body of research showing that the monetary
authority exerts a profound impact on the financial sector through its intervention on the
risk-free rate. In particular, we show that an accommodative monetary policy induces
some investors to overweight high-dividend stocks, which may result in under-diversified
portfolios. Furthermore, through the reaching-for-income channel, monetary policy may
also affect the cross-section of asset prices and ultimately, capital allocation and risktaking behavior in the aggregate. While our study does not advocate that monetary
policy should change its course because of these potential distortions, our results highlight
that it is important for policy makers to be aware of the effects we document and devise
measures to contain their consequences.

33

A

Appendix: Proofs of Propositions

Proof of Proposition 1:
We solve the problem (10)–(28) backwards starting at time t = T − 1. The agent has one
period left and, because of quasi-hyperbolic discounting in (10), his short-term discount
rate is βδ. The state variables are represented by the agent’s wealth WT −1 and income
IT −1 . We denote by JT −1 (WT −1 , IT −1 ) the agent value function
(
J1 (WT −1 , IT −1 ) =

max

{0≤CT −1 ≤IT −1 ,θT −1 }

 1−γ )
CT1−γ
WT
−1
+ βδET −1
,
1−γ
1−γ

(A1)

where
WT = (WT −1 − CT −1 )Rp,T (θT −1 ).

(A2)

Let ξ1 ≡ CT −1 /WT −1 and iT −1 ≡ IT −1 /WT −1 . Then we can re-express problem (A1)–(A2)
as follows:
)
(
1−γ
1−γ
ξ
B
(θ
)
T −1 T −1
T −1
+ βδ(1 − ξT −1 )1−γ
JT −1 (WT −1 , iT −1 ) = WT1−γ
max
.
−1
{0≤ξT −1 ≤iT −1 ,θT −1 }
1−γ
1−γ
(A3)
where we define the quantity BT −1 (θT −1 ) such that
" 1−γ
#
Rp,T (θT −1 )
BT −1 (θT −1 )1−γ
≡ ET −1
.
1−γ
1−γ

(A4)

Note that BT −1 (θT −1 ) > 0 for all values of γ. In the optimization (A3), the optimal
portfolio θT∗ −1 is independent of the consumption choice ξT −1 and is given by
"
θT∗ −1 = arg max ET −1

#
1−γ
Rp,T
(θ1 )
.
1−γ

(A5)

From (A4), the optimization in (A5) is equivalent to
θT∗ −1 = arg max BT −1 (θT −1 ).

34

(A6)

Taking the first-order condition with respect to ξT −1 in (A3) we obtain that the unconstrained consumption ξTunc−1 is given by
(ξTunc−1 )−γ = βδ(1 − ξTunc−1 )−γ BT1−γ
−1 ,
or
ξTunc−1 =

(A7)

γ−1
1
xT −1
, where xT −1 ≡ (βδ)− γ BT −1 (θT∗ −1 ) γ > 0.
1 + xT −1

(A8)

Imposing the self-control constraint ξT −1 ≤ iT −1 we obtain
ξT∗ −1



xT −1
= min iT −1 ,
1 + xT −1


.

(A9)

From (A3), the value function JT −1 (WT −1 , iT −1 ) is then
JT −1 (WT −1 , iT −1 ) =

(κJ,T −1 (iT −1 ))
WT1−γ
−1
1−γ

1−γ

,

(A10)

where κJ,T −1 (iT −1 ) is the certainty equivalent
κJ,T −1 (iT −1 ) = (ξT∗ −1 )1−γ + βδ(1 − ξT∗ −1 )1−γ BT −1 (θT∗ −1 )1−γ
At time t = T − 2 the value function is
(
JT −2 (WT −2 , IT −2 ) =

max

{0≤CT −2 ≤IT −2 ,θT −2 }

1
 1−γ

.

"
#)
1−γ
1−γ
CT1−γ
C
W
−2
T −1
+ βδ ET −2
+δ T
.
1−γ
1−γ
1−γ

(A11)

(A12)

Under the optimal consumption and portfolio policy, the term in the above expression is
the continuation value from time t = T − 1 onward. From the above analysis, we infer
that the continuation value is of the form (A1) where βδ is replaced by δ. Hence, using
(A10) we can express the continuation value as
VT −1 (WT −1 , iT −1 ) =

1−γ
1−γ (κV,T −1 (iT −1 ))
WT −1
,

(A13)

1−γ

where
κV,T −1 (iT −1 ) = (ξT∗ −1 )1−γ + δ(1 − ξT∗ −1 )1−γ BT −1 (θT∗ −1 )1−γ

35

1
 1−γ

(A14)

We can then express the problem (A12) recursively as follows:
(
JT −2 (WT −2 , IT −2 ) =

max

{0≤CT −2 ≤IT −2 ,θT −2 }

)
CT1−γ
−2
+ βδ ET −2 [VT −1 (WT −1 , iT −1 (θT −2 ))] ,
1−γ
(A15)

where
WT −1 = (WT −2 − CT −2 )Rp,T −1 (θT −2 ),

(A16)

and
iT −1 (θT −2 ) =

IT −1
(WT −2 − CT −2 )Yp,T −1 (θT −2 )
Yp,T −1 (θT −2 )
=
=
.
WT −1
(W0 − C0 )Rp,T −1 (θT −2 )
Rp,T −1 (θT −2 )

(A17)

Using the definition of VT −1 (WT −1 , iT −1 ) in (A13)–(17) we obtain
(
JT −2 (WT −2 , iT −2 ) =

where

WT1−γ
−2

max

{0≤ξT −2 ≤iT −2 ,θT −2 }

)
1−γ
ξT1−γ
B
(θ
)
T
−2
T
−2
−2
+ βδ(1 − ξT −2 )1−γ
,
1−γ
1−γ
(A18)

" 1−γ
#
Rp,T −1 (θT −2 )
BT −2 (θT −2 )1−γ
≡ ET −2
κV,T −1 (iT −1 (θT −2 ))1−γ ,
1−γ
1−γ

(A19)

and iT −1 (θT −2 ) is given in (A17). In the optimization (A18) the optimal portfolio θT∗ −2 is
independent on the consumption choice ξT −2 and is given by
θT∗ −2 = arg max BT −2 (θT −2 ).

(A20)

Taking the first-order condition with respect to ξT −2 in (A18) and following the same steps
used at time t = T − 1 above, we obtain that the unconstrained consumption ξTunc−2 is given
by
ξT∗ −2


= min iT −2 ,

xT −2
1 + xT −2



1

where xT −2 ≡ (βδ)− γ BT −2 (θT∗ −2 )

γ−1
γ

> 0.

(A21)

From (A18), the value function JT −2 (WT −2 , iT −2 ) is then
JT −2 (WT −2 , iT −2 ) = WT1−γ
−2

36

(κJ,T −2 (iT −2 ))1−γ
,
1−γ

(A22)

where
κJ,T −2 (iT −2 ) = (ξT∗ −2 )1−γ + βδ(1 − ξT∗ −2 )1−γ BT −2 (θT∗ −2 )1−γ

1
 1−γ

.

(A23)

Proceeding backwards, we infer that at each time t = 0, . . . , T − 2, the problem can be
expressed recursively as

Jt (Wt , it ) =
with

Wt1−γ


max

{0≤ξt ≤it ,θt }

ξt1−γ
Bt (θt )1−γ
+ βδ(1 − ξt )1−γ
1−γ
1−γ


,

" 1−γ
#
Rp,t+1 (θT −2 )
Bt (θt )1−γ
≡ Et
κV,t+1 (it+1 (θt ))1−γ ,
1−γ
1−γ

(A24)

(A25)

where it+1 (θt ) = Rp,t+1 /Yp,t+1 and the continuation value κV,t+1 (it+1 (θt )) is
∗
∗
∗
κV,t+1 (it+1 ) = (ξt+1
)1−γ + δ(1 − ξt+1
)1−γ Bt+1 (θt+1
)1−γ

1
 1−γ

,

(A26)

which at time t is known from the solution at time t + 1.

Proof of Proposition 2:
Using the definition of portfolio weights (30), we can express the nominal constraint (28)
as follows
#
"
$,f
$,L
$,H

Π
−
P
D
D
t
f
t−1
t
t
L
H
$
$
+ θA,t−1
+ θA,t−1
CA,t Πt ≤ WA,t−1
(A27)
− CA,t−1
θA,t−1
$,f
$,L
$,H
Pt−1
Pt−1
Pt−1
"
#
$,L
$,H



D
D
f
t
t
$
$
L
H
+ θA,t−1
= WA,t−1
− CA,t−1
θA,t−1
Rt$,f − 1 + θA,t−1
(A28)
$,L
$,H
Pt−1
Pt−1
where
Rt$f ≡

Πt
$,f
Pt−1

=

1
f Πt−1
Pt−1
Πt

= Rtf

Πt
,
Πt−1

(A29)

f
where Rtf denotes the time-t real risk free rate Rtf = 1/Pt−1
.

Transforming the income constraint in real terms using the price levels Πt and Πt−1
and using (A29) we have

CA,t Πt ≤ (WA,t−1 − CA,t−1 ) Πt−1

f
θA,t−1




DtL Πt
DtH Πt
f Πt
L
H
− 1 + θA,t−1 L
Rt
+ θA,t−1 H
,
Πt−1
Pt−1 Πt−1
Pt−1 Πt−1
37

which simplifies to

CA,t ≤ (WA,t−1 − CA,t−1 )

f
θA,t−1




DtL
DtH
Πt−1
f
L
H
+ θA,t−1 L + θA,t−1 H .
Rt −
Πt
Pt−1
Pt−1

(A30)

By definition, inflation πt is the change in price levels, that is,
Πt
= 1 + πt .
Πt−1
When inflation is small, ΠΠt−1
≈ 1 − πt , and therefore the income yield of bonds in (A30)
t
is the net nominal interest rate, that is,
Rtf −

Πt−1
≈ 1 + rtf − (1 − πt ) = rtf + πt = rt$,f .
Πt

Using this approximation in (A30), we obtain that the nominal income constraint (28) can
be written as a function of the nominal interest rate rt$,f and risky assets’ real dividend
yields dpjt = Dtj /Pt−1 , j = H, L, that is,
Ct
f
l
h
≤ θt−1
rt$,f + θt−1
dpLt + θt−1
dpH
t .
Wt−1 − Ct−1

38

(A31)

B

List of Data Variables
Mutual Fund Data
Variable

Details of construction

Flow

Monthly changes in total net assets (TNA) adjusted for fund returns

Dividend Yield

The dividend yield is calculated by dividing the annual dividend
income distribution by the NAV of the mutual shares at the time
of distribution. If there are multiple distributions within one year,
then we sum the yield for each distribution.

High Dividend

A dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if a fund is in the top
decile of the dividend yield distribution for a given month, and 0
otherwise

Return

Past one-month gross return

Volatility

Annualized monthly return volatility over the past 12 months.

Size

Assets under management (log)

Expense

Expense ratio

∆Tax

3-year change in the difference in tax on dividends and capital gains.
The tax rate on dividends is the maximum individual tax rate retrieved from the FRED database from the St. Louis Fed. The series
name is “IITTRHB. ” The tax rate on capital gains is retrieved from
Treasury Department website.

∆FFR

3-year change in the Fed Funds rates. The Fed Funds rates are
retrieved from the FRED database from the St. Louis Fed. The
series name is “FEDFUNDS.”

39

Individual Holding Data
Variable

Details of construction

∆Holding

Percentage change in quantity of a security held over last 6 months.

Dividend Yield

The dividend yield of a stock is calculated by dividing the dollar value
of dividends per share of stock by the share price before the dividend
is paid. If a stock pays multiple dividends within a year, the annual
dividend yield is the sum of the dividend yield over the whole year.

Repurchase
Yield

The repurchase yield of a stock is calculated by dividing the dollar
value of repurchase per share of stock by the share price before the
repurchase. If a stock has multiple repurchase within a year, the
annual repurchase yield is the sum of the repurchase yield over the
whole year. The share repurchase measure is constructed following
Fama and French (2001).

Home Owner

A dummy variable which takes the value of 1 if an account holder
owns a home, and 0 otherwise

Married

A dummy variable which takes the value of 1 if an account holder is
married, and 0 otherwise

Male

A dummy variable which takes the value of 1 if an account holder is
male, and 0 otherwise

Retirees

Individuals whose age is above 65

Withdrawers

Individuals who have above a median frequency to withdraw their
dividend income rather than reinvesting it

∆Deposit Rates Local deposit rates are constructed in the following steps. First, we
calculate deposit rates of each bank by dividing bank interest payments on deposits by total deposits held at the end of each quarter.
Then we take average across all the banks in a metropolitan statistical
area (MSA) to calculate the MSA level deposit rates. Each bank’s deposit rate is weighted by the amount of deposits of this bank’s branches
in the MSA.
Income

Labor income of the account holder

Bank Card

A dummy variable which takes the value of 1 if an account holder has
a bank card

Vehicles

A dummy variable which takes the value of 1 if an account holder has
a vehicle
40

References
Ainslie, George, 1975, Specious reward: a behavioral theory of impulsiveness and impulse
control., Psychological Bulletin 82, 463.
Baker, Malcolm, Stefan Nagel, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2007, The effect of dividends on
consumption, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 38, 231–292.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2004a, Appearing and disappearing dividends: The
link to catering incentives, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 271–288.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2004b, A catering theory of dividends, The Journal
of Finance 59, 1125–1165.
Barber, Brad M, and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The
common stock investment performance of individual investors, The Journal of Finance
55, 773–806.
Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2015, Reaching for yield in the bond market, The
Journal of Finance 70, 1863–1902.
Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca, 2013, Risk, uncertainty and monetary
policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 60, 771–788.
Bernanke, Ben S, and Kenneth N Kuttner, 2005, What explains the stock market’s reaction
to federal reserve policy?, The Journal of finance 60, 1221–1257.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto, 1979, Imperfect information, dividend policy, and ’the bird in the
hand’ fallacy, The Bell Journal of Economics 259–270.
Black, Fischer, 1976, The dividend puzzle, The Journal of Portfolio Management 2, 5–8.
Carlson, Kyle, Joshua Kim, Annamaria Lusardi, and Colin F Camerer, 2015, Bankruptcy
rates among nfl players with short-lived income spikes, American Economic Review
105, 381–384.
Choi, Jaewon, and Mathias Kronlund, 2017, Reaching for yield in corporate bond mutual
funds, The Review of Financial Studies 31, 1930–1965.
Chung, Shin-Ho, and Richard J Herrnstein, 1967, Choice and delay of reinforcement,
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 10, 67–74.
Di Maggio, Marco, and Marcin Kacperczyk, 2017, The unintended consequences of the
zero lower bound policy, Journal of Financial Economics 123, 59–80.
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2017a, The deposits channel of monetary policy, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1819–1876.
41

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2017b, Liquidity, risk premia, and
the financial transmission of monetary policy, Annual Review of Financial Economics,
forthcoming .
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2018, A model of monetary policy
and risk premia, The Journal of Finance 73, 317–373.
Easterbrook, Frank H, 1984, Two agency-cost explanations of dividends, The American
Economic Review 74, 650–659.
Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: changing firm
characteristics or lower propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial economics 60, 3–43.
Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 2016, Dissecting anomalies with a five-factor
model, The Review of Financial Studies 29, 69–103.
Fluck, Zsuzsanna, 1998, Optimal financial contracting: Debt versus outside equity, The
Review of Financial Studies 11, 383–418.
Fluck, Zsuzsanna, 1999, The dynamics of the management-shareholder conflict, The Review of Financial Studies 12, 379–404.
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi, 2015, Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic activity, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, 44–76.
Gomes, Joao F, 2001, Financing investment, American Economic Review 1263–1285.
Graham, John R, and Alok Kumar, 2006, Do dividend clienteles exist? evidence on dividend preferences of retail investors, The Journal of Finance 61, 1305–1336.
Hanson, Samuel G, and Jeremy C Stein, 2015, Monetary policy and long-term real rates,
Journal of Financial Economics 115, 429–448.
Harris, Christopher, and David Laibson, 2001, Dynamic choices of hyperbolic consumers,
Econometrica 69, 935–957.
Hartzmark, Samuel M, and David H Solomon, 2017, The dividend disconnect, Chicago
Booth Research Paper.
Hau, Harald, and Sandy Lai, 2016, Asset allocation and monetary policy: Evidence from
the eurozone, Journal of Financial Economics 120, 309–329.
Jensen, Michael C, 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers,
The American Economic Review 76, 323–329.
42

Jiang, Hao, and Zheng Sun, 2015, Equity duration: A puzzle on high dividend stocks,
Michigan State University working paper.
John, Kose, and Joseph Williams, 1985, Dividends, dilution, and taxes: A signalling
equilibrium, the Journal of Finance 40, 1053–1070.
Jones, Charles M, 2002, A century of stock market liquidity and trading costs, Columbia
University Working Paper .
Kaustia, Markku, and Elias Rantapuska, 2012, Rational and behavioral motives to trade:
Evidence from reinvestment of dividends and tender offer proceeds, Journal of Banking
& Finance 36, 2366–2378.
Kennon, Joshua, 2016, Don’t eat your seed corn: Never spend your principal if you want to
be rich, https://www.thebalance.com/dont-eat-your-seed-corn-357234. Last accessed
on February 9, 2018.
Laibson, David, 1997, Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112, 443–478.
Lian, Chen, Yueran Ma, and Carmen Wang, 2017, Low interest rates and risk taking:
Evidence from individual investment decisions, Harvard working paper.
Lintner, John, 1956, Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained
earnings, and taxes, The American Economic Review 46, 97–113.
Luttmer, Erzo GJ, and Thomas Mariotti, 2003, Subjective discounting in an exchange
economy, Journal of Political Economy 111, 959–989.
McCarthy, Yvonne, 2011, Behavioural characteristics and financial distress, ECB, Working
paper .
Miller, Merton H, and Franco Modigliani, 1961, Dividend policy, growth, and the valuation
of shares, The Journal of Business 34, 411–433.
Miller, Merton H, and Kevin Rock, 1985, Dividend policy under asymmetric information,
The Journal of Finance 40, 1031–1051.
Morrow, James, Naveed Rahman, and Srinivas Vemparala, 2016, A new era for dividend
stocks, Fidelity Viewpoints .
Myers, Stewart C, 1998, Outside equity financing, Technical report, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Nagel, Stefan, 2016, The liquidity premium of near-money assets, The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 131, 1927–1971.
43

O’Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin, 1999, Doing it now or later, American Economics Review
89, 103–124.
Owens, Brett, 2016, How to make $500,000 last forever, Forbes (November 2) .
Rajan, Raghuram G, 2006, Has finance made the world riskier?, European Financial Management 12, 499–533.
Shefrin, Hersh M, and Meir Statman, 1984, Explaining investor preference for cash dividends, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 253–282.
Statman, Meir, 2017, Standard and behavioral life-cycle theories and public policy, The
Journal of Retirement 5, 12–25.
Stein, Jeremy C, 2012, Monetary policy as financial stability regulation, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 127, 57–95.
Thaler, Richard H, 1999, Mental accounting matters, Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 12, 183.
Xiao, Kairong, 2018, Monetary transmission through shadow banks, Columbia Business
School Working Paper.
Zwiebel, Jeffrey, 1996, Dynamic capital structure under managerial entrenchment, The
American Economic Review 1197–1215.

44

Table 1: Summary Statistics of the Stock-Holding Sample
This table reports summary statistics of the individual stock-holding sample from January 1991 to December 1996, covering a total of 19,394 households. The data are from a large discount broker. ∆Holding
represents the percentage change in the quantity of a security over a period of 6 months; Dividend Yield
represents the annual dividend yield of the stock. Repurchase Yield is the annual repurchase per share
divided by price per share. Retiree represents a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the age of an
account holder is above 65 and 0 otherwise; Labor Income represents a categorical variable that classifies
account holders into 10 income groups; Home Owner represents a dummy variable that takes the value of
1 if an account holder owns a home and 0 otherwise; Married represents a dummy variable that takes the
value of 1 if an account holder is married and 0 otherwise; Male represents a dummy variable that takes
the value of 1 if an account holder is male and 0 otherwise; Bank Card represents a dummy variable that
takes the value of 1 if an account holder has at least one bank card and 0 otherwise; Vehicles represents
the number of vehicles an account holder owns.

mean

sd

p10

p25

p50

p75

p90

∆ Holding

2.929

22.451

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

1.660

Income Yield

0.021

0.024

0.000

0.000

0.013

0.036

0.057

Repurchase Yield

0.005

0.025

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.012

Market Beta

1.089

0.581

0.399

0.693

1.060

1.432

1.837

Book-to-Market

0.613

0.462

0.163

0.280

0.505

0.813

1.168

Past 1-year Return

0.861

1.241

-0.696

0.173

1.076

1.586

2.263

Past 3-year Return

0.203

0.713

-0.657

-0.117

0.278

0.591

0.978

Market Cap (log)

14.310

2.481

10.734

12.468

14.619

16.356

17.396

Profit Margin

0.289

0.610

0.109

0.213

0.350

0.492

0.651

ROE

0.038

0.337

-0.246

0.014

0.101

0.184

0.282

Retiree

0.237

0.425

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

1.000

Labor Income

4.070

3.313

0.000

0.000

5.000

7.000

8.000

Home Owner

0.593

0.491

0.000

0.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

Married

0.426

0.494

0.000

0.000

0.000

1.000

1.000

Male

0.580

0.494

0.000

0.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

Bank Card

0.753

0.431

0.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

Vehicles

0.495

0.835

0.000

0.000

0.000

1.000

2.000

45

Table 2: Summary Statistics of the Mutual Fund Sample
This table reports the summary statistics of the mutual fund sample. The data are from the CRSP
Survivor-Bias-Free U.S. Mutual Fund database from January 1991 to December 2016, covering a total of
25,463 fund share classes for equity funds and 14,921 fund share classes for bond funds. Each observation is
a month-fund share class combination. Flow represents net inflows into a fund share class; Income Yield
represents the annual income yield of the fund; Return is monthly fund return; Volatility is standard
deviation of fund return for the past year; Size represents assets under management (log); and Expense
represents the expense ratio. Flow, Return, Volatility, and Expense are in percentages. Size is in millions
(log).

Panel A: Equity Funds
mean

sd

p10

p25

p50

p75

p90

Flow

2.566

14.810

-4.545

-1.623

-0.007

2.607

9.523

Income Yield

0.013

0.012

0.002

0.005

0.011

0.019

0.028

Return

0.007

0.051

-0.053

-0.018

0.012

0.036

0.061

Volatility

1.303

0.697

0.618

0.814

1.163

1.641

2.132

Size

3.608

2.733

-0.223

1.887

3.869

5.561

6.923

Expense

1.199

0.588

0.450

0.820

1.150

1.550

2.000

Panel B: Bond Funds
mean

sd

p10

p25

p50

p75

p90

Flow

1.408

12.515

-6.076

-2.084

-0.212

2.261

8.820

Income Yield

0.038

0.022

0.006

0.025

0.038

0.050

0.062

Return

0.003

0.014

-0.008

0.000

0.003

0.009

0.017

Volatility

0.283

0.294

0.005

0.031

0.243

0.392

0.585

Size

3.918

2.506

0.531

2.404

4.140

5.634

6.920

Expense

0.908

0.516

0.270

0.550

0.800

1.250

1.670

46

Table 3: Demographics of Withdrawers
This table reports the coefficient estimates from a logistic regression of a withdrawer dummy on a set
of demographic variables. The sample includes all the households with demographic information in the
LBD data from 1991 to 1996. Columns 1 and 2 include all the individuals, while columns 3 and 4 include
only males and females respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses, with *, **, and *** denoting
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Standard errors are clustered at household and month levels.

(1)
All

(2)
All

(3)
Male

(4)
Female

Retiree

0.258∗∗∗
[0.040]

0.258∗∗∗
[0.040]

0.251∗∗∗
[0.048]

0.271∗∗∗
[0.075]

Labor Income

-0.018∗∗
[0.008]

-0.018∗∗
[0.008]

-0.024∗∗
[0.011]

0.025
[0.018]

Home Owner

0.061
[0.055]

0.061
[0.055]

0.089
[0.069]

0.018
[0.107]

Married

0.013
[0.041]

0.013
[0.041]

0.045
[0.045]

0.030
[0.113]

Bank Card

0.005
[0.043]

0.005
[0.043]

-0.019
[0.082]

0.017
[0.052]

Vehicles

0.026
[0.020]
No
19,394
0.002

0.026
[0.020]
Yes
19,394
0.002

0.042∗∗
[0.021]
Yes
11,442
0.003

-0.075
[0.070]
Yes
7,952
0.002

Occupation F.E.
Observations
Pseudo R-squared

47

Table 4: Stock Holdings and Monetary Policy: Retirees vs Non-retirees
This table reports the coefficient estimates from panel regression (4):
∆Holdingi,j,t = β1 ∆FFRt + β2 High Divi,j,t + β3 ∆FFRt × High Divi,j,t + γ 0 Xi,j,t + εi,j,t .
where ∆Holdingi,j,t is defined in equation (1) as the change in stock position over the past 6 months scaled
by the average position at the beginning and at the end of the period. ∆FFRt represents the three-year
change in Fed Funds rates from year t − 3 to year t; High Divi,j,t is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the
income yield of a stock is in the top decile for a given month, and 0 otherwise; and Xi,j,t is a set of control
variables. The first subset of control variables are stock characteristics including high repurchase dummy
and its interaction with the 3-year change in deposit rates, market beta and its interaction with the 3year change in deposit rates, book-to-market ratio and its interaction with the 3-year change in deposit
rates, past 1-year and 3-year returns, log market capitalization, profit margin, and ROE. The second set of
characteristics are demographic variables such as home-ownership, marital status, and gender. The sample
includes all the stock positions in the LBD data from 1991 to 1996. Column 1 includes all individuals in
the sample. Columns 2–3 include retirees and non-retirees respectively. Retirees represents individuals
whose age is above 65. Standard errors are in parentheses, with *, **, and *** denoting significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Standard errors are clustered at household and month levels.

(1)
All
-0.303∗∗∗
[0.105]

(2)
Retirees
-0.151
[0.109]

(3)
Non-retirees
-0.356∗∗∗
[0.109]

High Dividend

9.491∗∗∗
[1.143]

9.069∗∗∗
[1.262]

9.792∗∗∗
[1.203]

∆ FFR*High Dividend

-0.946∗∗∗
[0.338]

-1.568∗∗∗
[0.377]

-0.669∗∗
[0.339]

0.292
[0.490]

0.742
[0.733]

0.158
[0.541]

0.433∗∗∗
[0.126]
Yes
Yes
1,759,502
0.015

0.334∗
[0.196]
Yes
Yes
418,255
0.021

0.463∗∗∗
[0.139]
Yes
Yes
1,341,247
0.014

∆ FFR

High Repurchase

∆ FFR*High Repurchase
Stock Characteristics
Demographics
Observations
Adj. R-squared

48

Table 5: Local Deposit Rates and Stock Holdings
This table reports the coefficient estimates from panel regression (5):
∆Holdingi,j,t = β1 ∆Dep Ratesi,t + β2 High Divi,j,t + β3 ∆Dep Ratesi,t × High Divi,j,t + γ 0 Xi,j,t + εi,j,t
where ∆Holdingi,j,t is defined in equation (1) as the change in stock position over the past 6 months scaled
by the average position at the beginning and and at the end of the period. ∆Dep Ratesi,t is the 3-year
change in deposit rates from year t − 3 to year t. High Divi,j,t is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the
dividend yield of a stock is in the top decile for a given month and 0 otherwise; Xi,j,t is a set of control
variables. The first subset of control variables are stock characteristics including high repurchase dummy
and its the interaction with the 3-year change in deposit rates, market beta and its interaction with the
3-year change in deposit rates, book-to-market ratio and its interaction with the 3-year change in deposit
rates, past 1-year and 3-year returns, log market capitalization, profit margin, and ROE. The second set of
characteristics are demographic variables such as home-ownership, marital status, and gender. The local
deposit rates are average bank deposit rates in each MSA weighted by deposits. The sample includes all
the stock positions in the LBD data from 1991 to 1996. Column 1 includes all the individuals. Columns
2–3 include withdrawers and non-withdrawers respectively. Withdrawers represents individuals who have
above a median frequency of withdrawing their dividend income rather than reinvesting it. Standard errors
are in parentheses, with *, **, and *** denoting significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Standard
errors are clustered at household and month levels.

(1)
All
-0.883∗∗∗
[0.209]

(2)
Withdrawers
-0.858∗∗∗
[0.228]

(3)
Non-Withdr.
-1.153∗∗∗
[0.393]

7.638∗∗∗
[1.090]

7.533∗∗∗
[1.127]

9.233∗∗∗
[2.305]

∆ FFR*High Dividend

-0.426
[0.364]

-0.401
[0.365]

-0.768
[0.867]

∆ Deposit Rates*High Dividend

-2.159∗∗
[0.934]

-2.509∗∗
[0.950]

0.694
[1.928]

High Repurchase

0.304
[0.530]

0.0225
[0.517]

1.387
[1.360]

1.119∗∗∗
[0.291]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1,296,462
0.020

0.961∗∗∗
[0.294]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1,064,446
0.026

1.694∗∗
[0.768]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
232,013
0.012

∆ Deposit Rates

High Dividend

∆ Deposit Rates*High Repurchase
Stock Characteristics
Demographics
Time Fixed Effects
MSA Fixed Effects
Observations
Adj. R-squared

49

Table 6: Mutual Fund Flows, Income Yields, and Monetary Policy
This table reports the coefficient estimates from panel regression (7):
Flowsi,t = β1 High Incomei,t + β2 ∆FFRt × High Incomei,t + τt + γ 0 Xi,t + εi,t ,
where Flowsi,t represents flows into mutual fund i at time t; ∆FFRt represents the three-year change in
Fed Funds rates from year t − 3 to year t; High Incomei,t is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the income
yield of a fund is in the top decile for a given month, and 0 otherwise; and Xi,t is a set of control variables
including: Volatility, ∆FFR × Volatility, ∆Tax × High Dividend, Return, Size, Turnover, and Expense.
Return is fund return over the preceding month; Volatility is the standard deviation of fund returns for
the past year; ∆Tax is the difference between the maximum individual income tax rate and the capital
gains tax rate; Size represents the assets under management (log); and Expense represents the expense
ratio. The sample includes all the equity or bond mutual funds in the United States from 1991 to 2016.
Each observation is a fund share class-month combination. Columns 1 and 2 include the whole sample.
Columns 3 and 4 include only the retail share classes. Columns 5 and 6 include only the institutional
share classes. Standard errors are in parentheses, with *, **, and *** denoting significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels. Standard errors are clustered at month levels.

All

Retail

Institution

(1)
Equity
0.284∗∗∗
[0.094]

(2)
Bond
0.700∗∗∗
[0.099]

(3)
Equity
0.640∗∗∗
[0.148]

(4)
Bond
0.322∗∗∗
[0.118]

(5)
Equity
0.288∗∗
[0.145]

(6)
Bond
0.717∗∗∗
[0.145]

∆ FFR*High Income

-0.144∗∗∗
[0.031]

-0.050∗
[0.030]

-0.146∗∗∗
[0.047]

-0.090∗∗
[0.039]

-0.066
[0.042]

-0.069
[0.049]

Volatility

0.453∗∗∗
[0.154]

-0.770∗∗∗
[0.254]

0.853∗∗∗
[0.242]

-0.461
[0.381]

0.386∗∗
[0.177]

-0.462
[0.399]

0.038
[0.047]

-0.450∗∗∗
[0.058]

0.134∗∗
[0.064]

-0.289∗∗∗
[0.077]

0.047
[0.049]

-0.522∗∗∗
[0.101]

-0.120∗∗∗
[0.021]
Yes
Yes
1064289
0.015

-0.035
[0.024]
Yes
Yes
1206575
0.013

-0.040
[0.050]
Yes
Yes
500377
0.019

-0.068
[0.057]
Yes
Yes
572685
0.021

-0.002
[0.043]
Yes
Yes
388581
0.008

0.029
[0.051]
Yes
Yes
293847
0.006

High Income

∆ FFR*Volatility

∆ Tax*High Dividend
Fund Controls
Time F.E.
Observations
Adj. R-squared

50

Table 7: Mutual Fund Flows and Alternative Measures of Income Yields
This table reports the coefficient estimates from panel regression (7):
Flowsi,t = β1 High Incomei,t + β2 ∆FFRt × High Incomei,t + τt + γ 0 Xi,t + εi,t ,
where Flowsi,t represents flows into mutual fund i at time t; ∆FFRt represents the three-year change
in Fed Funds rates from year t − 3 to year t; and Xi,t is a set of control variables including: Volatility,
∆FFR × Volatility, ∆Tax × High Dividend, Return, Size, Turnover, and Expense. Return is fund return
over the preceding month; Volatility is the standard deviation of fund returns for the past year; ∆Tax
is the difference between the maximum individual income tax rate and the capital gain tax rate; Size
represents the assets under management (log); and Expense represents the expense ratio. The sample
includes all the equity or bond mutual funds in the United States from 1991 to 2016. Each observation
is a fund share class-month combination. In columns 1 and 2, High Incomei,t is a dummy variable that
equals to 1 if a fund is in the top decile of income yield distribution. In columns 3 and 4 High Incomei,t
is a categorical variable that equals the decile number of a fund in the income yield distribution. In
columns 5 and 6, High Incomei,t is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the name of an equity fund contains
“dividend,” “income,” or “yield”; and if the name of a bond fund contains “high dividend”, “high income,”
or “high yield” and equals to 0 otherwise. Standard errors are in parentheses, with *, **, and *** denoting
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Standard errors are clustered at month level.

High-Income Dummy

Income Decile

Fund Name

(1)
Equity
-0.044
[0.116]

(2)
Bond
0.561∗∗∗
[0.125]

(3)
(4)
Equity
Bond
-0.097∗∗∗ 0.089∗∗∗
[0.018]
[0.021]

(5)
Equity
-0.228∗∗
[0.098]

(6)
Bond
0.280∗∗
[0.139]

-0.604∗∗∗
[0.123]

-0.271∗∗
[0.119]

-0.049∗∗∗
[0.017]

-0.028
[0.019]

-0.630∗∗∗
[0.099]

-0.263∗
[0.134]

∆ Term Spread*High Income -0.585∗∗∗
[0.152]

-0.285∗
[0.151]

-0.060∗∗∗
[0.020]

-0.034
[0.024]

-0.587∗∗∗
[0.118]

-0.266
[0.163]

0.417∗∗∗ -1.089∗∗∗ 0.454∗∗∗
[0.151]
[0.239]
[0.151]

-0.596∗∗
[0.257]

-0.463∗∗∗
[0.059]

-0.444∗∗∗
[0.059]

High Income

∆ FFR*High Income

Volatility

∆ FFR*Volatility

∆ Tax*High Dividend
Fund Controls
Time F.E.
Observations
Adj. R-squared

0.455∗∗∗
[0.154]

-0.780∗∗∗
[0.254]

0.038
[0.047]

-0.453∗∗∗
[0.058]

-0.139∗∗∗
[0.020]
Yes
Yes
1064289
0.015

-0.048∗∗
[0.024]
Yes
Yes
1206575
0.013

51

0.030
[0.046]

0.027
[0.046]

-0.119∗∗∗ -0.020 -0.117∗∗∗
0.004
[0.019]
[0.023]
[0.019]
[0.022]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
1064289 1206575 1064289 1206575
0.015
0.013
0.015
0.013

Table 8: Monetary Policy and Excess Returns of Dividend Decile Portfolios
This table reports Fama French 5-factor alphas of equal-weighted portfolios formed on dividend yields
conditional on the stance of monetary policy over the sample period of 1963 to 2016. When the 3-year
change of Fed Funds rates is positive, we classify it as rising FFR; when negative, we classify it as declining
FFR. The first two columns are the portfolio alphas on each state while the third column is the difference.
Standard errors are in parentheses, with *, **, and *** denoting significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels. The alpha is in percentage points. The sample period is from July 1963 to June 2016.

Rising FFR Declining FFR Rising-Declining
Decile 1
Decile 2
Decile 3
Decile 4
Decile 5
Decile 6
Decile 7
Decile 8
Decile 9
Decile 10
Decile 10 - Decile 1

0.062

-0.211**

0.273**

[0.089]

[0.091]

[0.127]

0.041

-0.068

0.109

[0.077]

[0.071]

[0.104]

-0.018

-0.127*

0.109

[0.071]

[0.068]

[0.099]

-0.039

-0.056

0.017

[0.074]

[0.069]

[0.101]

-0.075

-0.045

-0.030

[0.069]

[0.069]

[0.098]

-0.002

0.018

-0.020

[0.074]

[0.069]

[0.101]

-0.050

0.142**

-0.191**

[0.071]

[0.066]

[0.097]

-0.005

0.229***

-0.233**

[0.073]

[0.070]

[0.101]

-0.064

0.187***

-0.251***

[0.073]

[0.072]

[0.102]

-0.113

0.178

-0.291*

[0.109]

[0.122]

[0.164]

-0.175

0.389***

-0.564***

[0.141]

[0.152]

[0.207]

52

Table 9: Fed Funds Rates and Excess Returns of Dividend Decile Portfolios
This table reports the coefficient estimates from panel regression (8):
αi,t = β1 ∆FFRt + β2 ∆FFRt × DivDecilei + ζi + εi,t ,
where αi,t represents the risk-adjusted return on the dividend portfolio i in month t. ∆FFRt represents
the three-year change in Fed Funds rates from year t − 3 to year t; DivDecilei is a dummy variable that
equals 1 for dividend decile portfolio i and 0 otherwise; and ζi is decile fixed effects. Each of the four
columns corresponds to alphas from the CAPM, the Fama-French 3-factor model, the Fama-French 4
-factor model, and the Fama-French 5-factor model. The observations are in monthly frequency. The
sample period is from July 1963 to June 2016. Standard errors are in parentheses, with *, **, and ***
denoting significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

∆ FFR

∆ FFR* Dividend Decile
Decile Fixed Effects
Observations
Adj. R2

(1)
CAPM Alpha
0.003
[0.018]

(2)
FF3 Alpha
0.013
[0.011]

(3)
FF4 Alpha
0.014
[0.011]

(4)
FF5 Alpha
0.033∗∗∗
[0.011]

-0.008∗∗
[0.003]
Yes
6,360
0.005

-0.007∗∗∗
[0.002]
Yes
6,360
0.006

-0.007∗∗∗
[0.002]
Yes
6,360
0.005

-0.009∗∗∗
[0.002]
Yes
6,360
0.005

53

Panel A: Dividend Yield vs. Withdrawal

Panel B: Capital Gains vs. Withdrawal

Figure 1: Dividend Income, Capital Gains, and Net Withdrawals
The figure shows a scatter plot of monthly net withdrawals against dividends (Panel A) or capital
gains (Panel B) in the same month. Following Baker et al. (2007), withdrawals are defined as households’
monthly net withdrawals from their brokerage account scaled by the account value in the previous
month. Dividend yields/capital gains are the dollar value of dividend income/capital gain from the
portfolio scaled by the account value in the previous month. The graph is truncated at 4% for both
axes to drop outliers.

54

20
15
10
5
0
1954

1964

1974

1984

US Stock Market Dividend Yield
3-Month Certificates of Deposit

1994

2004

2014

Fed Funds rates
10-Year Treasury Yield

Figure 2: Income Yields of Stocks and Bonds over Monetary Cycles
This figure shows the aggregate U.S. stock market dividend yield and the Fed Funds rates from 1954 to
2016. The aggregate stock market dividend yield is retrieved from Robert Shiller’s website. The yield
of 3-month certificates of deposit and 10-year Treasury yield is retrieved from the FRED database of
the St. Louis Fed.

55

-10

Cumulative Fund Flow (% of AUM)
-5
0
5
10

15

Panel A: Equity Funds

0

1

2

3

4

5
Year

6

Low

7

8

9

10

8

9

10

9

10

High

Cumulative Fund Flow (% of AUM)
-20
-15
-10
-5
0

5

Panel B: Bond Funds

0

1

2

3

4

5
Year

6

Low

7
High

-15

Cumulative Fund Flow (% of AUM)
-10
-5
0
5
10
15

Panel C: Balanced Funds

0

1

2

3

4

5
Year
Low

6

7

8

High

Figure 3: Impulse Response of Fund Flows to Changes in the Fed Fund Rates
The solid lines in each figure plot the impulse response of the mutual fund flows to a negative 1% shock
on the Fed Funds rates; the dotted lines represent 95% confidence intervals. The estimation model is
given by equation (7). The estimation sample includes the domestic mutual funds in the United States
from 1991 to 2016.

56

.4
Annual Change in Dividend Premium
-.2
0
.2
-.4
-7

-5

-3

-1
1
Annual Change in FFR

3

5

7

Figure 4: Dividend Premium and Fed Funds Rates
The figure reports the scatter plot of the annual change in the dividend premium against the annual
change in the Fed Funds rates. We take equal-weighted averages of the market-to-book ratios separately
for dividend payers and nonpayers in each year and compute the dividend premium as the difference in
the two average log market-to-book ratios (Baker and Wurgler 2004b). The sample period is from 1963
to 2016.

57

.8

Cumulative Return
1
1.2

1.4

Panel A: 1987–2016

1987m1

1997m1

Date

2007m1

HML
Dividend Strategy

2017m1
SMB

1

Cumulative Return
1.5
2

2.5

Panel B: 1963–2016

1963m7

1973m7

1983m7

1993m7
Date

HML
Dividend Strategy

2003m7

2013m7

SMB

Figure 5: Cumulative Return of the Dividend Strategy
This figure plots the cumulative return of a trading strategy that (i) buys the tenth decile of the dividend
portfolio and shorts the first decile after a negative 3-year change in Fed Funds rates, and (ii) buys the
first decile of the dividend portfolio and shorts the tenth decile after a positive 3-year change in Fed
Funds rates. The cumulative returns are normalized to have the same monthly standard deviation of
1%. The annual Sharpe ratio of the dividend strategy is 0.231.

58

Decile 2

-.1
1

2

3

4

5
6
Year

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

Decile 9

5
6
Year

7

8

9

10

7

8

9

10

Decile 10

-.2

-.1

-.05

-.1

Alpha
0

Alpha
0
.05

.1

.1

.2

.15

-.15

-.1

-.05

Alpha
0

Alpha
-.05

0

.05

.05

.1

Decile 1

1

2

3

4

5
6
Year

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

5
6
Year

Figure 6: Impulse Response of Alphas to Monetary Policy by Dividend Deciles
This solid lines in each figure plot the impulse response of the Fama-French 5-factor alphas of the two
lowest and the two highest dividend decile portfolios to a negative 1% shock on the Fed Funds rate; the
dotted lines represent 95% confidence intervals. The sample period is from July 1963 to June 2016.

59

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

1

0.9

0.8

0.7
1.5

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

2

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

Figure 7: Consumption and Self-Control Constraint
The figure reports the optimal time-1 consumption as a function of the time-1 wealth of the two-period
version of the problem described in Proposition 1. C1unc , C1con , and C1fc refers, respectively, to the
consumption of an agent without a self-control constraint, with a self-control constraint, and with full
commitment power, that is, β = 1 in the time-1 portfolio choice problem. I1 = 1 is the income from
the portfolio. Preferences parameter values: γ = 3, δ = 0.98, β = 0.5. We assume that the distribution
of asset returns is binomial, as discussed in footnote 17, with parameters σL = σH = 0.4, correlation
ρ = 0.5, µH = µL = 0.11, and Rf = 0.01. Asset H has a dividend yield of YH = 0.7 and asset L has a
dividend yield of YL = 0.5.

60

0.38

0.36

0.34

0.32

0.3

0.28

0.26
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 8: Certainty Equivalent Wealth and Time-Inconsistency
The figure reports the time-0 certainty equivalent wealth as a function of the time-inconsistency paramcon
fc
eter, β, for the two-period version of the problem described in Proposition 1. κunc
J , κJ , and κJ refers,
respectively, to the time-0 certainty equivalent wealth of an agent without a self-control constraint, with
a self-control constraint, and with full commitment power, that is, β = 1 in the time-1 portfolio choice
problem. Preferences parameter values: γ = 3, δ = 0.98. We assume that the distribution of asset
return is binomial, as discussed in footnote 17, with parameters σL = σH = 0.2, correlation ρ = 0.5,
µH = µL = 0.11, and Rf = 0.01. Asset H has a dividend yield of YH = 0.7 and asset L has a dividend
yield of YL = 0.5.

61

0.345

0.34

0.335

0.33

0.325

0.32

0.315

0.31

0.305
0.2

0.22

0.24

0.26

0.28

0.3

0.32

0.34

0.36

0.38

0.4

Figure 9: Certainty Equivalent Wealth and Return Volatility
The figure reports the time-0 certainty equivalent wealth as a function of the stock return volatility
con
parameter, σL = σH , for the two-period version of the problem described in Proposition 1.κunc
J , κJ ,
fc
and κJ refers, respectively, to the time-0 certainty equivalent wealth of an agent without a self-control
constraint, with a self-control constraint, and with full commitment power, that is, β = 1 in the time-1
portfolio choice problem. Preferences parameter values: γ = 3, δ = 0.98, β = 0.2. We assume that
assets log returns have identical volatility: σ = σL = σH , correlation ρ = 0.5, µH = µL = 0.11, and
Rf = 0.01. Asset H has a dividend yield of YH = 0.7 and asset L has a dividend yield of YL = 0.5.

62

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

Figure 10: Portfolio Holdings and Self-control Constraint
The figure reports the optimal portfolio holdings at time 0 for the two-period problem described in
con con
Section 4.1. The portfolio (θH
, θL ) refers, respectively, to the holdings of the high- and low-dividendunc unc
paying asset in the presence of the self-control constraint (28). The portfolio (θH
, θL ) is the corresponding unconstrained solution. Preferences parameter values: γ = 3, δ = 0.98, β = 0.95. We assume
that assets’ log returns have identical volatility: σL = σH = 0.5, correlation ρ = 0.5, µH = µL = 0.1249.
Asset H has a dividend yield of YH = 0.6 and asset L has a dividend yield of YL = 0.1.

63

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

Figure 11: Dividend Premium
The figure reports the dividend premium as a function of the risk-free rates in the general equilibrium
model of two agents. Agent A has a time-inconsistent preference while agent B has a time-consistent
preference. Each agent has an equal share of initial endowment. Preferences parameter values: γA =
γB = 3, δA = δB = 0.98, βA = 0.9, βB = 1.0. We assume that the dividend growth of both endowment
trees have volatility: σH = σL = 0.2 and correlation ρ = 0.5. Asset H (value stock) has an expected
dividend growth rate µH = 0.02 and asset L (growth stock) has expected dividend growth rate µL =
0.04. The dividend premium is defined as the ratio of the risk premium of the growth stock and the
value stock minus one. We normalize the dividend premium for the unconstrained economy to zero to
facilitate comparison. We express the dividend premium in basis points.

64

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

Figure 12: Portfolio Volatility
The figure reports the volatility of the time-0 unconstrained and constrained portfolios, respectively,
σpunc and σpcon , for the two-period problem described in Section 4.1. Preferences parameter values:
γ = 3, δ = 0.98, β = 0.5. We assume that assets log returns have identical volatility: σL = σH = 0.22,
correlation ρ = 0.5, µH = µL = 0.1249. Asset H has a dividend yield of YH = 0.6 and asset L has a
dividend yield of YL = 0.1.

65

20
10
15
Fed Funds rates

5

5

Dividend Initiation
3
4
2

0

1
1957

1967

1977

1987
Year

1997

2017

Fed Funds rates

8
2
0

1

2

4
6
Fed Funds rates

Share repo. Initiation
3
4

5

6

10

Dividend Initiation

2007

1982

1987

1992

1997
Year

Share repo. Initiation

2002

2007

2012

2017

Fed Funds rates

Figure 13: Dividend Initiation and Fed Funds rates
The figure reports the time series plot of the Fed Funds rates and the frequency of dividend and
repurchases initiation in next year scaled by total number of firms in the Compustat database. The
sample includes all the Compustat firms from 1962 to 2016.

66

