                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         IDENTITY POLITICS AND TRADE POLICY

                                       Gene M. Grossman
                                       Elhanan Helpman

                                      Working Paper 25348
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25348


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2018




We are grateful to Alberto Alesina, Ben Enke, Matt Grant, Oleg Itskhoki, Rachel Kranton, Steve
Redding, Dani Rodrik, Ken Shepsle, Andrei Shleifer, Jaume Ventura, and Yoram Weiss for
helpful discussions and to Evgenii Fadeev for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Identity Politics and Trade Policy
Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman
NBER Working Paper No. 25348
December 2018
JEL No. D72,D91,F13

                                          ABSTRACT

We characterize trade policies that result from political competition when assessments of well-
being include both material and psychosocial components. The material component reflects, as
usual, satisfaction from consumption. Borrowing from social identity theory, we take the
psychosocial component as combining the pride and self-esteem an individual draws from the
status of groups with which she identifies and a dissonance cost she bears from identifying with
those that are different from herself. In this framework, changes in social identification patterns
that may result, for example, from increased income inequality or heightened racial and ethnic
tensions, lead to pronounced changes in trade policy. We analyze the nature of these policy
changes.


Gene M. Grossman
International Economics Section
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
grossman@princeton.edu

Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ehelpman@harvard.edu
1    Introduction
Gradual trade liberalization proceeded steadily throughout most of the post-war period. But recent
years have witnessed a dramatic reversal of trade attitudes and trade policies in some countries.
What accounts for this sudden shift in the political winds?
    Many theories of the political economy of trade policy point to the role that special interest
groups play in scoring protection for their members; see, for example, Grossman and Helpman (2001,
2002). But interest groups do not seem to have played a central part in the recent events. In special
interest politics, lobbyists seek preferential treatment for some industry or factor of production at
the expense of others. The rhetoric of the recent policy reversals seems to be addressed to broader
segments of the voting population, having as its apparent goal a repudiation of globalization and an
across-the-board reduction in imports. E¤orts to understand the political economy of this about-
face might fruitfully focus on factors that led to changes in (some) voters’preferences rather than
on changes in the behavior of interest groups.
    In this paper, we explore the idea that voters’preferences over trade policy re‡ect not only their
material self-interests, but also concerns for members of those groups in society with whom they
identify. As Shayo (2009) argues, voters often consider the interests of others when formulating
their attitudes about redistributive policies, but such altruism typically is particular rather than
universal. Individuals predominantly care about the well-being of those they perceive to be similar
to themselves. In such a setting, discrete shifts in patterns of social identi…cation can result in
precipitous changes in policy outcomes.
    Social psychologists de…ne social identity as “the individual’s knowledge that he belongs to
certain social groups together with some emotional and value signi…cance to him of the group
membership” (Tajfel, 1974, p.31). Social identity theory builds on the assumption that society
encompasses a variety of social categories that stand in power and status relation to one another
(Hogg and Abrams, 1982, p.14). The pertinent categories are history and context dependent
and, to some extent, ‡uid (Hogg et al., 1995; Huddy, 2001). They may include divisions along
lines of nationality, race, ethnicity, class, occupation, gender, religion, and others, with di¤erent
categorizations acquiring salience in di¤erent political, economic, and cultural environments.
    A key tenet of the social identity theory developed by Tajfel (1981) and Tajfel and Turner
(1979)— and its close cousin, self-categorization theory as described by Turner et al. (1987)— is
that individuals choose the categorical groups with which they associate based on the positive
self-esteem they can derive from such a self-image and their sense of belonging to the group.
Individuals need not be “accepted” into the groups with which they identify, nor need the other
imagined members of an individual’s identity group see themselves similarly. Rather, individuals
compare themselves to a prototypical group member and derive satisfaction from the status that a
group of others with similar social characteristics (along some dimension) enjoys in society.
    Akerlof and Kranton (2000, 2010) introduced identity into economics. They posited a utility
function that includes not only the consumption of goods and services but also a psychosocial
component of self-image. Self-esteem, they assumed, is enhanced when an individual conforms

                                                  1
to the behavioral norms prescribed for their self-imagined social groups. Our approach builds on
theirs, and especially on Shayo’s (2009) formulation that incorporates a perceived utility gain when
an individual identi…es with a group that enjoys high status, but a loss from identifying with a
group whose prototypical member is very di¤erent from that person along relevant dimensions. In
his paper on redistributive taxation, Shayo advances the notion of a “social identity equilibrium,”
in which individuals self-categorize among a set of salient identity groups as a function of the
behaviors and outcomes of others, where behavior and outcomes are induced by policies and the
policy environment in turn re‡ects the identity choices made by the individuals together with their
political and economic actions. We will adopt a conceptually similar notion of equilibrium when
thinking about the formation of trade policies, even if our model di¤ers from his in various details.1
       We begin our analysis with a simple economic environment that is familiar from the Heckscher-
Ohlin trade model. There are two factors of production in a small country, more-skilled labor and
less-skilled labor, and two goods, an export good and an import-competing good. The country
imports the good that uses less-skilled labor relatively intensively at the given world prices. The
more-skilled individuals constitute the upper echelon in society and account for a minority of the
population. They may self-identify as “elite” or “upper-class,” or whatever term aptly describes
a group of highly-educated and well-paid individuals. The less-skilled majority comprises the
“working class” and these individuals too may identify with the fellow members of their social
class, deeming themselves to be, for example, “Main Streeters”or “middle class.”2 In addition, and
non-exclusively, individuals of either skill group may choose to identify with a broader category
that comprises the nation as a whole. We will refer to this group as “the broad nation,” or just
“the nation” for short; in the U.S. context, for example, this would mean seeing oneself as an
“American.”3 We follow Shayo (2009) in assuming that the psychological bene…t to an individual
from identifying with a group is increasing in the perceived status of the group, which we take to be
the material well-being of the average group member.4 The psychological cost of identi…cation is
increasing in the di¤erence between an individual’s own economic and cultural characteristics and
that of the prototypical or average member of the group, re‡ecting the assumption that identifying
   1
      Ansolabehere and Puy (2016) develop a spatial voting model with “positional” and “identity” issues in which
parties and voters have exogenous identities and each voter prefers the party that shares her identity, all else the
same. See also Karakas and Mitra (2018), who similarly take patterns of identi…cation among voters and candidates
as exogenously given, while assuming that voters over-reward or under-punish candidates for their policy positions
based on an alignment of cultural identity. Following Shayo (2009), our work is di¤erent in allowing self-categorizatoin
of identities. Our model shares an a¢ nity with recent work on the role of “moral values” in politics, in which voters
are endowed with either “individualizing” and “universal” moral values; see, especially, Enke (2018).
    2
      In the spirit of self-categorization, we should also allow the skilled individuals to self-identify as working class
and the unskilled to self-identify as elite. However, it is reasonable to assume that the dissonance costs of such
cross-identi…cation would be too severe in the light of the underlying di¤erences between the groups to deliver such
outcome in equilibrium.
    3
      In political discourse, what it means to be “a real American” may di¤er across individuals; see, for example,
Huddy (2001, p.130). For our purposes, we will take indentifying with “the nation” to mean identifying with a
prototypical denizen whose characteristics are average in the country’s population.
    4
      Shayo takes status to be a relative measure that compares the well-being of “in-group” members to that of the
“out-group”; we will discuss this possibility further below and argue that it makes little di¤erence to our qualitative
conclusions.



                                                            2
with others who are di¤erent from oneself creates cognitive dissonance (see Turner et al., 1987;
Hogg, 1996; Hogg and Hains, 1996; and McGarty et al., 1992).
       The polity chooses an ad valorem tari¤ on the import good. We imagine in the background
a political environment such as the one described by Lindbeck and Weibull (1987), Dixit and
Londregan (1996), and Grossman and Helpman (1996, 2001). In this setting, there are two political
parties that di¤er in their …xed ideological stances. Voters are heterogeneous in their preferences
for the two parties. The parties use their trade-policy positions to compete for votes. An individual
votes for a party if and only if her preference for its trade platform outweighs her preference for the
ideological position of the rival party. The equilibrium in this political game features convergence
for instrumental policies such as tari¤s. Moreover, if the parties view all groups of voters as having
ideological preferences drawn from a common distribution, then the equilibrium policy is the one
that maximizes a utilitarian social welfare function. With this model in the back of our minds,
we seek to identify the tari¤ that achieves the utilitarian optimum subject to the self-identi…cation
constraint. When we sum voters’ utilities across the polity to form the utilitarian objective, we
incorporate not only the components of welfare that measure individuals’ material well-being,
but also those that measure the psychological satisfaction they derive from their chosen social
identi…cations.5
       Our goal is to characterize how trade policy outcomes re‡ect the economic, political and cultural
environment. To that end, we de…ne an identi…cation regime to be a complete description of the
pattern of social identi…cation; i.e., a list of all of the groups with which each individual identi…es.
In our simple model with two types of individuals distinguished only by their skill levels, there are
a limited number of possible regimes. More-skilled individuals might identify or not as members
of the society’s elite social group and they might identify or not more broadly with the nation as
a whole. Similarly, the less-skilled individuals might see themselves as members of the working
class, or as nationals, or neither, or both. Typically, a small change in some parameter will not
induce a change in identi…cation regime. Nonetheless, it may generate a change in the equilibrium
policy, unlike what happens when the psychosocial components of utility are absent. For example,
we …nd that when every individual identi…es with her own social class and the members of at least
one skill group also identify more broadly, then neutral technological progress that does not alter
the identi…cation regime results in an increase in the rate of protection. This result runs counter
to what happens when social identi…cation is absent, in which case the utilitarian optimum for a
small country always manifests free trade.
       But we are especially interested in situations when a change in the political or economic environ-
ment alters the identi…cation regime. In keeping with recent political history, we focus speci…cally
on “populism.” In his well-regarded book, Müller (2016) de…nes populism succinctly as a speci…c
form of identity politics in which a group of voters rejects the elite members of society’s claims to
moral legitimacy. By his description, “populists do not just criticize elites; they also claim that
   5
   As a robustness check, we also consider brie‡y in the text— and more fully in an appendix— the tari¤ policy that
maximizes the welfare, economic and psychological, of the median voter.



                                                        3
they and only they represent the true people”(Müller, 2016, p.40). Populists advocate policies that
(in their minds) rightfully neglect the interests of the “corrupt” segments of society while serving
instead the interests of “real” people. Many commentators see the rise in populism as one of the
critical developments in recent European and American political history.
      To capture a dramatic rise in populism in the context of our model, we posit an initial iden-
ti…cation regime in which less-skilled workers identify not only as “working class,” but also more
inclusively as members of a group that includes all denizens of the country. Following a populist
revolution, the identi…cation regime changes. In the event, the less-skilled cease to identify with
the nation, or at least with their former understanding of “the nation” that included the elites.
Instead, they come to see the nation as synonymous with their own class and type. We describe
the parameter changes in the model that can give rise to such a change in identi…cation regime
and study the implications for the equilibrium trade policy. Interestingly, we …nd that if the elite
comprise a su¢ ciently small fraction of the nation’s population, a populist revolution of this sort
induces a discrete jump in the equilibrium tari¤ rate.
      The rise in populism is not the only important trend in western politics. Commentators agree
that race (in the United States) and ethnicity (in Europe) became notably more salient in recent
political discourse.6 To study this change and to consider whether it might have played any role
in a shift in trade policy preferences, we extend our simple model to include more dimensions of
identi…cation and more factors of production. In Section 7, we allow for three types of labor, with
low, middle, and high skill levels. The middle-skilled and high-skilled workers produce two traded
goods, as before, with the import-competing good again making intensive use of the lesser-skilled
labor. Low-skilled labor, on the other hand, is the unique input for nontraded services. This
trichotomy captures the apparent reality that the least skilled in society typically do not produce
the manufactured goods that compete with imports, but rather are employed predominantly in the
service sector. Meanwhile, we distinguish two racial or ethnic groups, which we designate as the
“majority” and the “minority.” These categories have no direct economic relevance, inasmuch as
a worker with majority race or ethnicity is assumed to be a perfect substitute for a worker with
minority race or ethnicity of the same skill level.
      In Section 7, we allow for a wide variety of identi…cation regimes. Individuals are characterized
by their race or ethnicity and by their skill level. Each voter may identify with her own social class
independent of race or ethnicity, with her own racial or ethnic group, independent of income level,
and with a narrower group that includes only those of the same race or ethnicity and the same
social class. In addition, anyone can identify with the nation, the broadest group that includes
all denizens of the country. We model an increase in the salience of race and ethnicity in political
deliberations as an increase in the parameter that measures the psychological cost that an individual
bears when identifying with others of the opposite race or ethnicity. We show that such changes
in the salience of race and ethnicity have no e¤ect on trade policy when the identi…cation regime
remains the same. But we …nd circumstances in which increases in racial and ethnic sensitivity
  6
      See, for example, Fukuyama (2018), among many others.



                                                       4
generate discretely higher tari¤s when segments of the population identify more narrowly than
before.
    Our goal in the paper is not to prove that certain changes in identity have been responsible for
recent shifts in trade attitudes and trade policies. Such shifts, after all, are not well established.
Rather, we aim to show that aspects of social identity can readily be incorporated in models of
the political economy of trade policy. When this is done, changes in patterns of social identi…ca-
tion can alter preferences about trade policy, both among particular groups in society and in the
aggregate. Moreover, inasmuch as identity politics builds on a dichotomous distinction between
“in-groups”and “out-groups,”the policy response to changes in social identi…cation can be sudden
and dramatic.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we introduce social
identity as a component in individuals’utility that in‡uences their voting behavior. In Section 3,
we identify the tari¤ that maximizes a utilitarian social-welfare function and argue that protec-
tionist outcomes can emerge in situations in which free trade would prevail absent the psychosocial
components of individual utility. Section 4 addresses how small changes in the economic, political
and cultural environment a¤ect trade policy when the patterns of social identi…cation remain …xed.
In Section 5, we consider the policy e¤ects of shifts in the identi…cation regime and, in particular,
those of a populist revolution in which the working class repudiates its identi…cation with a broad
national group that includes the elites. A brief Section 6 examines the robustness of our results
to changes in the political maximand, in particular substituting the welfare of the median voter
for that of the average voter. Finally, in Section 7, we extend the model to include additional
categories in society that enable a richer pattern of social identi…cation. Speci…cally, we introduce
a distinction between an ethnic majority and an ethnic minority and allow individuals to identify
with their social class and their ethnic group. Here we study the trade-policy implications of an
intensi…cation of ethnic divisions that leads some individuals to identify more narrowly than before.
Section 8 concludes.


2      A Model of Social Identity in Trade Politics
We consider a simple and familiar trading environment. A small country produces and trades
two goods at …xed world prices. The goods are produced competitively, with constant returns to
scale, by two types of individuals: the “more-skilled,” h, and the “less-skilled,” `. (Later we will
introduce a third type of labor that earns even less than type `; these workers will be employed
in a sector that produces nontraded services.) The less-skilled workers comprise a majority of the
population, so that    `   >   h,   where   i   is the fraction of individuals of type i. The export good,
X, makes relatively intensive use of the more-skilled labor, while the import-competing good, Z;
makes relatively intensive use of the less-skilled labor. We normalize the size of the population to
one.
    All individuals irrespective of skill level share the same, quasi-linear materialistic utility function,


                                                        5
whereby
                                                      i   = cXi + v (cZi )                                        (1)

is the material utility enjoyed by a representative individual with skill level i who consumes quantity
cXi of the export good and quantity cZi of the import-competing good. The quasi-linear form allows
us to ignore income e¤ects, which are not particularly germane to the analysis, but are analytically
cumbersome. We assume that v ( ) is increasing and concave.
         An individual’s overall ful…llment comprises the sum of her material utility, as just described,
and a psychosocial component that comes from identifying with those groups in society that have
emotional signi…cance to her. Psychosocial utility has two subcomponents, one positive and one
negative. On the one hand, an individual takes pride in seeing herself as a member of a group,
the more so the greater is the “status” of that group in its social context. According to Tajfel’s
(1974) social identity theory, identifying with a group of others confers dignity and self-respect.
On the other hand, there is cognitive dissonance that ensues from identifying with others who are
very di¤erent from oneself. Self-assurance derives from seeing oneself as fundamentally similar in
relevant ways to those others whom one respects. In contrast, seeing oneself as a member of a
group whose others are very di¤erent may undermine an individual’s con…dence in her attributes
and behavior.
         We take the bene…t to any individual from identifying with some group to be a linearly in-
creasing function of the status of the average member of that group, where status is measured by
material well-being. The dissonance cost is an increasing, quadratic function of the distance in
some conceptual space between an individual’s own attributes and those of the average member
of a group with whom she identi…es. Since the social groups that we will consider in this section
are de…ned in socioeconomic terms, we measure distance also in units of material well-being; that
is, an individual bears a greater cost from identifying with a group of others who are, on average,
much wealthier or much poorer than she. Combining these two components, we have that a rep-
resentative individual with skill level i who chooses to self-identify with a socioeconomic group g
gains a net bene…t from that identi…cation of

                                 ui = Agi +     g g
                                                i
                                                           g
                                                           i   (   i
                                                                       g 2
                                                                        ) ,   g
                                                                              i   > 0;   g
                                                                                         i   > 0,                 (2)

where Agi is a constant re‡ecting the baseline level of pride that comes from identifying with group
g for an individual of type i and           g   is the average material utility of all those who are considered
by society as having the characteristics that de…ne group g. In principle, Agi could be negative, if
individuals perceive a stigma from identifying with a group of su¢ ciently low status. The parameter
 g
 i       can be thought to represent the intensity of identi…cation with group g among those with skill
level i; Huddy (2001, p. 137), for example, has emphasized variation in the degree to which di¤erent
types of individuals identify with di¤erent salient groups and the importance of this consideration
for political outcomes.7
     7
         Some experimental evidence suggests the existence of a third, psychosocial subcomponent of utility associated



                                                                   6
     Two comments are in order. First, as stressed in the self-categorization theory developed
by Turner et al. (1987), identi…cation is voluntary and unregulated; it is a choice made by the
individual and its psychological signi…cance resides only in that person’s own mind. An individual
need not secure anyone’s permission to identify in any particular way, nor is she required to identify
with groups that share her salient characteristics.
     Second, the set of groups with whom an individual may identify and the attributes of the
prototypical members of those groups are given at a moment in time by the cultural and historical
context. That is, we take the de…ning characteristics of group g as exogenous (although they
may change over time in response to political and historical events) when we calculate the average
characteristic in the group,                g   in equation (2); in particular,                    g   does not depend on the set of
individuals that choose to identify with group g. While it would be interesting to consider how the
set of social groups that are salient in a society evolves over time, as well as the determinants of a
group’s de…ning characteristics, that is beyond the scope of the present paper.8
     To summarize, a representative individual in skill-group i has preferences that are summarized
by the utility function ui , where
                                                         X          h                                              i
                               ui = cXi + v (cZi ) +             Igi Agi +            g g
                                                                                      i
                                                                                               g
                                                                                               i   (   i
                                                                                                           g 2
                                                                                                               )       ,
                                                         g2G


Igi = 1 if the individual self-identi…es with group g and Igi = 0 if not, and where G is the set of social
groups that is salient in society at that historical juncture. In this section, we take the set of salient
social identity groups to have three elements: (i) a socioeconomic group that we term “the elite”
and designate by " that has as its archetype one of the higher-earning individuals in society, so that
 "   =   h,   i.e., the material utility of the representative more-skilled individual; (ii) a socioeconomic
group that we term “the working-class” and designate by ! that has as its archetype one of the
lower-earning individuals in society, so that                        !   =     `,   i.e., the material utility of the representative
less-skilled individual; and (iii) a social group that we term “the broad nation” and designate by
b that has as its archetype the average citizen in the country, so that                                    b   =             +
                                                                                                                       ` `       h h.   It follows
that                       (
                               1 if Agi +         g g    g
                                                             [   i
                                                                             g ]2     0
                   Igi =                          i      i
                                                                                          ; i 2 fh; `g ; g 2 f"; !; bg .
                               0 if   Agi   +     g g
                                                  i
                                                         g
                                                         i   [   i
                                                                             g ]2   <0

with identity, namely envy of members of out-groups who enjoy greater material well-being than oneself; see, for
example, Chen and Li (2009) and Kranton et al. (2018). We could readliy include such an element by subtracting
from i a term that represents the psychological cost that a lesser–skilled individual bears from jealousy of each
high-skilled individual who earns a higher wage than she, in circumstances where the individual does not identify
with the broad nation and thus considers more-skilled workers to be members of the “out-group.” We will pursue
this possibility in footnote xx of Section 5 below, where we will argue that envy of out-group members broadens the
set of parameters for which a populist revolution induces a jump in trade protectionism.
   8
     It is possible that individuals bear a “psychological …xed cost” that depends upon the number of groups with
which they choose to identify, which might limit self-identi…cation on the extensive margin. We do not pursue this
idea here, because we consider only a few large and highly-salient identity groups. That is, we do not believe that
identifying with one’s social class impinges upon identifying more broadly with other nationals, nor (in Section 7)
that identifying with others in one’s own racial or ethnic group impinges upon more economically-based identity
choices.



                                                                         7
     To avoid a taxonomy that includes unrealistic cases, we introduce parameter restrictions that
rule out certain identi…cation patterns. First, we shall assume throughout that A"h > 0 and A!` > 0;
each individual takes some pride from identifying with others in their own social class. Then, since
     =   "   and       =    !,   every individual chooses to identify with her own socioeconomic group,
 h                 `
because such identi…cation confers a psychological bene…t but imposes no dissonance cost. Second,
                       !             "
we assume that         h   and       `   are large enough that no cross-class identi…cation occurs; i.e., no more-
skilled individual identi…es as working class and no less-skilled individual identi…es as an elite.9 We
are left with two possible outcomes for each skill type: in addition to self-identifying as elite, the
more-skilled individuals might opt to identify with the broad nation or not (Ibh = 1 or Ibh = 0); and
similarly, in addition to self-identifying as working class, the less-skilled individuals might choose
to identify broadly or not (Ib` = 1 or Ib` = 0). In total, there are four possible identi…cation regimes,
R= f(0; 0) ; (0; 1) ; (1; 0) ; (1; 1)g ; where an identi…cation regime r 2 R is an ordered pair in which
the …rst element describes whether or not the more-skilled individuals identify broadly with the
nation and the second element describes whether or not the less-skilled individuals do so.
     We also introduce a symmetry assumption that sharpens some of our results. In particular, we
invoke

Assumption 1 (i)            "    =       !   =   and (ii)   b   =       b   =   b.
                            h            `                  h           `

With this assumption of symmetric bene…ts from status, those that are more skilled take the same
pride from a marginal increase in the status of the elites as those that are less skilled take from a
marginal increase in the status of the working class. Moreover, if the two skill groups both identify
as nationals, then those in each group take similar pleasure from a marginal increase in the status
of the nation.10
     We turn next to the political environment. As we mentioned in the introduction, we have
in mind a political setting such as that described in Lindbeck and Weibull (1987), Dixit and
Londregan (1996), and Grossman and Helpman (1996, 2001). In these papers, two political parties
distinguished by their ideological stances compete for votes by announcing their intentions for
a set of pliable policies. The parties adopt policy platforms to maximize their expected vote
counts, anticipating that individuals will cast their votes for whichever party o¤ers a more agreeable
combination of ideological and pliable policies. Rather than describe this game in detail, we apply
what we know from the earlier papers. In particular, all of these authors have shown that if voters’
ideological preferences are drawn from a common distribution, then the parties’ positions on the
pliable policy issues converge on those that maximize the sum of voters’utilities.11
    9
      Equivalently, we could assume that A!           "
                                             h and A` are zero or even negative, so that the more-skilled individuals
take little or no pride in identifying as working class and the less-skilled individuals take no pride in pretending to
be elites.
   10
      We allow for the possibility that bh 6= b` , because experimental research has found that individuals are more
bothered by “disadvantageous inequality” than by “advantageous inequality”; see, for example, Fehr and Schmidt
(1999) and Charness and Rabin (2002). These …ndings would suggest that bh < b` , i.e., that less-skilled workers
su¤er a greater psychological cost from having income below the national average than the more-skilled workers su¤er
from having income above that average.
   11
      The mechanisms by which social identity a¤ects trade policy are present for a wide set of political environments


                                                                    8
    To focus on endogenous rates of protection, we take the pliable policy instrument to be an ad
valorem tari¤ at rate t. The small country faces a …xed relative price, q, of imports in terms of
exports. Then the domestic relative price of the import-competing good is the product of the world
price and one plus the tari¤ rate, or
                                                     p = q (1 + t) .                                                (3)

We seek to characterize the tari¤ rate t that maximizes the sum of voters’utilities. Importantly, in
a setting of identity politics, the utility level that in‡uences an individual’s voting behavior includes
not only the material component of well-being, but also the psychological component associated
                                                                                             P
with self-identi…cation. In other words, the utilitarian welfare function of interest here is i i ui ,
                                           P
not the more usual and limited version,        i i . Moreover, when thinking about the utilitarian
maximum as being an outcome of a political competition between parties, we also need to be wary
of the “self-identi…cation constraints”that re‡ect individually-rational decisions about identity. In
the spirit of Shayo’s notion of a social identity equilibrium, we recognize that the parties would
not propose policies that pre-suppose an identi…cation regime di¤erent from the one that would, in
fact, be induced by those policies.12
    Turning to the economic equilibrium, the domestic price determines output levels, YX (p) and
YZ (p), as well as factor prices, wh (p) and w` (p), as in any model with a Heckscher-Ohlin production
structure. Speci…cally, factor prices in units of the numeraire good X are such that the domestic
price in each sector equals the unit cost of production. And given factor prices, which dictate the
cost minimizing production techniques, output levels are such as to clear the two labor markets.
Recall, as well, the Stolper-Samuelson theorem that applies in this environment; an increase in the
relative price p boosts the wage of less-skilled workers more than proportionately, while depressing
the real wage of the more-skilled workers. These distributional implications of tari¤-induced price
changes will …gure prominently in the analysis below.
    We develop now the political maximand, U . An individual in skill group i earns a wage wi (p)
and receives a share of the rebated tari¤ revenues,


                                             T (p; q) = (p      q)     (p) ,                                        (4)

where     (p)    CZ (p) YZ (p) is the import-demand function and CZ (p)                   arg maxcZ v (cZ ) pcZ is
aggregate consumption of good Z. The representative individual in skill group i achieves material
welfare
                                        i (p; q)   = wi (p) + T (p; q) +       (p) ,                                (5)
that imply di¤erent mappings from voter preferences to policy outcome. We show in Section 6, for example, that the
e¤ects of a populist revolution are qualitatively similar no matter whether the policy outcome maximizes utilitarian
welfare or the welfare of the median voter.
  12
     In other words, we imagine a two-stage game in which the parties …rst announce their positions on trade policy,
then voters cast their ballot for whichever party o¤ers them higher total utility, including material, psychosocial, and
ideological components. In evaluating the psychosocial component of utility, a voter recognizes the identity choices it
will induce her to take. We require the equilibrium in this two-stage game to be subgame perfect; see the discussion
in the next section.



                                                           9
where       (p) = maxcZ [v (cZ )         pcZ ] is the common per capita surplus from consumption of good Z.
The psychosocial component of utility for an individual in skill group h is
                                                                                       h                            i2
      uh (p; q) = A"h +       "
                              h h (p; q)   + Ibh (p) Abh +        b b
                                                                  h   (p; q)      b
                                                                                  h        h (p; q)
                                                                                                          b
                                                                                                              (p; q)      ,    (6a)

which is the sum of the self-worth she reaps by identifying with other elites and the net bene…t
from identifying broadly with all other nationals, if in fact she elects to do so. Notice that we write
Ibh (p) to emphasize the fact that a more-skilled individual’s decision whether to identify broadly
depends on the domestic relative price which in turn determines her own income level and that
of the national average. Similarly, the psychosocial component of utility for an individual in skill
group ` is
                                                                                           h                            i2
            u` (p; q) = A!` +    !
                                 ` ` (p; q)      + Ib` (p) Ab` +     b b
                                                                     `   (p; q)        b
                                                                                       `       ` (p; q)
                                                                                                              b
                                                                                                                  (p; q)   ;   (6b)

she reaps psychological satisfaction from identifying with her fellow members of the working class
and possibly by identifying with the nation.
   In a competitive economy,
                                                 h wh (p)   +   ` w` (p)   = Y (p) ,

where Y (p)       YX (p) + pYZ (p) is aggregate GDP at domestic prices. Also, average material utility
is a population-weighted average of the material utility of individuals in each skill group; i.e.,
 b (p; q)   =   h wh (p) +    ` w` (p) + T   (p; q) +       (p). Using these observations, and summing across all
voters, we have under Assumption 1 that

                                 "           !
            U (p; q) =        h Ah   +       + (1 + ) [Y (p) + T (p; q) + (p)]
                                          ` A`                                                                                  (7)
                                        n                                                                                o
                                                                                                             2
                             + h Ibh (p) Abh + b [Y (p) + T (p; q) + (p)]      b
                                                                               h (1                        h) [  (p)]2
                                        n                                                                             o
                                                                                                             2      2
                             + ` Ib` (p) Ab` + b [Y (p) + T (p; q) + (p)]    b
                                                                             ` (1                         ` ) [ (p)]    ,

where (p)         wh (p)      w` (p) > 0 is the earnings gap between more- and less-skilled workers. The
…rst line on the right-hand side of (7) is aggregate welfare from all material utilities and from
individuals’ identi…cation with their own social class. The following two lines give the aggregate
psychological gain to the more- and less-skilled individuals, respectively, from identifying as na-
tionals, if members of those skill groups choose to do so. The equilibrium tari¤ maximizes U (p; q)
subject to the the constraint that all identity choices are individually rational.
   We o¤er two observations about the political maximand, U (p; q). First, when all individuals
identify with their own social class, this introduces an additional element of class warfare to the
political struggle over trade policies. Not only does a less-skilled worker favor an import tari¤
to boost her own wage, but she also favors protection to bene…t others like herself. Similar, a
more-skilled individual opposes protection not only to preserve her own pay, but also to safeguard
the incomes of other elites with whom she identi…es. However, under the symmetry assumption,


                                                                10
these sel…sh motives for trade policy just o¤set one another in the calculus of utilitarian maxi-
mization. The sel…sh aims of the less-skilled individuals who identify with the working class add
 `       [w` (p) + T (p; q) +   (p)] to the political objective, whereas those of the more skilled individuals
who identify with the elite add         h   [wh (p) + T (p; q) +    (p)] to the objective. Together these sum
to        [Y (p) + T (p; q) +   (p)], which is proportional to aggregate material welfare. So, this extra
component of policy preferences does not tilt the trade politics in one direction or the other.13
         Second, when either skill group identi…es with the nation as a whole, this introduces a source of
inequality aversion into the trade politics. Here, such a distaste for inequality does not re‡ect a sense
of fairness or altruism on the part of any voter. Rather, inasmuch as everyone pays a psychological
toll from identifying with others that are di¤erent from themselves, those that identify with the
nation sel…shly lean to policies that narrow the gap between themselves and the average. In the
present context, a tari¤ has such an e¤ect, inasmuch as the Stolper-Samuelson theorem ties the
wage gap to the price of the import-competing good.


3         Equilibrium Protection with Social Identi…cation
In this section, we maximize the utilitarian objective function, U (p; q) ; subject to the self-identi…cation
constraints, in order to characterize the equilibrium tari¤. We describe the conditions under which
the trade politics with social identi…cation give rise to protectionist outcomes and discuss how the
equilibrium tari¤ rate responds to changes in social attitudes, technology, and the terms of trade
for a given identi…cation regime. We postpone consideration of changes in patterns of identi…cation
until Section 5.
         Consider Figure 1. The …gure depicts U (p; q) as a function of p for each of the four possible
identi…cation regimes. The curve labeled r0 corresponds to the identi…cation regime r = (0; 0) in
which no voter identi…es broadly with the nation; i.e., Ibh = 0 and Ib` = 0. The curves labeled rh and
r` correspond, respectively, to identi…cation regimes in which only the higher-skilled individuals
and only the lesser-skilled individuals identify broadly with their fellow nationals, while those in
the remaining skill group identify only with others in their own social class. Finally, the curve
labeled rh;` corresponds to the identity regime r = (1; 1) in which all citizens irrespective of skill
level identify not only with those in their own social class, but also with the nation as a whole.
We have drawn the …gure under the assumption that all four of these curves are single-peaked as
a function of p. We maintain this assumption henceforth.
         We shall argue now that the equilibrium tari¤ is the one that gives rise to the domestic price
p that achieves the global maximum in Figure 1; that is, we need not worry speci…cally about
the individual-rationality constraints, because they are always satis…ed at p                   argmaxp U (p; q).
Equilibria at ph;` , ph , p` , and p0 all are possible outcomes, depending upon the perceived bene…ts
from broad identi…cation that are re‡ected in the parameters Abh and Ab` , as well as the other
    13
     In contrast, when the political competition maximizes the welfare of the median voter, identi…cation with own
social class favors the working class, because the less-skilled individuals are more numerous and so the median voter
is one of them; see Section 6.


                                                         11
                                         Figure 1: Equilibrium protection



parameters that characterize the economic and cultural environment.
    To see this, suppose …rst that the global maximum is achieved for p = ph;` , which is the
domestic price that maximizes U (p; q) for r = (1; 1). We have illustrated this case in Figure 1.
Then, U (ph;` ; q)jIb =1;Ib =0 < U (ph;` ; q)jIb =1;Ib =1 and U (ph;` ; q)jIb =0;Ib =1 < U (ph;` ; q)jIb =1;Ib =1 ; i.e.,
                        h   `                   h       `                        h       `               h       `
the curves rh and r` pass below rh;` at p = ph;` . But the di¤erence between U (p; q)jIb =1;Ib =1
                                                                                                                 h       `
and U (p; q)jIb =1;Ib =0 at a given price p is the net (positive) psychosocial bene…t to more-skilled
                h       `
workers from identifying broadly with the nation. Since rh;` is above rh at ph;` , the more-skilled
will choose to identifying broadly at this price. Similarly, rh;` above r` at ph;` implies that the
less-skilled workers prefer to see themselves as part of the broad nation at this price. In short,
when the parties set the trade policy to achieve a utilitarian maximum at ph;` , the identity choices
that underlie this choice are ful…lled.
    Now suppose instead that the global maximum is achieved at p = ph , which is the price that
generates the peak of the curve rh . In such circumstances, the fact that U (ph ,q)jIb =0;Ib =0 <
                                                                                                             h       `
U (ph ; q)jIb =1;Ib =0 implies that the more-skilled individuals enjoy a net bene…t from identifying
            h       `
broadly, whereas the fact that U (ph ,q)jIb =1;Ib =1 < U (ph ; q)jIb =1;Ib =0 implies that the less-skilled
                                                    h       `                h       `
workers would su¤er a net loss from doing so. Again, the welfare-maximizing tari¤ induces an
identi…cation pattern that justi…es the policy choice. An analogous argument applies to the case
in which the global maximum occurs at p = p` .
    Finally, suppose that the global maximum is attained for p = p0 , which achieves the peak of the
curve r0 . Then U (p0 ; q)jIb =1;Ib =0 < U (p0 ,q)jIb =0;Ib =0 and U (p0 ; q)jIb =0;Ib =1 < U (p0 ; q)jIb =0;Ib =0 .
                                h    `                          h        `                   h   `               h       `
No workers would choose to identify broadly under such conditions. In short, no matter which
identi…cation regime gives rise to the global maximum of U (p; q), the associated domestic price
p = arg maxp U (p; q) induces self-categorization that justi…es the parties’vote-maximizing policy
choices.
    We examine now the nature of the trade policy that underlies each of the possible choices of the
domestic price, p . Suppose …rst that the global utilitarian maximum is achieved at p0 , so that each

                                                                    12
worker identi…es narrowly only with others in her own social class. In this case, U (p; q)jIb =Ib =0 =
                                                                                                               h   `
    "           !
 h Ah    +   ` A`   + (1 + ) [Y (p) + T (p; q) +      (p)], and the equilibrium trade policy is the one that
maximizes aggregate material welfare, Y (p) + T (p; q) +                    (p). For a small country, the implied
equilibrium tari¤ is t = 0; i.e., the political equilibrium involves free trade. Whereas the less-
skilled workers favor tari¤s (up to a point), both for their own real-income gains and in order to
advance the status of the working class with whom they identify, the more-skilled workers take the
opposite position. The balancing of these opposing forces based on self-interest and concern for the
status of one’s own social group results in a neutral policy with respect to trade.
       Now suppose that the highest peak occurs for p = ph , at which the more-skilled workers identify
broadly with the nation, while the less-skilled workers do not; i.e., r = (1; 0). Then the political
maximand comprises the …rst-two lines in (7). In addition to constants, the maximand includes a
component that is proportional to aggregate material welfare and a component that is decreasing
in the wage gap, . The latter re‡ects the psychological cost to the more-skilled workers from iden-
tifying with other nationals who are di¤erent from themselves in terms of socioeconomic standing.
As we noted before, the dissonance costs induce an aversion to inequality on the part of these elites,
not from any sense of “fairness,” but rather from a desire to “be more like the others.” Since a
marginal change in the tari¤ has a negligible e¤ect on aggregate material welfare at t = 0, and since
a tari¤ reduces the wage gap via the Stolper-Samuelson mechanism, the maximization of U (p; q)
                                                                 b
generates a positive tari¤ in this case, as long as              h   > 0.
       A similar logic applies if the less-skilled workers identify with the broad nation but the more-
skilled workers do not; i.e., r= (0; 1). Then the sel…sh motives of the working class and the elite
cancel out, but the less-skilled voters have an additional interest in protection in order to reduce the
psychological distance between themselves and the average national. In this case, too, the political
maximand is increasing at t = 0, because the only force that does not cancel there is the less-skilled
workers’aversion to being di¤erent from the prototype.
       Finally, if broad identi…cation is widespread among both skill groups, the aggregate aversion
to inequality is all the greater. Members of both classes can mitigate their dissonance cost by
narrowing the income gap between themselves and the average. This does not mean that both
groups favor tari¤s; in fact, the more-skilled individuals may well prefer an import subsidy to
further their own material interests and to boost the status of the elites with whom they also
identify. But the material interests of the more-skilled voters balance those of the low-skilled voters
at t = 0, leaving a net preference for protection. We recap these …ndings in14

                                       b              b
Proposition 1 Suppose that             h   > 0 and    `   > 0. If neither skill group identi…es broadly with the
nation, the equilibrium tari¤ is zero. Otherwise, it is positive.
  14
     Technically, we have made only a local argument that U (p; q) is increasing in p at p = q. But it is easy to see from
(8) below that Up (p; q) > 0 for all p < q. So a global maximum of U (p; q) cannot be achieved with any t < 0. We
know that a global maximum exists, because for p large enough, either the economy remains incompletely specialized
and (p) = 0 or the economy specializes in producing good Z and (p) > 0. If the economy remains incompletely
specialized, the optimal domestic price must be smaller than the one that delivers (p) = 0. If the economy becomes
completely specialized for large p, wages are proportional to p and so 0 (p) is a positive constant. Then the optimal
p is below the lowest price that leads to complete specialization.


                                                            13
4         Comparative Statics in a Fixed Identi…cation Regime
We ask next how small changes in the economic and political environment a¤ect the equilibrium
policy when the identi…cation pattern does not change. That is, we begin from an equilibrium
in which the equilibrium policy is some to and the identi…cation regime is some r                                                2 R: We
then change one of the parameters of the model by a small amount, such that the equilibrium
identi…cation regime continues to be r , and examine the response of t. We consider in turn changes
                                                             g
in the psychological cost of identi…cation,                  i,      changes in the production technologies (as described
further below), and changes in the terms of trade, q. In each case, we employ the usual method of
comparative statics: we calculate the shift in the marginal bene…t from a tari¤, evaluated at t = to ,
and rely on the second-order condition for an optimum to tell us in which direction the equilibrium
tari¤ must adjust. From (3) we have that the marginal political bene…t from an increase in the
tari¤ rate, t, is equal to qUp (p; q), and then from (4) and (7),
                          0                             1
                                             X                                            X
             Up (p; q) = @1 +      +     b
                                                     i Ii A (p
                                                        b
                                                                      q)    0
                                                                                (p)   2           b b
                                                                                                  i Ii i (1   i)
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                     (p)   0
                                                                                                                               (p) .    (8)
                                             i=h;`                                        i=h;`


Considering the second-order condition that requires Upp (p ; q) < 0 at the global maximum of
U (p; q), the equilibrium tari¤ rises in response to a small increase in the parameter                                        if and only if
dUp (p; q) =d >        0.15
         Note that we need only consider initial regimes in which at least one of the skill groups identi…es
broadly with the nation, because if neither do so, the equilibrium tari¤ remains unchanged at its
initial level of zero.

4.1         Changes in the Psychological Cost of Identi…cation
First note that a change in the cost of identifying with one’s own social class has no e¤ect on the
equilibrium policy. In our model with homogeneous skill groups, individuals bear no dissonance
                                                                                                               "         !
cost from identifying with the others just like them, no matter how large is                                   h    or   `.    So, we need
                                    b           b
only consider changes in            h   and     `.
                                   b                                                                b
         Suppose, then, that      Ii    = 1 for i = h or i = `, and that                            i   grows. That is, it becomes
psychologically more costly for the members of skill group i to identify with others in their country
that have a di¤erent standard of living from their own. At the initial equilibrium, this raises the
marginal political value of a tari¤, because a tari¤ reduces the income gap, , via the Stolper-
Samuelson e¤ect. Therefore, we have

Proposition 2 Suppose that skill group i identi…es broadly with the nation in some initial political
equilibrium (Ibi = 1) and that a change in the cost of identi…cation does not induce a change in the
                                                                 b
identi…cation regime. Then an increase in                        i   generates an increase in the equilibrium tari¤ rate,
for i = h or i = `.
    15
         Recall the last footnote in which we argued that a global maximum for U (p; q) always exists.


                                                                       14
4.2      Changes in Technology
We model technological change that is factor-augmenting. That is, we take the productivity of one
unit of “raw”labor of type i to be           in all uses, and consider changes in                           o                 o
                                         i                                                   i.   If d   h= h   = d `=        `   > 0,
where      o   is the initial productivity level for skill group i, then we have Hicks-neutral technological
           i
progress throughout the economy.16 If d                    o
                                                        h= h   > d `=          o
                                                                               `    0, then the productivity gains are
biased toward the more-skilled labor. Without further loss of generality, we can set the initial
productivity levels equal to one; i.e.,         o   =    o   = 1. We can also de…ne                such that d               = d `;
                                                h        `                                                               h
then technological progress is skill-biased if           > 1 and Hicks-neutral if             = 1:
       Hicks-neutral or skill-biased technological progress can have o¤setting e¤ects on the marginal
political desirability of a tari¤. On the one hand, technological progress of this sort widens the
wage gap, and inasmuch as the psychological cost of distance is a convex function of the gap, it
increases the marginal desirability of a tari¤ to alleviate dissonance. But technological progress
often will increase the marginal cost of a tari¤ in terms of aggregate material welfare and the status
bene…ts of identi…cation that derive therefrom. This tends to reduce the desirability of a given
rate of protection. Despite this apparent ambiguity, we …nd that dUp (p; q) = d ` jd                       h=    d   `
                                                                                                                         > 0 when
  = 1; i.e., when productivity gains are Hicks-neutral, the upward pressure on the tari¤ from the
increased marginal dissonance cost always outweighs any downward pressure on the tari¤ from a
possible increase in the marginal e¢ ciency cost. We state

Proposition 3 Suppose that skill group i identi…es broadly with the nation in some initial political
equilibrium (Ibi = 1). Then Hicks-neutral technological gain that does not induce a change in
identi…cation regime generates an increase in the equilibrium tari¤ rate, for i = h or i = `.

The proof in the appendix relies on the fact that the initial tari¤ rate is not arbitrary, but involves an
optimal weighting of the e¤ects of protection on national income versus the cost of dissonance. Using
the …rst-order condition for maximizing U (p; q) at                o   =   o   = 1, we can sign dUp (p ; q) = d ` jd
                                                                   h       `                                                   h =d `
and thereby determine the direction of change in the rate of protection.
       When       > 1, the political outcome is, in principle, ambiguous. In the appendix we derive
su¢ cient conditions for the tari¤ rate to increase in response to skill-biased technical progress.
First, the tari¤ necessarily rises if wh00 (p )              0. This condition, is satis…ed, for example, if the
production technologies in both sectors are Leontief, in which case wh (p) is linear and wh00 (p ) = 0.
Second, the tari¤ rises if both wh00 (p ) > 0 and w`00 (p ) > 0. This condition is satis…ed, for example,
if both sectors produce with Cobb-Douglas technologies. We emphasize that these conditions are
su¢ cient for a tari¤ hike, but not necessary; skill-biased technical progress induces an increase in
trade protection in many other cases as well.
  16
    Factor-augmenting technological progress that raises the productivity of every factor by the same proportion
is equilivalent to technological progress that raises the total factor productivity in every industry by that same
proportion.




                                                              15
4.3      Changes in the Terms of Trade
We now consider changes in the terms of trade. Of course, improvements in the terms of trade
stemming from the “China Shock” and from growth in other emerging economies have been a
prominent feature of the recent European and American economic experiences (see, for example,
Autor et al., 2013).
       Suppose the terms of trade improve, i.e., dq < 0. From (8), it is clear that
                                         0                              1
                          @Up (p; q)                      X
                                     =   @1 +    +    b
                                                                  i Ii (p)A
                                                                     b        0
                                                                                  (p) > 0 .
                             @q
                                                          i=h;`

For a given domestic price, an improved terms of trade means more tari¤ revenue per unit of imports
and so a domestic price hike that chokes o¤ imports has a greater adverse e¤ect on national income.
Meanwhile, at a given domestic price, an improvement in the terms of trade has no impact on the
wage gap and thus on the aggregate dissonance costs. It follows that an improvement in the terms
of trade unambiguously reduces the marginal political gain from increasing the domestic price at
p = p . At least part of any fall in the world price of imports will be passed through to domestic
prices after the optimal tari¤ response.
       But this does not tell us what happens to the tari¤ rate. The domestic price might fall by
proportionately less than the terms of trade, which would imply an increase in the rate of protection.
Or the price might fall by proportionately more than the terms of trade, which would imply a cut
in the tari¤ rate. To determine which of these outcomes obtains, we must examine the extent of
the decline in the price that maximizes the political objective, U (p; q), in response to a change in
q. We undertake this calculation in the appendix.
       We …nd that there are two, potentially-o¤setting forces at play that guide the political response
to an improvement in the terms of trade. First, the decline in the domestic price of the importable
good might alter the elasticity of the import-demand curve,                   (p). If the curve becomes more
elastic as the price of the import-good falls, the marginal e¢ ciency cost of a tari¤ grows, which
would tend to moderate the political demands for a tari¤. If, alternatively, the import-demand
curve becomes less elastic as p falls, the marginal deadweight loss from a tari¤ would shrink, and
political resistance to the tari¤ from this source would abate. Second, the fall in the domestic price
of the import good might alter the marginal dissonance cost arising from the wage gap. We know
from the Stolper-Samuelson theorem that a fall in p widens the wage gap                        and thereby increases
the dissonance any voters feel if they happen to identify broadly with their fellow nationals. But a
                                                                                         00
decline in p might make the wage gap more or less responsive to tari¤s. If                    (p ) > 0, the usefulness
of a tari¤ to combat inequality grows as the price falls, which encourages a higher tari¤ rate. If
 00
      (p ) < 0, the e¢ cacy of a tari¤ for reducing inequality falls after an improvement in the terms
of trade, and so voters see less bene…t from high tari¤s from this source. If the two forces reinforce
                                                                                  00             00
one another, then the outcome will be clear. For example, when                         0 and          0, the marginal
e¢ ciency cost falls while the e¢ cacy of protection in reducing inequality increases, in which case an



                                                     16
improvement in the terms of trade results in an unambiguous increase in the rate of protection. In
the appendix, we provide a necessary and su¢ cient condition for the tari¤ rate to rise in response
to a decline in the world price of the import good.


5         Populist Revolution and Trade Policy
In the last section, we described the e¤ects of small changes in the economic and political environ-
ment that do not alter the identi…cation regime. We found that changes in the psychological costs
of identi…cation, changes in technology, and changes in the terms of trade all generate political
adjustments in the equilibrium tari¤ rate whenever the members of at least one skill group identify
broadly with the nation. Naturally, such political responses are proportionate to the magnitude of
the shifts in the underlying parameters, so they typically imply a smooth and gradual evolution of
trade policy.
         In this section, we consider shifts in the underlying environment that induce a change in the
identi…cation regime. Prompted by recent political events, we focus on a particular switch in the
pattern of self-identi…cation, namely one that we term a populist revolution.17 Populism has been
de…ned by Müller (2016) as a political situation in which a group of voters rejects the legitimacy
of the political and economic elite and designates themselves as the only “true” citizens worthy
of consideration. Müller describes populism as “always a form of identity politics,” but observes
that “not all versions of identity politics are populist” (p.3). As in all expressions of self-identity,
populists distinguish an “in-group” and an “out-group,” but populism is distinguished by the
composition of these groups; the in-group comprises the working man whereas the out-group is
made up of allegedly corrupt elites.
         To capture the phenomenon of populist revolution, we begin with an initial identi…cation regime
in which voters at all income levels see themselves as part of the broad nation, alongside their more
narrow association with their own social class. The “revolution” entails a repudiation of the elites
by the working class. When the working class rejects the legitimacy of the elites, they cease to
embrace a broad notion of “the nation.” Instead, they reconceptualize the prototypical “national”
as being a fellow member of the working class. In short, we imagine a change in identi…cation
regime whereby Ib` = 1 beforehand and Ib` = 0 afterward. In our model, such a change in self-
                                                               b
categorization could be caused by an increase in               `,   the dissonance cost of associating with those
in a di¤erent income class, by skill-biased or Hicks-neutral technological progress that increases the
wage gap and therefore the cost of identi…cation, or by a terms of trade improvement that does
likewise. Arguably, all of these trends have been observed in the period leading up to the recent
rise in populist expression.
         We illustrate how a populist revolution can generate a discrete jump in the tari¤ rate in Figure
2. The …gure depicts the case in which p0 = q < p` < ph;` < ph , where q; p` ; ph;` and ph are,
    17
   On the role of the populist revolution in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, see for example, Sides et al. (2016),
Mutz (2018), and Oliver and Rahn (2016). On the rise of populism in the United Kingdom and its in‡uence on the
Brexit referendum, see Freeden (2016) and Goodhart (2017)


                                                          17
                                          Figure 2: Populist Revolution



respectively, the peaks of the U (p; q) curves for r = r0 , r = r` , r = rh;` , and r = rh : In the
appendix we show that ph;` < ph if and only if the inequality in (11) below is satis…ed. Moreover,
if ph;` < ph , it must also be true that p` < ph;` , as drawn. The …gure shows an initial equilibrium—
                                                                                                                                    b
prior to the populist revolution— at ph;` , where U (p; q) reaches a global maximum. Now, if                                        `   rises,
for example, the rh;` curve shifts down and its peak shifts to the right, as portrayed by the dotted
               0 .18 If there were no change in the identi…cation regime, the equilibrium domestic
curve labeled rh;`
price would rise slightly. However, the …gure depicts a situation in which the initial peak of rh;` is
only slightly above that of rh . After the downward shift in rh;` , the new global maximum occurs
at ph . Instead of a small rise in t , we see a discrete jump in the tari¤, as the political parties
seek to appeal to less-skilled voters whose policy preferences have changed along with their social
identities.
       More formally, we can evaluate analytically how the equilibrium tari¤ adjusts following a pop-
ulist revolution.19 Beforehand, the equilibrium policy is determined by the …rst-order condition
                                                                                     X                   2
                                          b                      0                            b                     0
       Up (p ; q)jIb =Ib =1 = 1 +    +            (p        q)       (p )        2            i i (1   i)    (p )       (p ) = 0.         (9)
                 h   `
                                                                                     i=h;`


Afterward, the equilibrium policy is determined instead by


                                              b                           0                  b           2          0
   Up (~
       p ; q)jIb =1; Ib =0 = 1 +      +           h    (~
                                                        p        q)           (~
                                                                               p )     2     h h (1    h)    (~
                                                                                                              p )       (~
                                                                                                                         p ) = 0.        (10)
                 h       `

  18
     The r` curve also shifts down and its peak shifts to the right, but this shift is not relevant to the case under
discussion. We do not show the shift of r` in Figure 2, to avoid cluttering the …gure.
  19
     We consider a small change in some parameter that induces the change in identi…cation from Ib` = 1 to Ib` = 0, so
that the values of this parameter before and after are close enough that the di¤erence can be ignored.


                                                                     18
The ex post domestic price, p~ , will be discretely higher than the ex ante price, p , if
Up (p ; q)jIb =1; Ib =0 > Up (p ; q)jIb =Ib =1 = 0. The price will be discretely lower if the inequality
                       h        `                                    h        `
runs in the opposite direction. And, if it happens that Up (p ; q)jIb =1; Ib =0 = Up (p ; q)jIb =Ib =1 ,
                                                                                                                                                       h       `                         h   `
then the change in identi…cation regime has no e¤ect on the policy outcome.
         Equations (9) and (10) imply that Up (p ; q)jIb =1; Ib =0 > 0 if and only if20
                                                                                                             h       `


                                                                  b b                        2           b                           b
                                                                  h   (1                   h)    >       `       1+          +           h           h.                                      (11)

Notice that (11) is satis…ed for                                     h   = 0 and that is violated for                                    h   = 1. Notice too that the left-hand
side is decreasing in                       h    and the right-hand side is increasing in                                                    h       for all           h   < 1. This implies the
existence of a                  h   2 (0; 1) such that a populist revolution induces an upward jump in protection for
                                    b       b                                                                                                         b=           b
all       h   <    h.      If       h   =   `,       h   can be expressed quite simply as                                                h   =             2           +1+        .
         When the working class ceases to identify with a broad group that includes the elites, the
political pressures for protection may intensify or abate. On the one hand, the working class no
longer reaps psychological gains from the status associated with national income. On the other
hand, they no longer bear dissonance costs from the wage gap. In other words, the working class
perceives protection as being less costly, but also as less valuable for its redistributive e¤ects. The
tari¤ rate rises whenever the former force outweighs the latter, as it will if most of the other
citizens are in the same social class as themselves; i.e., if                                                                    `   is large and                  h   is small. For example,
         b         b            b                        b
if       h   =     `   =            and         =            = 0:1, the tari¤ rate jumps when the elite are less than 1=13                                                                   7:7%
of the population.
         We summarize our …ndings in

Proposition 4 There exists a                                         h   2 (0; 1) such that a populist revolution induces a discrete upward
jump in the tari¤ rate for all                                       h    <           h    and a discrete downward jump in the tari¤ rate for all
                           b            b        b                       b=            b
     h   >    h.   If      h    =       `   =        ,       h   =                2        +1+               .

         Evidently, a change in identi…cation regime can generate a precipitous change in trade policy.
In particular, a populist revolution can generate a discontinuous jump in tari¤ rates. Whether
the jump is upward or downward depends on the size of the elite. The revolution that provokes a
discrete change in protectionism might be caused by economic factors, such as an increase in income
inequality owing to skill-biased technical change or the forces of globalization, or by political factors,
  20
     In footnote 6 we noted that psychosocial utility might include a third component representing envy of out-group
members who enjoy greater material well-being than oneself. Suppose that, when the working class envies the elites,
each less-skilled worker su¤ers disutility of h (vh v` )2 , which is proportional to the number of elites that inspire
jeaolousy and to the square of the di¤erence in materal well-being. In the appendix we show that, in this case, the
analog to condition (11) becomes
                                                     b   b                 2                                 b           b                       b
                                                         h   (1          h)       +        1+        +           >       `   1+          +            h    h   ,

which is satis…ed for a wider range of values of h . In this sense, feelings of envy on the part of a working class make
a protectionist response to a populist revolution more likely. Moreover, for > b` , there is a protectionist response
irrespective of the size of the elite.



                                                                                                     19
as when entrepreneurial politicians stoke up anti-elite sentiments among the working class in order
to promote their own political ends.


6         The Median Voter
Before extending our analysis to include additional identi…cation categories, we discuss brie‡y an
alternative political environment. Until now, we have assumed that protectionist policies re‡ect
the preferences of the average voter, as suggested by the aforementioned models of probabilistic
voting. In this section, we revisit our conclusions in a setting in which tari¤s maximize instead the
welfare of the median voter.
         Inasmuch as the less-skilled individuals constitute a majority of the voting population, the
median voter is a member of the working class. The new political objective becomes

               U med (p; q) = A!` + (1 + ) [w` (p) + T (p; q) + (p)]                                                               (12)
                                  n                                                                                        o
                                                                                                           2           2
                              +Ib` Ab` + b [Y (p) + T (p; q) + (p)]                         b
                                                                                            ` (1       `)      [ (p)]          ,

which combines the median voter’s own material welfare, the self-esteem she gains from identifying
with her socioeconomic class, and a net psychological bene…t she may reap from identifying with
the nation. The marginal political bene…t from a tari¤ hike in this setting is qUpmed (p; q), where
                                                                         h                                     i
              Upmed (p; q) = 1 +        +   b b
                                             I`   (p      q)   0
                                                                   (p)       (1 + )   h   + 2 b` Ib`   2
                                                                                                       h    (p)    0
                                                                                                                       (p) .       (13)

         Here, social identi…cation by the more-skilled workers makes no di¤erence for policy; only
the identity choices made by the median voter matter. Since the less-skilled individuals always
identify with the working class, there are only two possible identi…cation regimes to consider:
either Ib` (p) = 1 or Ib` (p) = 0: In either case, Upmed (q; q) > 0; i.e., the median voter’s welfare
rises when the tari¤ rate is increased from zero.21 A small tari¤ has negligible cost in terms of
aggregate national income, but it increases the wages of the less-skilled individuals and narrows
the wage gap. Whether the less-skilled workers identify with the nation or not, the median voter
prefers some protection for the import-competing sector. The political equilibrium always entails
a positive tari¤, which we denote by tmed > 0.22
                               b
         Now suppose that      `   rises; i.e., the less-skilled individuals become more sensitive to identifying
with others who have achieved greater economic status than themselves. Clearly, if the less-skilled
individuals do not identify with the nation, this has no e¤ect on the equilibrium policy. If they do
identify with the nation both beforehand and afterward, the marginal bene…t of a tari¤ increases,
because a tari¤ serves to narrow the wage gap and reduces dissonance costs. It follows that
              b                                   b
@tmed =@      `   = 0 if Ib` = 0 and @tmed =@     `   > 0 if Ib` = 1.
    21
     Also note that Upmed (p; q) 0 for all p q.
    22
     This …nding mimics that of Mayer (1984), who showed that positive protection emerges in a median-voter
framework when households di¤er in their endowments of capital and labor and the median household has relatively
less capital than the average.


                                                               20
      Turning to the e¤ects of technical progress, we …nd that the tari¤ preferred by the median
voter— like that preferred by the average voter— rises in response to Hicks-neutral productivity
gains that do not alter the identi…cation regime. Moreover, tmed rises in response to skill-biased
technological progress whenever wh00 (p)                 0. However, as with the utilitarian objective function
that we considered in Section 4.2, the tari¤ that maximizes the welfare of the median voter may
rise or fall in response to skill-biased technological progress when wh00 (p) > 0.23
      If the terms of trade improve, the tari¤ preferred by the median voter will likely change, for two
reasons. First, the marginal e¢ ciency cost of the tari¤ will grow or shrink according to whether
the import demand curve becomes ‡atter or steeper. The median voter shares in this marginal cost
or bene…t of protection as a claimant on rebated tari¤ revenues, and from the status that derives
therefrom. Second, the marginal redistribution brought about by a tari¤ will change, inasmuch
as the Stolper-Samuelson derivatives adjust. This a¤ects the median voter directly, as a recipient
of less-skilled wages, and may also alter any dissonance cost she bears from achieving a lesser
socioeconomic status than the average national.
      In the appendix we provide a necessary and su¢ cient condition for the tari¤ to rise in response
to an improvement in the terms of trade. The form of the inequality is strikingly similar to the
one that applies when the trade policy achieves a utilitarian optimum. In particular, the tari¤ that
                                                                                    00 (p)                00
maximizes welfare for the median voter certainly rises when                                       0 and        (p)         0; i.e. when
an improvement in the terms of trade reduces the marginal e¢ ciency cost of protection while also
boosting the responsiveness of the wage gap to the domestic price.
      Finally, we reconsider the e¤ects of a populist revolution, this time in a median-voter setting.
First note that the equilibrium tari¤ under either Ib` (p) = 1 or Ib` (p) = 0 might be prohibitive. An
increase in the rate of protection from any given level always raises the real income of the less-
skilled workers via the Stolper-Samuelson mechanism, it always raises the status of the less-skilled
workers, and it always narrows the wage gap. The only adverse e¤ect comes from a reduction in
tari¤ revenue, and this can happen only for tari¤s on the downward-sloping portion of the La¤er
curve (which can emerge in the political equilibrium).
      We suppose, nonetheless, that the equilibrium tari¤s before and after the populist revolution
are interior; i.e., they do not eliminate imports. Then these tari¤s are determined by a pair of
…rst-order conditions of the form Upmed (p; q) = 0, one with Ib` = 1 and the other with Ib` = 0. As
before, we calculate the di¤erence in the marginal bene…t of a tari¤ in the two regimes, evaluated at
p = p , the equilibrium tari¤ before the less-skilled individuals repudiate their identi…cation with
the broad group that includes the elite. We …nd

                                                                     1+             h                       i
            Upmed (p ; q)            Upmed (p ; q)            =             b   h
                                                                                        b
                                                                                              2   b
                                                                                                  ` h   (p )         0
                                                                                                                         (p ) .
                            Ib` =0                   Ib` =1        1+ +

                                                                       b        b
The rate of protection jumps upward in this case if                        >2   ` h         (p ), and it jumps downward if
the inequality runs in the opposite direction. Once again, a populist revolution generates a discrete
 23
      For proof of these claims, see the appendix.



                                                                  21
rise in protection when the elite comprises a small enough fraction of the voting population.


7    Ethnic and Racial Identi…cation
Until now, we have focused on a political environment in which there are only two groups in society,
a group of high-income elites and a group of lesser-income workers. Clearly, most societies have
other cleavages that o¤er a wider menu of identity choices. Moreover, one of these sociocultural
distinctions has become increasingly salient in recent elections in the United States and Europe,
namely that perceived along ethnic and racial lines. In this section, we extend our model to re‡ect
a population that varies not only in skill level and earnings potential, but also in ethnic or racial
background. We ask whether an increase in the perceived cost of identifying with those of a di¤erent
race or ethnicity has any bearing on the equilibrium rate of trade protection.
    We distinguish two ethnicities in the population, an ethnic majority, M , and an ethnic minority,
m. Although every individual bears one ethnicity or the other, individuals may or may not choose
to identify with their ethnic group, depending on the composition of the group in socioeconomic
terms. At the same time, we introduce a third skill level to our model of Section 2 and designate
the three skills by h (high), ` (medium) and k (low). Having a third skill level gives us greater
‡exibility in aligning ethnicities and socioeconomic standing with interests in protectionist policies.
    The economy now produces three goods. Two goods are tradable. An export good, X, and an
import-competing good, Z, are produced with constant returns to scale by h and `, much as before.
The export good uses high-skilled labor relatively intensively, whereas the import-competing good
uses middle-skilled labor relatively intensively. The third good, S, is a nontraded service. This
service is provided by low-skilled workers, with one unit of output per unit of labor. Let pS be the
price of the service. Low-skilled workers earn the competitive wage, wk = pS .
    All individuals have quasi–linear preferences and devote residual income after optimal spending
on the import good and the nontraded service to the export good. We represent the material
well-being of an individual in skill group i by

                       i (p; q; pS )   = wi (p) + T (p; q; pS ) +   (p; pS ) , i = h; `; k,

where   (p; pS ) is consumer surplus from combined purchases of the import good and the nontraded
service and where tari¤ revenues T ( ) now depend on the price of the nontraded service, because
demand for the import good Z depends on this price.
    Output of the nontraded service is …xed by the supply of low-skilled labor, i.e., YS =         k   (where   i
again is the fraction of individuals with skill level i in the population of size one). Aggregate demand
for the service can be derived from the surplus function, namely CS (p; pS ) =                @ (p; pS ) =@pS .
Market clearing for services, CS (p; pS ) = YS , yields a functional relationship between the price of
services and the price of the import good. Considering that wk = pS , we can write (with slight
abuse of notation) that wk = wk (p), as well as pS = pS (p).
    The link between the price of the import good and the wage of low-skilled workers depends on

                                                        22
the substitutability or complementarity between Z and S in the typical consumer’s demand. If the
import good and the nontraded service are gross complements, then an increase in the domestic
price of good Z depresses demand for services, which spells a decline in their price and thus a fall
in the wage, wk . Alternatively, if good Z and service S are gross substitutes, a rise in the price p
induces an increase in wk .24
          We allow for a rich pattern of potential social identities. Individuals with ethnicity j and skill
level i may identify with others of their same ethnicity (Ij;j             j;j
                                                           i = 1) or not (Ii = 0). These same
individuals may identify with others in their same social class (Iji;i = 1) or not (Iji;i = 0). And
they may identify with a broad group of nationals (Ij;b             j;b
                                                    i = 1) or not (Ii = 0).
                                                                           25 The psychological

bene…t to an individual from identifying with any group is a linearly increasing function of the
material well-being of the prototypical member of the group, where the prototype is the average
among individuals with the speci…ed characteristics. That is, the bene…t from identifying with
                    P j         j         e is a constant that is common across ethnicities, j
ethnic group j is e    i i i = , where                                                       i
                                                                                             j
is the fraction of individuals with skill level i and ethnicity j, and                           is the fraction of individuals
with ethnicity j in the total        population.26      Similarly, the bene…t from identifying with social class i
is                                                                                e.
           i,   where
               is another constant, possibly di¤erent from                             Finally, the bene…t from identifying
                             P
broadly with the nation is b i i i .
          Dissonance costs now have two components. The …rst component is proportional to the squared
distance in the space of material well-being, as before. For individuals with skill i who identify
with some group g, this cost is               (        g )2 ,   where   g   is the average material well-being among
                                                  i
those with the characteristics associated with group g. The second component is proportional to
the squared distance in “ethnic space.” Without loss of generality, we assign individuals in the
majority an ethnic value of one (E M = 1) and individuals in the minority an ethnic value of zero
(E m = 0), so that the distance between them is one. The second component of psychological
                                                                                                     e            2
cost for individuals with ethnicity j who identify with some group g is                                  Ej   E g , where E g
     24
          Let consumer surplus be de…ned as

                                          (p; pS ) = max v (cZ ; cS )       pcZ    pS cS ,
                                                      cZ ;cS


where v ( ) is the utility from consuming the import good and the nontraded service. This function is increasing in
each argument and strictly concave. The …rst-order conditions for maximizing consumer surplus require vZ = p and
vS = pS , where vJ       @ v (cZ ; cS ) =cJ , and the concavity of v ( ) ensures that the second-order condition is satis…ed.
                                                                                                         2
Di¤erentiating the pair of …rst-order conditions gives @cS =@p = vZS =D, where D = vZZ vSS vZS               > 0: Therefore,
an increase in the import price, p, reduces demand for the nontraded service if vZS > 0 and lowers demand for the
service if vZS < 0. The price of services, pS , moves in the same direction as the shift in demand, because market
clearing for nontraded services requires CS (p; pS ) = k .
   25
      It is also possible that the sociocultural environment a¤ords as well the opportunity for individuals to identify
with a narrow group de…ned by both class and ethnicity. For example, in the U.S. context, much has been made of
late about political trends driven by the “white working class.” In our model, the group of individuals with skill level
i and ethnicity j is homogeneous, so if social identity groups de…ned by a given combination of class and ethnicity
exist and if the status associated with each of them is positive, then everyone would choose to identify with theirs.
This would a¤ect the level of trade protection in the initial equilibrium, but would not a¤ect the predicted response
to any narrowing of self-identi…cation due to growing ethnic or racial sensitivies.
   26
      Note that all individuals with skill level i achieve the same level of material well-being, independent of their
ethnicity. Thus, M          m
                     i = i = i for i = h; `; k.




                                                                 23
is the average ethnicity among those in group g. Notice that this cost component is zero when an
individual identi…es with a group comprised only of others that share the same ethnicity as she.
                                                                e                                                  e
       We are interested in the e¤ects of increases in              on the equilibrium trade policy. Arguably,
has risen in recent years due in part to the e¤orts by some politicians to highlight and amplify the
salience of ethnic and racial di¤erences in political discourse.
       In the appendix, we display the expression for U (p; q) in the present environment. The political
objective, U (p; q), is the sum of material and psychosocial components of utility across individuals
with all possible combinations of skill level and ethnicity. Aggregate material utility equals GDP
at domestic prices plus tari¤ revenue plus consumer surplus. The status bene…ts from identifying
broadly with the nation are proportional to this for all individuals that opt to so identify. The cost
combines elements that re‡ect distance from the average wage in the population and distance from
the average ethnicity. For those individuals that identify with their skill group there is an additional
psychological gain that is proportional to the sum of that group’s wage, tari¤ revenue and consumer
surplus and a psychological cost that depends on the ethnic composition of the skill group. For
those that identify with their ethnic group, the status bene…t re‡ects the average material welfare
of those with the same ethnicity and the cost re‡ects the distance of the individual from the ethnic
group’s average wage.27
       As before, we need to calculate Up (p; q) and examine how the marginal political bene…t from a
                                           e
tari¤ hike responds to changes in              (within an identi…cation regime) and changes in identi…cation
                                                                      e
patterns (across identi…cation regimes). Note …rst that                   multiplies terms that re‡ect the di¤erence
between an individual’s own ethnic “value”and that of the average member of a group with whom
she identi…es. This di¤erence re‡ects the ethnic composition of the group in question, but not the
domestic price. For example, when an individual with ethnicity j and skill i identi…es with others of
                                                      h                               i2
                                                                j j       j
her own social class, she bears a dissonance cost of e E j      i E +   i   E  j =
                                                                                    i    , where “ j”
denotes the ethnic group that is di¤erent from j. This cost does not vary with p. It follows that
                 e
@Up (p; q) =@        = 0 for …xed r, which implies that an increased sensitivity to ethnic di¤erences has
no e¤ect on the equilibrium tari¤ unless it induces a change in identi…cation regime. We record
this observation in

                                                       e
Proposition 5 Suppose that a change in                     does not induce a change in identi…cation regime.
Then the equilibrium tari¤ rate is not a¤ ected.

                         e
       An increase in        can generate two types of changes in social identi…cation patterns. First, some
individuals with skill level i and ethnicity j might cease to identify with the broad nation. Second,
such individuals might cease to identify with their broad social class, inasmuch as these groups
comprise a mix of ethnicities. In either case, the dissonance costs arising due to ethnic diversity are
greater for those bearing the group’s less-common ethnicity as compared to those with the group’s
  27
    Following on from foonote 25, if individuals can identify with others that share the same combination of skill
and ethnicity as themselves, they will enjoy an additional psychological bene…t that is proportional to the material
well-being of their social class. Because these narrow groups are homogeneous in skill and ethnicity, there would be
no o¤setting dissonance cost.


                                                           24
                                                                           M;g             m;g           M;g              j;g
more-common ethnicity, considering that E g =                                    EM +            Em =          , where          is the fraction
of those with ethnicity j in group                   g.28     This implies that those with the less-common ethnicity in
group g will cease to identify with the group before those with the more-common ethnicity, if all
else is the same.
      As before, we evaluate Up (p ; q)jr=~r , where p denotes the equilibrium domestic price in the
initial identi…cation regime and r~ represents the new identi…cation regime. Also, as before, it is
helpful to calculate Up (p ; q)jr=~r                     Up (p ; q)jr=r , which is the same as Up (p ; q)jr=~r , because
Up (p ; q)jr=r = 0 by the …rst-order condition for the optimum tari¤ in the original identi…cation
regime, r . Suppose r is any identi…cation regime in which individuals in skill group i with ethnicity
j identify with the nation. Let r~ have the same pattern of identi…cation as in r , except that those
with skill i and ethnicity j are induced to no longer identify with the nation; i.e., Ij;b
                                                                                       i = 1 initially
but Ij;b
     i = 0 in r
              ~. Then


                                                         b j                    0
  Up (p ; q)jr=~r       Up (p ; q)jr=r =                   i      (p   q)           (p )
                                                              2                                     32                                       3
                                                          j
                                                                                    X                                X
                                                 +2           4wi (p )                     iw   (p )5 4wi0 (p )                  iw
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                          (p )5 .
                                                          i
                                                                                =h;`;k                              =h;`;k

                                                                                                                                              (14)

      In the appendix, we identify several scenarios when a group’s repudiation of its broad national
identity necessarily generates a jump in the tari¤ rate. One such scenario arises when the importable
good Z and the nontraded service S are complements in demand and a group of low-skill workers of
either ethnicity ends its identi…cation with the broad nation. Another arises when the import good
and nontraded services are complements and a group of middle-skilled workers whose wage happens
to be above the average wage in the economy ends its identi…cation with the broad nation. In both of
these cases, the elimination of concern about the gap between a group’s own wage and the national
average implies a preference for a higher tari¤. Moreover, when any group no longer receives a
psychic boost from the material well-being of the average national, there is less resistance to a
distorting tari¤. Then the two terms on the right-hand side of (14) reinforce one another, leading
to higher protection. Of course, these are not necessary conditions for a tari¤ hike, and protection
can rise in many other circumstances. We highlight, for example, that                                          (p    q)    0 (p   ) > 0 when
p > q, so the …rst term on the right-hand side contributes to higher protection no matter which
group repudiates its broad national identity.
      Now consider what happens when individuals in skill group i with ethnicity j are induced
to no longer identify with their social class due to heightened concern about the diverse ethnic
composition of that group. Initially, when r = r , Iji;i = 1. But then, when                                         e
                                                                                                                          rises, the regime
switches to r~ in which          Iji;i   = 0 but other self-categorizations remain unchanged. Then the direction
 28                     e                M;g 2                     M;g 2
      It follows that       EM                   <   e
                                                         Em                , when E M = 1 and E m = 0.




                                                                           25
of the jump in policy can be identi…ed from the sign of
                                                                    2                                                                 3
                                                                j
                                                                                                                    X
        Up (p ; q)jr=~r     Up (p ; q)jr=r =                        4(p         q)      0
                                                                                             (p ) + wi0 (p )                 w0 (p )5 .            (15)
                                                                i
                                                                                                                  =h;`;k


Suppose, for example, that low-skill individuals in either ethnic group cease to self-identify as
“working poor,” a socioeconomic designation that includes low-skilled workers of all ethnicities.
Suppose further that the import good and the nontraded service are complements in demand, so
that wk0 (p) < 0. Then the term in the square bracket in (15) can be written as

                                       0                            0                       0                  0
                       (p        q)        (p ) + (1           k ) wk   (p )             h wh (p    )+      ` w` (p   ) <0,

where the inequality re‡ects that                      0 (p   ) < 0 and wh0 (p ) + w`0 (p ) = YZ (p ) > 0.29 It follows that
the tari¤ rate jumps upward following such a change in identi…cation regime.
       On the other hand, suppose it is middle-skill individuals in some ethnic group that cease to
self-identify as “working class.” Then the term in the square bracket in (15) becomes

                                            0                            0                       0              0
                            (p        q)        (p ) + (1           ` ) w` (p     )           h wh (p   )    k wk   (p ) .

The …rst term in this sum is negative, the second and third terms are positive, and the fourth
is positive if the import good and the nontraded service are gross complements in demand, and
negative otherwise. Evidently, it is not possible to o¤er a clear prediction about the resulting
change in trade protection in this case.
       We conclude that changes in self-identi…cation that result from heightened sensitivity to ethnic
di¤erences can destabilize trade policy, but the nature of the policy response will vary with the
economic and political circumstances. The following proposition records our sharpest predictions.

                                                 e
Proposition 6 Suppose that                           rises and that the import good Z and the nontraded service S are
gross complements in demand. If the least-skilled workers of any ethnicity cease to identify with the
broad nation or with their social class, the rate of protection jump upwards. If the middle-skilled
workers of any ethnicity cease to identify with the broad nation and if their wage is at least as great
as the economy-wide average, then the rate of protection jumps upward.

       In this section, we have shown how the deepening of racial or ethnic divisions in society can lead
to changes in trade policies in certain circumstances. If interracial or interethnic tensions intensify,
individuals may cease to identify with groups of others that share common socioeconomic attributes
but are heterogeneous along these other dimensions. When individuals narrow the purview of their
social identi…cation, they may no longer consider the economic standing of the broader group to be a
source of pride, nor the income inequality within the group as a source of dissonance. The change in
  29                                                                                                                             0             0
       Zero pro…ts in the two tradable sectors implies              h wh   (p)+       ` w`   (p) = YX (p)+pYZ (p), hence      h wh   (p)+   ` w`   (p) =
YX0   (p) + pYZ0 (p) + YZ (p) = YZ (p) > 0.



                                                                           26
their material-plus-psychosocial utility evaluation alters their policy preferences. Thus, switches in
social identity that have entirely non-economic roots can generate protectionist political responses
when individuals’altruistic preferences extend only so far as the limits of their self-identi…cation.


8         Conclusion
It has become commonplace to cite the frequent failure of some groups in society to vote their
economic self-interests.30 Many commentators take this observation as evidence of irrational voting
behavior. To us, it suggests instead the application of an overly narrow notion of self interest. The
considerations that should guide rational voting should include not only the material aspects of
well-being, but also psychological elements such as pride, social acceptance, and self-esteem. A
rational voter supports policies that will make her most content, which are not necessarily the
same as those that will make her most rich.
         Social psychologists teach us that contentment and self-esteem come in part from seeing our-
selves as members of groups in society. Humans are social creatures. We seek approval from others
and covet a sense of belonging. We like to associate ourselves with others whom we respect, taking
delight in their successes and sharing discomfort from their failures. It is natural for us to consider
the well-being of these others with whom we identify to be a component of our own utility and to
support policies that serve them as well as ourselves. Identity politics is the logical result of such
thinking.
         In this paper, we have adopted the perspective of social identity theory to revisit the political
economy of trade policy. We sought to characterize policies that maximize average (or median-voter)
welfare in a setting where an individual’s assessment of her well-being includes both material and
psychosocial components. The material component re‡ects, as usual, satisfaction from consuming
goods and services. Borrowing from social identity theory, we took the psychosocial component
as combining two subcomponents, positive feelings derived from pride in the status of groups with
which an individual identi…es and a dissonance cost borne from identifying with others that are
di¤erent from oneself along meaningful dimensions.
         In a familiar trade setting with two goods and two factors, identity politics can give rise to
positive tari¤s. Protection need not result from the distributional bene…ts that the less-skilled
workers derive from limiting imports to a skill-abundant country. This preference for protection is
o¤set in the utilitarian calculus by the opposite predilection on the part of the skilled workers for
export promotion. Rather, a bias against trade emerges in political equilibrium when individuals of
any skill level identify with an expansive group in society that we have termed “the broad nation.”
Such individuals may display inequality aversion in their political behavior, not out of a sense
of social justice, but sel…shly, because they feel better about themselves when they are not too
    30
    Following the U.S. presidential election in 2016, articles with this theme appeared in Forbes (11/17/16). Politico
(12/31/17), Pscyhology Today (12/12/17), The Atlantic (5/9/17), The Nation (11/17/16), The Economist (6/5/18),
The Hu¢ ngton Post (7/17/17), The New York Times (4/12/17, 7/19/18), The Washington Post (12/12/16, 3/13/18),
and Vox (5/9/17), among others.



                                                         27
di¤erent from the others around them.
   A de…ning feature of social identity theory is the element of choice; individuals may choose to
identify with certain salient groups in society or not. Other people with similar characteristics can-
not coerce identi…cation, nor can they exclude it. Inasmuch as identity re‡ects self-categorization,
it can respond to economic and cultural experience. Since identity in‡uences policy preferences,
changes in identi…cation patterns can a¤ect policy outcomes. Moreover, choices of social identity
approximate discrete choices; it is more common to think of oneself as being in the in-group or the
out-group, rather than being somewhat a part of a group. If identity choices by those with shared
characteristics are positively correlated, discrete changes in self-identi…cation at the individual level
can go hand in hand with precipitous changes in policy preferences at the aggregate level.
   With this possibility in mind, we studied two recent trends in western politics. First, in many
western countries, populism has been on the rise. We interpret populism as a form of identity
politics whereby the everyman ceases to identify with a broad group of fellow nationals and opts
instead to identify more narrowly, i.e., only with other non-elites. In a populist revolution, the
elites are seen as corrupt by the working class and no longer a legitimate source of national pride.
In our model, such an event is well captured by a shift in identi…cation by the working class from
broad to narrow. It occurs in our model in response to a widening of the income distribution, no
matter whether that has been caused by globalization, by technological change, or by some other
mechanism. If the elite comprise a small enough minority in the population, a populist revolution
of this sort will result in an increased demand for protectionism. It is interesting to note that
protectionist sentiments can emerge even if trade is not the primary source of a spread in wages.
   Second, many western societies have experienced a heightened sensitivity to racial and ethnic
cleavages. In the United States, the Black Lives Matter movement has become a salient identity
group advocating on behalf of African Americans. Meanwhile, working class whites, especially
males, have become a more potent force in identity politics. In Europe, an in‡ux of immigrants
from Eastern Europe and the Middle East has generated cultural tensions along ethnic and religious
lines. In both the American and European cases, identity groups have narrowed along with the
perceived de…nition among some sociocultural groups of what it means to be an “American,” a
“Brit,”a “German”or a “Swede.”The connection of this to trade policy in general, and to a rise in
protectionist sentiments in particular, is not immediately obvious. By studying a model with two
ethnic groups, three goods and three skill levels, we have identi…ed situations where a narrowing
of self-identi…cation by certain low- and middle-income groups in society does lead to an increased
aggregate demand for tari¤s. More broadly, in a setting of identity politics, shifts in identi…cation
patterns that have entirely non-economic causes can a¤ect political preferences and policy outcomes
on economic matters.
   In order to incorporate social identity into political-economic analysis, we need to make speci…c
assumptions. The results from psychological experiments performed to date give us some guidance,
but they do not fully resolve all of the relevant questions. The experimental evidence indicates, for
example, that individuals gain self-esteem and satisfaction from the status and achievements of the


                                                   28
groups with which they identify, but it remains unclear exactly how status and achievement ought
to be measured in this context, or how these psychological components compare in magnitude to
the direct, materialistic components of utility. Similarly, it is well accepted by now that divergence
between one’s own attributes and those of fellow group members causes psychological discomfort,
but the existing literature does not tell us which di¤erences are most pertinent, how they should
be measured, and how powerful are these concerns compared to the bene…ts from identi…cation.
In view of the state of our knowledge, we have proposed a ‡exible framework that can be readily
re…ned as more evidence of this sort becomes available. To make progress, we have no choice but
to take a stand on both reasonable measures of status and of dissonance costs, and our model
includes parameters that represent the strength of these respective elements. By doing so, we are
able to conduct political-economic analysis of trade policy formation and to identify circumstances
under which changes in economic, political and cultural conditions might generate a protectionist
backlash. Although the links we describe between social identity and trade policy are hardly
de…nitive, it will be misleading if the study of economic policy continues to focus exclusively on
aggregate preferences derived only from individuals’own, material interests.
   Further applications of social identity theory to political economics readily come to mind. Im-
migration policy stands high on our personal agenda. The immigrant waves in the United States
and Western Europe are widely seen as having fomented nationalistic and anti-global sentiments,
and the policy response has been dramatic. We hope to study the evolution of immigration pol-
icy in a setting with endogenous identi…cation of national and global citizens in the near future.
Another potentially fertile application is to growth theory. Fukuyama (2018) o¤ers the intriguing
hypothesis that a well developed national identity is necessary for economic development. He points
to Japan, Korea and China as societies with strong national identities and to the Middle East and
sub-Saharan Africa as regions with more narrow identi…cation along religious and ethnic lines. We
hope to study the political-economic mechanisms that might underlie successful modernization in
the former countries and failed development in the latter.




                                                 29
References
 [1] Akerlof, George A. and Kranton, Rachel, 2000, “Economics of Identity,”Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 115, 715-753.

 [2] Akerlof, George A. and Kranton, Rachel, 2010, Identity Economics: How Our identities Shape
    our Work, Wages, and Well-Being, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

 [3] Ansolabehere, Stephen and Puy, M. Socorro, 2016, “Identity Voting,” Public Choice 169, 77-
    95.

 [4] Autor, David H., Dorn, David and Hanson, Gordon H., 2013, “The China Syndrome: Lo-
    cal Labor Market E¤ects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic
    Review 103, 2121-68.

 [5] Charness, Gary and Rabin, Matthew, 2002, “Understanding Social Preferences with Simple
    Tests,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 817-69.

 [6] Chen, Yan and Li, Sherry Xin, 2009, “Group Identity and Social Preferences,” American
    Economic Review 99, 431-457.

 [7] Dixit, Avinash and Londregan, J0hn, 1996, “The Determinants of Success of Special Interests
    in Redistributive Politics,” Journal of Politics 58, 1132-1155.

 [8] Enke, Benhamin, 2018, “Moral Values and Voting,” NBER Working Paper No. 24268.

 [9] Fehr, Ernst and Schmidt, Klaus M., 1999, “A Theory of Fairness, Competition and Coopera-
    tion,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 817-68.

[10] Freeden, Michael, 2017, “After the Brexit Referendum: Revisiting Populism as an Ideology,”
    Journal of Political Ideologies 22, 1-11.

[11] Fukuyama, Francis, 2018, Identity: The Demand for Dignity and the Politics of Resentment,
    New York: Macmillan Publishers.

[12] Goodhart, David, 2017, The Road to Somewhere: The Populist Revolt and the Future of
    Politics, London: Hurst and Company.

[13] Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan, 1996, “Electoral Competition and Special Interest
    Politics,” Review of Economic Studies 63, 265–286.

[14] Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan, 2001, Special Interest Politics, Cambridge MA:
    The MIT Press.

[15] Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan, 2002, Interest Groups and Trade Policy, Prince-
    ton: Princeton University Press.


                                                30
[16] Hogg, Michael A., 1996, “Intragroup Processes, Group Structure, and Social Identity,”in W.P.
    Robinson, ed., Social Groups and Identities: Developing the Legacy of Henri Tajfel, Oxford:
    Butterworth-Heinemann.

[17] Hogg, Michael A. and Abrams, Dominic, 1988, Social Identi…cations: A Social Psychology of
    Intergroup Relations and Group Processes, London: Routledge.

[18] Hogg, Michael A., Terry, Deborah J. and White, Katherine M., 1995, “A Tale of Two Theories:
    A Critical Comparison of Identity Theory with Social Identity Theory,” Social Psychology
    Quarterly, 58, 255-69.

[19] Hogg, Michael A. and Hains, Sarah C., 1996, “Intergroup Relations and Group Solidarity:
    E¤ects of Group Identi…cation and Social Beliefs on Depersonalized Attraction,” Journal of
    Personality and Social Psychology 70, 295-309.

[20] Huddy, Leonie, 2001, “From Social to Political Identity: A Critical Examination of Social
    Identity Theory,” Political Psychology 22, 127-56.

[21] Jones, Ronald W., 1965, “The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models,” Journal of
    Political Economy 73, 557-572.

[22] Karakas, Leyla D. and Mitra, Devashish, 2018, “The Power of Identity Politics: A Behavioral
    Political-Economy Analysis of Policy Making,” mimeo.

[23] Kranton, Rachel, Pease, Matthew, Sanders, Seth, and Huettel, Scott, 2018, “Groupy and Not
    Groupy Behavior: Deconstructing Bias in Social Preferences,” mimeo.

[24] Lindbeck, Assar and Weibull, Jörgen,1987, “Balanced-Budget Redistribution as the Outcome
    of Political Competition,” Public Choice 52, 273-297.

[25] Mayer, Wolfgang, 1984, “Endogenous Tari¤ Formation,”American Economic Review 74, 970-
    85.

[26] McGarty, Craig, Turner, John C., and Hogg, Michael A., 1992, “Group Polarization as Con-
    formity to the Prototypical Group Member,” British Journal of Social Psychology 31, 1-19.

[27] Monroe, Kristen Renwick, James Hankin and Bukovchik Van Vechten, Renée, 2000, “The
    Psychological Foundations of Identity Politics,” Annual Review of Political Science 3, 419-
    447.

[28] Müller, Jan-Werner, 2016, What is Populism?, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

[29] Mutz, Diana C., 2018, “Status Threat, Not Economic Hardship, Explains the 2016
    Presidential Vote,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 201718155; DOI:
    10.1073/pnas.1718155115.


                                               31
[30] Oliver, J. Eric and Rahn, Wendy M., 2016, “Rise of the Trumpenvolk: Populism in the 2016
    Election,” The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 667, 189-
    206.

[31] Shayo, Moses, 2009, “A Model of Social Identity with an Application to Political Economy:
    Nation, Class, and Redistribution,” American Political Science Review 103(2), 147-174.

[32] Sides, John, Tesler, Michael and Vavreck, Lynn, 2017, “The 2016 U.S. Election: How Trump
    Lost and Won,” Journal of Democracy 28, 34-44.

[33] Tajfel, Henri,1974, “Social Identity and Intergroup Behavior,” Social Science Information 13,
    65-93.

[34] Tajfel, Henri, 1981, Human Groups and Social Categories: Studies in Social Psychology, Cam-
    bridge UK: Cambridge University Press.

[35] Tajfel, Henri and Turner, John C., 1979, “An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Con‡ict,” in
    W.G. Austin and S. Worchel, eds., The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations, Monterrey
    CA: Brooks/Cole.

[36] Turner, John C., Hogg, Michael A., Reicher, Stephen D., and Wetherell, Margaret S., 1987,
    Rediscovering the Social Group: A Self-Categorization Theory, Cambridge MA: Basil Black-
    well.




                                               32
                                                        Appendix

    Properties of Wage Functions

    The wage functions wh (p) and w` (p) are solved from the pricing equations

                                                    p = cZ (wh ; w` ) ;
                                                    1 = cX (wh ; w` ) ;

where cj (wh ; w` ) is the unit cost in sector j. Logarithmic di¤erentiation of these pricing equations
yields (see Jones, 1965):

                                        wh0 (p) p              1        hX    (p)
                                                    =                                < 0;
                                        wh (p)             hX (p)             hZ (p)
                                        w`0 (p) p                  hX   (p)
                                                    =                                > 1;
                                         w` (p)           hX   (p)        hZ   (p)

where       ij   (p) is the share of input i in the cost of sector j and               hX   (p) >     hZ   (p) when the export
sector is intensive in more-skilled workers. In the Cobb-Douglas case, these cost shares are constant.
                                             P
In the Leontief case ij (p) = wi (p) aij = k=h;` wk (p) akj , where aij are constant input-output
coe¢ cients; that is, aij is the input of workers of type i, i = h; `, needed to produce one unit of
good j, j = Z; X. In the Leontief case, wi is a linear function of p for i = h; `, and therefore
wi00 (p) = 0 for i = h; `. In the Cobb-Douglas case, these equations imply

                                    wh00 (p) p      wh0 (p) p      w00 (p) p    1   hM
                            0 =                               + 1 = h0       +          ;
                                    wh0 (p)         wh (p)          wh (p)     hX    hM
                                    w`00 (p) p      w`0 (p) p      w00 (p) p      hM
                            0 =                               + 1 = `0                  :
                                     w`0 (p)        w` (p)          w` (p)     hX    hM


Evidently, in this case, wi00 (p) > 0 for i = h; `, because our factor intensity assumption implies
wh0 (p) < 0 and w`0 (p) > 0.
    Note, however, that the sign of wh00 (p) can di¤er from the sign of w`00 (p). To illustrate, suppose
that in sector j the technology is Leontief while in the other sector it is Cobb-Douglas. Then twice
                                                         P
di¤erentiating the pricing equation for sector j yields i=h;` wi00 (p) aij = 0. Since in this case the
wage functions are not linear in p, this equation implies that wh00 (p) has the opposite sign from
w`00 (p).

    Section 4.2

    Let      i   be the productivity of labor of type i, i = h; `, the same in the exportable and import-
competing sectors. If, say,         h   rises from its initial value of one to              h   = 2, this means that with the
new technology a …rm can use half the amount of more-skilled labor to produce the same output


                                                               33
as it did with the old technology. Now, the wage rates can be written as the solution to

                                                                         wh w`
                                                     p = cZ                ;                  ;
                                                                               h      `
                                                                            wh w`
                                                     1 = cX                   ;               .
                                                                               h      `

Let these solutions be w
                       ~h (p;       h)      and w
                                                ~` (p;          ` ).    Then, using the functions wh (p) and w` (p) from
the previous section of the Appendix, which describe the solution of this system when                                   h   =    `   = 1,
we obtain
                                            w
                                            ~i (p;    i)   =        i wi (p)       for i = h; `:                                     (16)

In other words, an increase in          i   raises proportionately the wage rate of labor of type i, given the
domestic price of imports. These imply:
                                                                        X
                                             R (p;    h;       `)   =                i i wi (p) .                                    (17)
                                                                        i=h;`


   Now, starting with       h   =   `   = 1, consider changes in                          i   of the form

                                                      d    h        =          d ;
                                                       d   `        = d > 0:

For 0       < 1 this represents less-skilled labor biased technical change, for                             = 1 it represents Hicks-
neutral technical change, and for             > 1 it represents more-skilled labor biased technical change. We
are interested in the impact of these forms of technical change on the equilibrium domestic price,
and hence the tari¤ rate.
   The …rst-order condition that characterizes the initial equilibrium is given by

                                              Up (p ; q;        h;      ` )j   h = ` =1
                                                                                              = 0:

Then

               @p            @                          @
        sign        = sign      Up (p ; q; h ; ` ) +       Up (p ; q; h ; ` )                                                        (18)
               @            @ `                       @ h                      h = ` =1
                           2                                                            3
                             X @                                    @
                    = sign 4         Up (p ; q; h ; ` ) + (    1)     Up (p ; q; h ; ` )5                                        :
                                 @ i                              @ h
                                i=h;`
                                                                                                                      h = ` =1


To evaluate the expression on the second line of (18), note that the …rst-order condition for the




                                                                       34
equilibrium policy together with (8) yields
                                             0                                               1
                                                                              X
  Up (p ; q;    h;   ` )j   h = ` =1
                                          = @1 +                   +     b
                                                                                     Ibi i A (p                 q)          0
                                                                                                                                (p ;    h;        `)     h = ` =1
                                                                             i=h;`
                                      2                                             3
                                          X
                                  24              b b
                                                  i Ii i (1                    i) 5
                                                                                 2
                                                                                             (p ;         h;    ` )j    h = ` =1
                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                 (p ;     h;     `)              = 0:
                                                                                                                                                                      h = ` =1
                                       i=h;`


Also note from (17) that
                                                                         X
                                      R0 (p;      h;        `)      =                     0
                                                                                     i i wi (p)           = YZ (p;               h;     `) :                                       (19)
                                                                         i=h;`


   Using       (p;   h;     `)   = CZ (p)             YZ (p;             h;     `)   and (??), we obtain

                              @
                                 Up (p ; q;                h;       `)                                                                                                             (20)
                             @ i                                             h = ` =1
                               0                                               1
                                                            X                                           @ 0
                     =           @1 +         +        b
                                                                        Ibi i A (p                q)      Y (p ;                   h;       `)
                                                                                                       @ i Z                                          h = ` =1
                                                           i=h;`
                                  2                                             3
                                      X                                                                         @
                                 24            b b
                                               i Ii i (1                     i) 5
                                                                               2
                                                                                        (p ; 1; 1)                     0
                                                                                                                            (p ;       h;        `)
                                                                                                               @ i                                      h = ` =1
                                     i=h;`
                                  2                                             3
                                      X                                               @
                                 24            b b
                                               i Ii i (1                     i) 5
                                                                               2
                                                                                         (p ;                  h;      `)
                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                      (p ; 1; 1) :
                                                                                     @ i                                        h = ` =1
                                     i=h;`


But
                                                      (p;          h;    `)   =      h wh (p)                  ` w` (p) ;

                                                  0                                     0                          0
                                                      (p;          h;    `)   =      h wh (p)                   ` w` (p) ;

which imply

                                                           @
                                                                   Up (p ; q;           h;    `)                        =
                                                      @        h                                       s = u =1
                            0                                          1
                                                       X                                              @
                            @1 +          +       b
                                                                   Ibi i A (p                q)               YZ0 (p ;           h;     `)
                                                                                                  @       h                                      h = ` =1
                                                      i=h;`
                                 2                                             3
                                     X
                             24               b b
                                              i Ii i (1                  i) 5
                                                                           2
                                                                                        (p ) wh0 (p ) + wh (p )                              0
                                                                                                                                                 (p ) ;
                                   i=h;`




                                                                                     35
                                                                             0                                          1
         @                                                                                                X                                    @ 0
            Up (p ; q;                  h;    `)                  =          @1 +             +       b
                                                                                                                  Ibi i A (p             q)      Y (p ;            h;   `)
        @ `                                          h = ` =1
                                                                                                                                              @ ` Z                           h = ` =1
                                                                                                          i=h;`
                                                2                                             3
                                                     X
                                             +2 4                b b
                                                                 i Ii i (1               i) 5
                                                                                           2
                                                                                                      (p ) w`0 (p ) + w` (p )                     0
                                                                                                                                                      (p ) :
                                                    i=h;`


It follows that
                                                                                0                                         1
X @                                                                                                           X                                 X           @ 0
      Up (p ; q;                         h;     `)                     =        @1 +              +       b
                                                                                                                      Ibi i A (p          q)                  Y (p ;         h;   `)
  @ i                                                                                                                                                      @ i Z                       h = ` =1
i=h;`                                                                                                         i=h;`                            i=h;`
                                                      h = ` =1
                                                                             2                                           3
                                                                                  X
                                                                           44                 b b
                                                                                              i Ii i (1               i) 5
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                               (p )       0
                                                                                                                                              (p ) :
                                                                                 i=h;`


But (19) implies
                                                   X        @          0
                                                               Y       Z   (p ;          h;   `)                      = YZ0 (p ; 1; 1) > 0.
                                                           @ i                                        h=       ` =1
                                                   i=h;`

Using this result and the …rst-order condition (??) we obtain
                            P              @
                                    i=h;` @ i Up (p             ; q;    h;      `)
                                                                                         h = ` =1
                                                        P                                                     =       YZ0 (p ; 1; 1)              2    0
                                                                                                                                                           (p ; 1; 1)                  (21)
                                 1+           +       b            b                (p        q)
                                                            i=h;` Ii i

                                                                                                              =       2CZ0 (p ) + YZ0 (p ; 1; 1) > 0 :

This proves that Hicks-neutral technical change ( = 1) raises the rate of protection.
            We now turn to skilled biased technical change,                                                                    for which we need to evaluate
    @
@       h
            Up (p ; q;      h;          `)                 . Equations (??) and (19) imply
                                              h = ` =1

                                                                                                   0                                          1
                                @                                                                                            X
                                        Up (p ; q;         h;     `)                      =        @1 +            +     b
                                                                                                                                     Ibi i A (p              q) wh00 (p )    h
                            @       h                                      h=     ` =1                                       i=h;`
                                    2                                           3
                                        X
                                24                 b b
                                                   i Ii i (1            i) 5
                                                                          2
                                                                                         (p ) wh0 (p ) + wh (p )                     0
                                                                                                                                         (p ) :
                                        i=h;`


                        @
Evidently,          @       h
                                Up (p ; q;           h;     `)                      > 0 if wh00 (p )                   0, which is satis…ed both sectors produce
                                                                   h=      ` =1
with Leontief technologies. In this case, skilled biased technical change raises the rate of protection.
We next consider the case when wh00 (p ) > 0. Substituting the …rst-order condition (??) into the




                                                                                                      36
former equation yields

                                                @
                                            @       h
                                                        Up (p ; q;     h;     `)
                                                                                          h = ` =1
                                                          P                                                           =
                                   1+       +           b          b          (p            q)   0 (p     ; 1; 1)
                                                            i=h;` Ii i
                                               00                   w0 (p ) wh (p )
                                            h wh (p        )
                                                                   + h0     +       :
                                 YZ0   (p ; 1; 1)            0
                                                           CZ (p )     (p )   (p )

Now note that
                                            wh0 (p )         wh (p )
                                       0<    0       < 1 and         > 1;
                                               (p )            (p )
so that the sum of the last two terms exceeds one. Moreover,
                                       00                                                    00
                                    h wh (p     )                                       h wh (p       )
                                                         =P                                                           :
                         YZ0   (p ; 1; 1)       CZ0 (p )   i=h;`
                                                                                          00
                                                                                      i wi (p )           CZ0 (p )

                                                                                  @
When this expressions is smaller than one, we have                            @       h
                                                                                          Up (p ; q;      h;     `)              > 0, and more-
                                                                                                                      h = ` =1
skilled labor biased technical change raises the rate of protection. This condition is satis…ed when
wh00 (p ) > 0 and w`00 (p )      0, which happens when the production functions in both sectors are
Cobb-Douglas in form. Note, however, that even if this condition fails, the tari¤ rate may still
                                                                                             0 (p )
                                                                                            wh             wh (p )
increase in response to skill bias technical change, because                                 0
                                                                                               (p )
                                                                                                      +     (p )      > 1.

   Section 4.3

   For an interior equilibrium (8) implies that p satis…es
                                            0                                         1
                                                                     X
                      Up (p ; q) = @1 +                    +     b
                                                                             Ibi i A (p              q)    0
                                                                                                               (p )                        (22)
                                                                     i=h;`
                                                    2                                        3
                                                        X
                                              24                b b
                                                                i Ii i (1                 i) 5
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                 (p )      0
                                                                                                               (p ) = 0:
                                                        i=h;`


We assume that either Ibh = 1 or Ib` = 1 in this equilibrium (that is, some individuals identify with
the broad nation). Under these circumstances, the …rst-order condition implies p > q; that is,
t > 0. We are interested in the response of t to an improvement in the terms of trade, i.e., to
dq < 0.
   We can write the …rst-order condition for the optimal tari¤ as

                                                    Up [(1 + t ) q; q] = 0;                                                                (23)

where Up [(1 + t ) q; q] is the derivative of U [(1 + t ) q; q] with respect to the …rst argument (i.e.,
with respect to p), evaluated at t = t . The second-order condition requires Upp [(1 + t ) q; q] q < 0.



                                                                     37
   In this case

                @t           q                             1                                                                              Upq [(1 + t ) q; q]
                                =                                                     Upp [(1 + t ) q; q] +                                                                    ;
                @q          1+t                    Upp [(1 + t ) q; q]                                                                          1+t

where Upq [(1 + t ) q; q] is the derivative of Up [(1 + t ) q; q] with respect to the second argument.
Note, however, from (8) that
                                                                       0                                                        1
                                                                                                            X
                                 Upq [(1 + t ) q; q] =                 @1 +               +             b
                                                                                                                          Ibi i A     0
                                                                                                                                          [(1 + t ) q] ;
                                                                                                            i=h;`


which implies                                                                                                   P
                                                                               1+              +            b                   b
                                    @t              q                                                                    i=h;` Ii i            0
                                                       =               1+                                                             q            (p ) :                                  (24)
                                    @q             1+t                                     p Upp (p ; q)
Since Upq [(1 + t ) q; q] > 0, the domestic price p is increasing in q. That is, an improvement in
the terms of trade leads to a lower domestic price. But we are also interested in whether the tari¤
rate rises in response to an improvement in the terms of trade, which it does if and only if the
expression in (24) is negative.
   Since        0 (p   ) < 0 and Upp (p ; q) < 0, the expression in (24) is negative if and only if

                                                                            X                               p Upp (p ; q)
                                                                       b
                                                    1+          +                   Ibi    i    <                         :
                                                                                                              q 0 (p )
                                                                           i=h;`


Using (8) to compute Upp ( ), this is equivalent to

                       0                                0                                      00
                 q         (p ) <              p            (p ) + (p               q)              (p )
                                                            P       b          b                          2               n                                                o
                                                              i=h;`         i Ii i (1                   i)                                00                0          2
                                           +2p                         b
                                                                         P            b
                                                                                                                               (p )            (p ) +           (p )               :
                                                     1+         +              i=h;` Ii (p                   )       i


But the …rst-order condition (22) implies
                                               P                b b                         2
                                                    i=h;`       i Ii   i (1               i)                     (p          q) 0 (p )
                                           2                    P                                           =                          :
                                               1+       +                   b
                                                                     i=h;` Ii (p           )        i                     (p ) 0 (p )

Substituting this result into the previous inequality then yields
                                                                                                                                          00                    0
                             0                                         00                                                 0                    (p ) p               (p ) p
           (p          q)        (p ) <        p (p             q)          (p ) + (p                           q)            (p )             0      +                                :
                                                                                                                                                 (p )                (p )

Dividing by (p              q)      0 (p   ) < 0 yields

                                                             00 (p              0                                    00
                                                    p         )                     (p ) p                                (p ) p
                                                     0 (p ) (p )
                                                                 +                         +                              0      < 1:                                                      (25)
                                                                                     (p )                                   (p )



                                                                                      38
The second term on the left-hand side of the inequality is negative, and the third term is negative
          00
when           (p )       0 (the latter holds, for example, when the production functions are Leontief in both
sectors, because in this case the wage functions are linear in p). In these circumstances,                                                                                 00 (p   )     0
is a su¢ cient condition for this inequality to be satis…ed. But of course, this inequality can also be
satis…ed in many other cases.31

       Section 5

       To evaluate the impact of a populist revolution, we start with a regime in which every individual
identi…es broadly with the nation. Under these circumstances the equilibrium policy is characterized
by (9), which we reproduce here as
                                                                                                                   X                          2
                                                     b                                  0                                     b                            0
       Up (p ; q)jIb =Ib =1 = 1 +             +              (p               q)            (p )           2                  i i (1        i)    (p )         (p ) = 0.               (26)
                      h       `
                                                                                                               i=h;`


The populist revolution leads members of the working class to repudiate their a¢ nity with the elite.
When the less-skilled workers identify only with the fellow members of their own socioeconomic
class, the marginal utility of p evaluated at p becomes


                                                             b                                         0                       b                2               0
        Up (p ; q)jIb =1; Ib =0 = 1 +                +            h           (p             q)            (p )        2       h h (1         h)        (p )        (p ) .             (27)
                          h           `


Substituting (26) into (27) implies that Up (p ; q)jIb =1; Ib =0 > 0 if and only if
                                                                                                  h            `


                                              b b                       2                   b                             b
                                              h   (1                  h)           >        `     1+               +           h    h;                                                 (28)

which is condition (11) in the text. This condition is necessary and su¢ cient for the peak of the
rh;` curve in Figure 2 to be to the left of the peak of rh .
       Next note that (27) also implies that the peak of the rh;` curve is to the right of the peak of
the r` curve. To see why, suppose that the peak of the rh;` curve is to the left of the peak of the r`
curve and therefore Up (p ; q)jIb =0; Ib =1 > 0. Then (26) together with
                                              h          `




                                                                      b                                        0                   b                2                0
               Up (p ; q)jIb =0; Ib =1 = 1 +                 +                 `       (p         q)               (p )        2   ` ` (1         `)      (p )           (p )
                                  h       `

  31                                          00                                   0
    Note that in the Leontief case                 (p ) = 0 and                        (p ) = CZ0 (p ), because YZ does not vary with p. Under these
circumstances                                                                 00
                                                                  p            (p )                   p CZ00 (p )
                                                                                    =                             ;
                                                                          0   (p )                     CZ0 (p )
which is the elasticity of the slope of the demand function. If the demand function is concave, then CZ00 (p ) < 0 and
this expression is negative.




                                                                                            39
imply that Up (p ; q)jIb =0; Ib =1 > 0 if and only if
                            h            `


                                              b b                      2             b                                 b
                                              `   (1                 `)       >      h       1+                +           `           `:


Together with (28) this inequality implies

                                                    b (1               2                                               b
                                                                     `)                       1+               +            `          `
                                                                 b
                                                                                     >                                       2             ;
                                             (1 +       +                h)      h                     b (1
                                                                                                                           h)

or

                                b              2    b                   2                                          b                                        b
                 0 <                (1       `)         (1            h)                 1+            +               h           h    1+             +        `    `

                                                                                                  b
                   =            (1 + )         h (1              h)       1+             +             ;

a contradiction. It follows that Up (p ; q)jIb =0; Ib =1 < 0 when (28) is satis…ed and the peak of the
                                                                         h           `
r` curve is to the left of the peak of the rh;` curve, as drawn in the …gure.
     Now suppose that the working class bears a cost of envy when they repudiate the elite. Such
a cost might arise when a less-skilled individual considers others in the working class to be the
“in-group” and elites to be the “out-group,” and when comparison with the out-group generous
jealousy and “schadenfreude,” as is suggested by various research in social psychology. Suppose
that failure to identify broadly with the nation (a group that includes the elites) causes each less-
skilled worker to su¤er disutility of                       h    (vh              v` )2 ,          > 0, which is proportional to the number of
elites that inspire jealousy and to the square of the di¤erence in material well-being. Under such
circumstances, the marginal utility from narrow identi…cation (27) is replaced with


                                                                     b                                     0                           b                      2            0
       Up (p ; q)jIb =1; Ib =0 =               1+            +               h    (p              q)           (p )            2       h h (1               h)      (p )       (p )
                   h        `
                                                                                              0
                                                   (1           h)       h        (p )            (p ) .

Substituting (26) into this formula implies that Up (p ; q)jIb =1; Ib =0 > 0 if and only if
                                                                                                                   h           `


                            b b                  2                                        b                    b                               b
                            h   (1             h)       +            1+           +               >            `       1+          +               h       h:


Evidently, for     > 0 this inequality is satis…ed for a larger range of                                                                    h      than (28).

     Section 6

     We turn to the case in which the parties compete for the favor of the median voter. We
…rst consider the impact of technical change on the rate of protection. Using the factor-augmenting
coe¢ cients   h   and   `   and (12), the marginal impact of an increase in p on U med ( ) can be expressed




                                                                                     40
as

                     Upmed (p; q;     h;     `)    =         1+ +            b b
                                                                              I`    (p       q)         0
                                                                                                            (p;   h;   `)                                           (29)
                                                               h                                                i
                                                              h 1+            + 2 b` Ib`        h    (p; h ; ` )            0
                                                                                                                                (p;    h;   `)       .

Initially        s   =   u    = 1 and the equilibrium domestic price p is characterized by the …rst-order
condition,

                     Upmed (p ; q; 1; 1) =                  1+ +            b b
                                                                             I`    (p        q)         0
                                                                                                       (p ; 1; 1)                                                   (30)
                                                              h                                               i
                                                             h 1+            + 2 b` Ib`     h       (p ; 1; 1) 0 (p ; 1; 1) = 0 .

For technical change of the form

                                                                d   h    =         d ;
                                                                d   `    = d >0;

(29) implies

            @p                @ med                        @
     sign            = sign      Up (p ; q; h ; ` ) +         U med (p ; q; h ; ` )                                                                                 (31)
            @                @ `                         @ h p                        h = ` =1
                            2                                                                  3
                              X @                                     @
                     = sign 4        U med (p ; q; h ; ` ) + (    1)      U med (p ; q; h ; ` )5                                                                    :
                                  @ i p                              @ h p
                                     i=h;`
                                                                                                                                                         h = ` =1


     From (29) and (16) we obtain
       2                                           3
         X @
       4      U med (p ; q;                h;
                                                   5
                                                  `)                     =          1+              +       b b
                                                                                                             I`   (p            q) YZ0 (p ; 1; 1)
           @ i p
        i=h;`
                                                            h = ` =1
                                                                                        h                                             i
                                                                                    h       1+          + 4 b` Ib`     h    (p ; 1; 1)           0
                                                                                                                                                     (p ; 1; 1) :

Subtracting (30) from this equation yields
                         2                                              3
                           X @
                         4      U med (p ; q;                  h;   `)
                                                                        5
                             @ i p
                             i=h;`
                                                                              h = ` =1

                                             b b
                     =         1+     +       I`       (p      q) CZ0    (p )               b b
                                                                                        h 2 ` I` h           (p ; 1; 1)         0
                                                                                                                                    (p ; 1; 1) > 0 :

It follows that Hicks-neutral technical change increases the tari¤ rate. Next, use (29) and (16) to




                                                                             41
obtain

                    @
                            Upmed (p ; q;                  h;       `)                =        1+    +       b b
                                                                                                              I`       (p       q) wh00 (p )               h
                @       h                                                h=    ` =1
                        h                                                      i
                    h       1+            + 2 b` Ib`            h    (p ; 1; 1) wh0 (p )                 b b
                                                                                                     h 2 ` I` h wh (p               )    0
                                                                                                                                             (p ; 1; 1) :

The right-hand side is positive for wh00 (p )                                             0. In such circumstances, skilled biased technical
change raises the rate of protection. And, like in the case in which the trade policy maximizes
aggregate welfare, skill biased technical change can increase the tari¤ rate even when wh00 (p ) > 0.
   We now consider the impact of an improvement in the terms of trade, dq < 0, on the rate of
protection. The …rst-order condition Upmed (p ; q) = 0 implies
                                                                   "                                              #
                                                                                            U med [(1 + t ) q; q]
          @t         q                                1               med                    pq
                        =                      med [(1 + t ) q; q]
                                                                     Upp  [(1 + t ) q; q] +                         ;
          @q        1+t                       Upp                                                  1+t

       med [(1 + t ) q; q] is the derivative of U med [(1 + t ) q; q] with respect to the second argument.
where Upq                                        p
Note, however, from (13) that

                                              med                                                        b b           0
                                             Upq  [(1 + t ) q; q] =                            1+   +     I`               (p ) ;

which implies
                                             @t                 q                           1 + + b Ib`            0
                                                                   =             1+            med (p ; q)
                                                                                                           q           (p ) :
                                             @q                1+t                         p Upp
This expression is negative if and only if

                                                                         b b          0             med
                                                       1+           +     I`    q         (p ) > p Upp  (p ; q) :

                       med ( ), this inequality is equivalent to
Using (13) to compute Upp

                                         b b               0
                1+               +        I`       q           (p ) > p          1 + + b Ib`             0
                                                                                                             (p ) + (p                  q)      00
                                                                                                                                                       (p )
                                         h                                          i
                                                                                                                                                   2
                             p       h       1+            + 2 b` Ib`     h     (p ) 00 (p ) p                   b b
                                                                                                             h 2 ` I` h
                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                        (p )           :

Substituting the …rst-order condition Upmed (p ; q) = 0 and (13) into the inequality then yields

                              p          00 (p     )              2 b` Ib` h (p )   p 0 (p ) p 00 (p )
                                     0 (p
                                                       +                                    + 0        < 1:
                                               )               1 + + 2 b` Ib` h (p ) (p )       (p )

It follows that an improvement in the terms of trade raises the rate of protection if and only if the
last inequality is satis…ed. Note that this condition is similar to condition (25), the di¤erence being
                                                       0                                                                                       0
only the weight in front of p                              (p ) = (p ), which is smaller here. Because p                                           (p ) = (p ) < 0, the
condition for a rise in the tari¤ is less likely to be satis…ed when the median voter’s preferences
determine the policy choice.

                                                                                          42
   Section 7

   We provide here more details for the arguments advanced in Section 7 on Ethnic and Racial
Identi…cation. We begin with the production structure. As before, the price of the export good, X,
is normalized to one and the domestic price of the import competing product, Z, is p. The foreign
price of Z is q. Goods X and Z are produced with high-skilled workers h and medium-skilled
workers ` under constant returns to scale, as in the previous sections. As a result, wages of these
workers depend on p, where wh (p) is a declining function and w` (p) is an increasing function as
long as there is incomplete specialization. Due to the Stolper-Samuelson result, the elasticity of
the function w` (p) is greater than one.
   The price of the nontraded service, S, is pS . The service sector produces output with one unit
of low-skilled labor k per unit output and it uses no other inputs. Therefore, the competitive wage
rate of low-skilled workers is wk = pS and the output level of services is YS =         S,   a constant.
   Material well-being is represented by the utility function cX +v (cZ ; cS ), where v ( ) is increasing
and concave. For an individual with wage income wi this yields the measure of material well-being,

                                             i   = wi + T + ~ (p; pS ) ,

where T is the per capita rebate of tari¤ revenues and

                                 ~ (p; pS ) = max v (cZ ; cS )          pcZ     pS cS
                                                  cZ ;cS


is the consumer surplus function. The solution to this problem generates the demand functions
C~Z (p; pS ) and C~S (p; pS ) that do not depend on income as long as the individual consumes all three
products. The demand function C~Z (p; pS ) is declining in p, and it is also declining in pS if and
only if vZS (cZ ; cS ) > 0. Similarly, C~S (p; pS ) is declining in pS , and it is also declining in p if and
only if vZS (cZ ; cS ) > 0. The product-market clearing condition for services is C~S (p; pS ) = S .
This implies that pS is a function of p— which we write as pS (p)— and that pS is decreasing in p
if and only if vZS (cZ ; cS ) > 0. Since wk (p) = pS (p), the wage rate of low-skilled workers also is
decreasing in p if and only if vZS (cZ ; cS ) > 0
   Substitution of pS (p) into ~ (p; pS ) yields the consumer surplus function,

                                                  (p)      ~ [p; pS (p)] ;

from which we obtain
                                      0
                                          (p) =     CZ (p)       CS (p) p0S (p) ;

where

                                          CZ (p)            C~Z [p; pS (p)] ;
                                          CS (p)            C~S [p; pS (p)] :


                                                            43
Using the price function for services, we also obtain

                                                   T (p; q) = (p           q)      (p) ,

where
                                                    (p) = CZ (p)                YZ (p) :

It follows that
                                 i   = wi (p) + T (p; q) +                 (p) for i = h; `; k:

   Finally, GDP can be represented by
                                          X
                       Y (p) =                     i wi (p)        YX (p) + pYZ (p) + pS (p)               k:
                                         i=h;`;k


This implies
                                                   X
                             Y 0 (p) =                      0
                                                         i wi (p)           YZ (p) + p0S (p)         k;
                                               i=h;`;k
                                                                                                                P
because YX0 (p) + pYZ0 (p) = 0. It follows that aggregate material well-being,                                       i=h;`;k       i i,   equals

                                                   Y (p) + T (p; q) +                 (p) ;

and

         Y 0 (p) + Tp (p; q) +       0
                                         (p) = YZ (p) + p0S (p)                   k   +       (p) + (p    q)    0
                                                                                                                    (p) +      0
                                                                                                                                   (p)
                                                                    0
                                               = (p           q)        (p) ;

which is similar to the case without the service sector.
   The aggregate utility function U (p; q) consists of the sum of individuals’ material well-being
plus the sum of the psychosocial components of individual welfare that derive from identi…cation




                                                                   44
choices. That is,

       U (p; q) = Y (p) + T (p; q) + (p)
                               8                                         0                                                 12 9
          X X j j < j                                                                                          X              =
                                                                        e@ j
       +                i Ii;i :Ai;i + [wi (p) + T (p; q) + (p)]          E                                            i
                                                                                                                         E A
                                                                                                                       i      ;
         j=M;m i=h;`;k                                                                                         =M;m
                               8          2                                  3                                   2                             32 9
          X X j j;j < j;j                    X j                                                                               X        j         =
                                        e4
       +                i Ii :Ai +                   j
                                                       w (p) + T (p; q) + (p)5                                   4wi (p)
                                                                                                                                        j
                                                                                                                                          w (p)5
                                                                                                                                                  ;
         j=M;m i=h;`;k                      =h;`;k                                                                             =h;`;k
          X X j j;b n i;b                                          o
                                       b
       +                  I
                        i i     A i  +   [Y (p) +  T  (p; q) + (p)]
         j=M;m i=h;`;k
                                8 2                                       32            0                              12 9
           X     X              <                    X                                                    X               =
                          j j;b   4wi (p)
                           I
                          i i :                                 w (p)5 +            e@
                                                                                            Ej                       E A :
                                                                                                                          ;
         j=M;m i=h;`;k                               =h;`;k                                               =M;m


The …rst line on the right-hand side of this equation represents aggregate material well-being.
The second line represents the contribution to aggregate welfare of the identi…cation of various
individuals with their own social class. An individual with skill level i and ethnicity j identi…es
with her social class if and only if
                                                                              0                                12
                                                                                            X
                   Aji;i +     [wi (p) + T (p; q) +           (p)]        e@
                                                                               Ej                         i
                                                                                                              E A      0: ;
                                                                                                          i
                                                                                        =M;m


that is, if and only if the status provided by the social group is larger than the dissonance cost.
Inasmuch as each worker has the same material well being as every other member of her social
class, the dissonance cost results only from the fact that the groups exhibit ethnic diversity. With
our normalization of E M = 1 and E m = 0, we obtain
                                         0                                12                         !2
                                                      X                                          j
                                        e@
                                             E   j              i
                                                                     E A =          e        i
                                                                                                          :
                                                                 i                               i
                                                     =M;m

                         e
A higher value of            raises the cost of identi…cation in a group of mixed ethnicities.32
       The third line in the expression for U (p; q) represents the contribution to aggregate welfare of
the identi…cation of various individuals with others that share their ethnicity. An individual with
skill level i and ethnicity j identi…es with her own ethnic group if and only if
                      2                                                   3       2                                       32
                             X     j                                                                      X      j
            Aj;j
             i +
                    e4
                                   j
                                       w (p) + T (p; q) +            (p)5         4wi (p)
                                                                                                                 j
                                                                                                                     w (p)5     0:
                          =h;`;k                                                                      =h;`;k

  32
    We assume as before that no individual identi…es with a social class di¤erent from her own, because, the dissonance
costs are too great.




                                                                     45
Here, the cost of identi…cation depends only on the di¤erence between the individual’s material
well-being and the average for the group, because each individual shares the same ethnicity with
the prototypical member of her ethnic group. We assume that no individual identi…es with an
ethnic group that is not her own.
     The fourth line in the expression for U (p; q) represents the positive contribution to aggregate
welfare of the status that derives from identifying with the nation, while the …fth line represents
the dissonance cost of such identi…cation. An individual of ethnicity j with skill level i identi…es
with the nation if and only if
                                                         2                                            32             0                               12
                                                                            X                                                         X
Ai;b
 i +
          b
              [Y (p) + T (p; q) +          (p)]          4wi (p)                         w (p)5                      e@
                                                                                                                          Ej                    E A             0:
                                                                           =h;`;k                                                    =M;m


Here the cost of identi…cation depends both on the distance of the individual’s material well-being
from the average in the country and her distance from the average ethnicity value in the country.
The latter is                                   0                                12
                                                                  X
                                               e@                                                          j 2
                                                    Ej                      E A =             e
                                                                                                                 :
                                                              =M;m

     For a given identi…cation regime r, the marginal contribution to aggregate welfare of an increase
in p is

       Up (p; q)jr                                                                                                                                         (32)
       0                                                                                                                               1
                 X               X         j j
                                                              X        X          j j;j
                                                                                                       X             X             j j;b A
     = @1 +                                i Ii;i   +    e
                                                                                  i Ii    +       b
                                                                                                                                   i Ii    (p   q)    0
                                                                                                                                                          (p)
                         j=M;m i=h;`;k                       j=M;m i=h;`;k                            j=M;m i=h;`;k
                                           2                                       3
                      X      X        j j 4 0
                                                                  X
          +                           i Ii;i wi (p)                        w0 (p)5
                  j=M;m i=h;`;k                               =h;`;k
                                               2                                                       3
                       X      X        j j;j
                                                    X         j                 X
          +       e                            4                  w0 (p)                  w0 (p)5
                                       i Ii                   j
                      j=M;m i=h;`;k                =h;`;k                       =h;`;k
                                               2                                         32                                               3
                       X      X        j j;j
                                                                   X       j                                         X         j
              2                                4wi (p)                         w (p)5 4wi0 (p)                                     w0 (p)5
                                       i Ii                                j                                                   j
                      j=M;m i=h;`;k                               =h;`;k                                         =h;`;k
                                               2                                      32                                                3
                       X      X        j j;b 4
                                                                  X                                              X
              2                        i Ii   wi (p)                        w (p)5 4wi0 (p)                                    w0 (p)5 :
                      j=M;m i=h;`;k                               =h;`;k                                         =h;`;k

                                                                                                                                                                 e
Evidently, Up (p; q)jr does not depend on the distance in ethnic space and, therefore, changes in
that do not induce changes in identi…cation have no e¤ect on trade policy, as stated in Proposition
6.
     Now consider an equilibrium with some identi…cation regime r = r in which individuals with


                                                                           46
skill level i and ethnicity j identify with the nation. Let p be the associated domestic relative
price of the import good. Assuming an interior solution, this price is characterized by

                                                              Up (p ; q)jr=r = 0:

We do not restrict any of the remaining components of the identi…cation regime. Thus, for example,
other persons may or may not identify with the nation and may or may not identify with their own
ethnic groups. But we do assume that p > q, i.e., that the initial equilibrium has a positive tari¤.
    Now suppose that a change in either                           e
                                                                      or Aj;b
                                                                          i induces individuals with skill i and ethnicity j
to stop identifying with the broad nation, but that other identi…cation choices remain as before.
Let r = rij;   b
                   represent the new identi…cation regime and let pj;
                                                                   i
                                                                                                       b
                                                                                                           represent the new domestic price
of the import good. Then               pij; b   > p if and only if

                                 Up (p ; q)jr=rj;     b       Up (p ; q)jr=r = Up (p ; q)jr=rj;                     b   > 0:
                                                  i                                                             i


But (32) yields

                                                                  b j                  0
   Up (p ; q)jr=rj;      b       Up (p ; q)jr=r =                   i   (p        q)       (p )
                     i
                                                              2                                            32                                        3
                                                          j
                                                                                   X                                             X
                                                +2            4wi (p )                        w (p )5 4wi0 (p )                               w0 (p )5 :
                                                          i
                                                                                  =h;`;k                                         =h;`;k


The …rst term on the right-hand side of this equation is positive, implying that pj;
                                                                                  i
                                                                                                                                          b
                                                                                                                                              > p if and
only if                      2                                          32                                              3
                                                X                                             X
                             4wi (p )                     w (p )5 4wi0 (p )                                w0 (p )5         0:                       (33)
                                            =h;`;k                                           =h;`;k

    Note that, by assumption, wh (p ) > w` (p ) > wk (p ). That is, the high-skilled workers are
paid the highest wages while the low-skilled workers earn the lowest wages. Medium-skilled workers
have intermediate wages between those of other two skill groups. Then, the …rst term in the square
bracket on the right hand side of (33) is negative for i = k and positive for i = h. For i = `
it is positive if medium-skilled workers have a wage that is higher than the average and negative
otherwise. For i = k; the term in the second square bracket is negative if the import-competing
good and the nontraded service are gross complements in consumption. The reason is that in this
case wk0 (p ) < 0 and therefore
                                          X                                                                 X
                         wk0 (p )                     w0 (p ) = (1                          0
                                                                                       k ) wk   (p )                    w0 (p )
                                         =h;`;k                                                             =h;`
                                                                                            0
                                                                      = (1             k ) wk   (p )        YZ (p ) < 0 :

Under these circumstances, the tari¤ rate jumps upward when the least-skilled of either ethnicity



                                                                             47
cease identifying broadly with the nation.
   If the medium-skilled individuals of either ethnicity cease to identify with the nation, the term
in the second square brackets becomes
                                   X                                                        X
                    w`0 (p )                    w0 (p ) = (1               0
                                                                      ` ) w` (p        )            w0 (p ) :
                                   =h;`;k                                                   =h;k


This expression is positive when the import-competing good and the nontraded service are gross
complements in consumption, because, in this case, wk0 (p ) < 0 while the Stolper-Samuelson the-
orem implies that w`0 (p ) > and wh0 (p ) < 0. It follows that the rate of protection jumps upward
when medium-skilled workers of either ethnicity cease to identify with the broad nation, if these
workers happen to earn an above-average wage.
   Finally, consider i = h. If such workers of either ethnicity end their national identi…cation, the
term in the …rst square bracket of (33) is positive. The term in the second square bracket can be
expressed as
                                     X
                        wh0 (p )                 w0 (p ) = wh0 (p )                  0
                                                                                  k wk     (p )    YZ (p ) :
                                    =h;`;k

This expression is negative if the import-competing good and the nontraded service are gross
substitutes in consumption, in which case wk0 (p ) > 0. But if they are gross complements in
consumption, the expression cannot be signed. So, the net e¤ect is ambiguous.
   Now consider an initial equilibrium with some identi…cation regime r and equilibrium price
p in which individuals of ethnicity j and skill level i identify with their own social class; Iji;i = 1.
                                            e
Now suppose that an increase in                 leads them to end such identi…cation, but does not a¤ect other
identity choices. This results in a new identi…cation regime ri;j                            i   and a new policy p~ . The new
policy entails a higher rate protection if and only if

                                    Up (p ; q)jr=rj                Up (p ; q)jr=r > 0:
                                                       i; i


In the present circumstances, (32) yields
                                                              2                                                          3
                                                          j
                                                                                                          X
     Up (p ; q)jr=rj         Up (p ; q)jr=r =                 4(p           q)    0
                                                                                      (p ) + wi0 (p )             w0 (p )5 :
                    i; i
                                                          i
                                                                                                         =h;`;k


Since (p    q)   0 (p   ) < 0, the right-side of this equation is positive, implying that p~ > p if
                                                                     X
                                        wi0 (p ) (1           i)                 w0 (p ) :                                     (34)
                                                                      6=i


For i = k; the expression on the left-hand side of (34) is negative if the import-competing good
and the nontraded service are gross substitutes in consumption, and the expression on the right-
hand side of (34) is positive in this case, because it equals YZ (p ). Under these circumstances, the
inequality is satis…ed, which implies that the tari¤ rate jumps upward if the low-skilled workers of

                                                               48
either ethnicity cease to identify with others in their social class. For i = `, the expression on the
left-hand side is positive while the expression on the right-hand side is negative when the import-
competing good and the nontraded service are gross complements, in which case the inequality is
violated. So, in this case, we cannot predict whether the tari¤ rate jumps upward or downward.
Finally, for i = h, the left-hand side is negative while the right-hand side has one positive term,
    0                                                                            0
 ` w` (p   ), and one negative term (in the case of gross complementarity),   k wk   (p ). It follows that
we cannot predict the direction of change in the equilibrium tari¤.




                                                  49
