                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               CLOSING THE GAP:
       THE EFFECT OF A TARGETED, TUITION-FREE PROMISE ON COLLEGE CHOICES
                    OF HIGH-ACHIEVING, LOW-INCOME STUDENTS

                                          Susan Dynarski
                                            C.J. Libassi
                                       Katherine Michelmore
                                         Stephanie Owen

                                        Working Paper 25349
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25349


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2018

This project would not have been possible without our collaborators at the University of
Michigan—particularly Kedra Ishop, Steve Lonn, and Betsy Brown. We are grateful to the
Michigan Department of Education (MDE) and Michigan’s Center for Educational Performance
and Information (CEPI) for providing data. Seminar participants at Boston University, Clemson,
Cornell, Harvard, Northwestern, University of Illinois, University of Virginia, Princeton,
Chicago, Stanford, the National Bureau for Economic Research, and Syracuse provided helpful
comments, while Michael Lovenheim and Sarah Turner read initial drafts. The Institute of
Education Sciences of the U.S. Department of Education (through Grants R305E100008 and
R305B110001), Arnold Ventures, the Smith Richardson Foundation, and the University of
Michigan Provost’s Office funded this research. This study is registered at the randomized trial
registry of the American Economics Association under RCT ID AEARCTR-0001831, with DOI
10.1257/rct.1831. A pre-analysis plan was filed in April 2017. Elizabeth Burland, Meghan Oster,
and Shwetha Raghuraman provided outstanding research assistance. Results, information and
opinions solely represent the analysis, information and opinions of the authors and are not
endorsed by, or reflect the views or positions of, grantors, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, MDE and CEPI or any employee thereof.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Susan Dynarski, C.J. Libassi, Katherine Michelmore, and Stephanie Owen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Closing the Gap: The Effect of a Targeted, Tuition-Free Promise on College Choices of High-Achieving,
Low-Income Students
Susan Dynarski, C.J. Libassi, Katherine Michelmore, and Stephanie Owen
NBER Working Paper No. 25349
December 2018, Revised June 2020
JEL No. I0,I21,I22,I23,I24,I28

                                          ABSTRACT

High-achieving, low-income students attend selective colleges at far lower rates than upper-
income students with similar achievement. Behavioral biases, intensified by complexity and
uncertainty in the admissions and aid process, may explain this gap. In a large-scale experiment
we test an early commitment of free tuition at a flagship university. The intervention did not
increase aid: rather, students were guaranteed before application the same grant aid that they
would qualify for in expectation after admission. The offer substantially increased application (68
percent vs 26 percent) and enrollment rates (27 percent vs 12 percent). The results suggest that
uncertainty, present bias, and loss aversion loom large in students’ college decisions.


Susan Dynarski                                   Katherine Michelmore
University of Michigan                           Syracuse University
Weill Hall                                       Center for Policy Research
735 South State Street                           426 Eggers Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091                         Syracuse, NY 13244
and NBER                                         kmmichel@syr.edu
dynarski@umich.edu
                                                 Stephanie Owen
C.J. Libassi                                     University of Michigan
College Board                                    238 Lorch Hall
1919 M Street NW                                 611 Tappan Ave.
Suite 300                                        Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
Washington, DC 20036                             srowen@umich.edu
clibassi@collegeboard.org




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1831
I     I NTRODUCTION
         Gaps in educational attainment between low- and high-income students are large and have grown in
recent decades. Among children born in the 1980s, those from the bottom quartile of family incomes are
50 percentage points less likely to attend college than those from the top quartile. And while 54 percent of
children born into the top income quartile earned a bachelor’s degree, only nine percent of those in the lowest
quartile did so (Bailey and Dynarski 2011).
         These differences stem in part from disparities in academic preparation. But even among well-prepared
students, there are substantial gaps in college enrollment and the quality of college attended (Hoxby and
Avery 2012). Combined with evidence that attending a college of higher quality increases both educational
attainment and earnings (Hoekstra 2009; Zimmerman 2014; Dillon and Smith 2018), the under-representation
of low-income students at selective colleges likely exacerbates both educational and income inequality.1
         Among high-achieving students, differences in application behavior drive income differences in college
quality. Hoxby and Avery (2012) find that the majority of low-income, high-achieving students apply to zero
selective schools, even though doing so would likely lower their costs (Cohodes and Goodman 2014), increase
their chances of completing a college degree, and increase their future wages (Hoekstra 2009, Zimmerman
2014; Andrews, Imberman and Lovenheim 2016).
         Standard models of human capital investment fall short in explaining these behaviors. Though a
lack of information about the (net) cost of college or suitability for an elite school could in theory lead
low-income students to underinvest in education, previous interventions targeting these information frictions
have shown only modest success (Bettinger et al. 2012; Hoxby and Turner 2013; Bergman, Denning and
Manoli 2019; Gurantz et al. 2019; Hyman 2019, although see Jensen 2010 for an exception). Insights
from behavioral economics suggest that students’ choices deviate from the classical model in predictable
ways. Many observed behavioral patterns, such as present bias, overreliance on routine or defaults, and debt
aversion, are particularly pronounced for those facing economic scarcity (which by definition low-income
students are) and complex decisions (as in the higher education and financial aid systems) (Mullainathan and
Shafir 2013). Within such an environment, small changes can lead to a large difference in behavior.
         We use a randomized, controlled trial to test whether targeted, personalized communications, which
reframe but do not increase financial aid, can alter the college decisions of low-income students. The
intervention, the “HAIL (High Achieving Involved Leader) Scholarship,”2 was designed in the spirit of
previous interventions that make small changes to the framework of decision-making with the hope of inducing
large changes in behavior.
         In a personalized mailing, two cohorts of two thousand low-income, high-achieving students were
encouraged to apply to the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor (the state’s most selective school) and

     1 We interchangeably use the terms “high quality”, “selective”, and “elite" throughout to refer to selective institutions. These schools

tend to spend more per student, as well as provide high-achieving classmates who are inputs into the education production function
(Black and Smith 2006).
     2 The acronym “HAIL” is a reference to the University of Michigan’s fight song. “HAIL Michigan” is plastered on t-shirts, bumper

stickers, water bottles, tube tops, underwear, beer coolers, dog coats, and billboards across the state and beyond. Go Blue!


                                                                     1
promised free tuition and fees if admitted.3 Parents and principals of the eligible students were also notified
about this offer. Students enrolled in Michigan public schools who qualified for subsidized school meals and
met certain academic criteria (described in Section III) were eligible for the scholarship.
           Crucially, this intervention did not change costs for these students: rather, it offered an early guarantee
of grants for which, in expectation, they were already eligible. This offer was made in the fall of a student’s
senior year of high school, before college application deadlines; traditionally, aid offers are made after a
student is accepted. The offer was unconditional; traditionally, in order to qualify for aid, students must
complete a set of forms that are more complicated than the typical tax return (Dynarski and Scott-Clayton
2006). Finally, the scholarship was guaranteed for four years; traditionally, schools require an annual application
for aid.
           We find very large effects of the intervention offer on application and enrollment rates at the University
of Michigan and, more generally, on college choice. The likelihood of applying to the University of Michigan
more than doubled, from 26 percent among controls to 68 percent among students offered treatment. The
share enrolling at a highly selective college more than doubled, from 13 percent to 28 percent, with this effect
operating completely through enrollment at the University of Michigan.
           One-quarter of the enrollment effect (four percentage points) is driven by students who would not have
attended any college in the absence of the treatment. The balance would have attended a community college or
a less selective four-year college. The offer of the scholarship diverted no students from colleges as or more
selective than the University of Michigan – that is, there was no “poaching” from other selective schools.
Nor did the offer increase attendance at other selective schools, which plausibly could have been induced
by mailings that told students that they were strong candidates for admission to the selective University of
Michigan.
           The magnitudes of these effects are much larger than those in previous interventions with similar
goals (Hoxby and Turner 2013; Bettinger et al. 2012; Goldrick-Rab et al. 2016; Bergman, Denning and
Manoli 2017; Oreopoulos and Ford 2019; Gurantz et al. 2019; Hyman 2019). Several dimensions of the
HAIL intervention set it apart, and plausibly explain the size of its effect.
           The HAIL Scholarship provides an early, unconditional guarantee of free tuition. The early nature
of the offer locks in a price guarantee at the time of the application decision. Previous research suggests
that information is most effective when delivered at the time of decision making (Fernandes, Lynch Jr and
Netemeyer 2014; Fischer and Wagner 2018; Patterson, Pope and Feudo 2019).
           The offer is unconditional: though students must still apply and be admitted, they do not have to fill out
any paperwork or go through any verification to qualify for the scholarship.4 Although the costs of learning
about and applying for financial aid are small compared to its value (and the benefits of college), previous
research suggests that even minor and short-term costs can have an outsize influence on the decisions of
     3 Barron’s ranks schools from “least competitive” to “most competitive” based on a combination of average GPA, SAT scores, and

acceptance rates. The University of Michigan is in the “highly competitive” or second highest category.
     4 While submitting aid forms was not required to receive the HAIL Scholarship, applicants were encouraged to do so. University of

Michigan staff prodded admitted students to complete forms, and 95 percent of the admitted HAIL Scholars did so, thereby substantially
increasing their aid.


                                                                  2
myopic students (Oreopoulos and Ford 2019; Hoxby and Turner 2013; Goodman 2016; Pallais 2015; Bulman
2015). The HAIL offer effectively changes the default option for students, in that no action is required
to accept it. Previous research indicates that people use shortcuts in complex decision environments, and
that changing defaults can therefore dramatically influence behavior (Marx and Turner 2019; Pallais 2015;
Johnson and Goldstein 2009; Beshears et al. 2013).
         Finally, the four-year guarantee reduces the uncertainty of future college costs, by converting the
possibility of future aid into a present certainty.
         Our results show that a low-cost intervention that removes behavioral and administrative obstacles
can profoundly alter student choices. We add to a growing body of research that shows that seemingly minor
differences in policy design can have profound effects on real economic outcomes. In ongoing work, we
track the effects of the intervention on college major, persistence, and graduation. In the long term, we will
examine the effect of the induced changes in educational attainment on earnings and other measures of adult
well-being.


II      BACKGROUND
A     Income Gaps in College Quality and Why They Matter
         A long literature informs the design of the HAIL scholarship and our understanding of income-based
gaps in college going.
         Just 12 percent of college students come from the bottom fifth of the family-income distribution, while
28 percent are from the top fifth. This imbalance is even larger at the most selective colleges (Chetty et al.
2017)5 , which have more students from the top one percent of the income distribution than from the entire
bottom half.
         Undermatching accounts for some of this gap in college selectivity. Students are said to undermatch
when they are much more academically qualified than typical peers at their chosen school. Only 38 percent
of Chicago Public Schools students who qualify for very selective colleges attend one (Roderick, Coca and
Nagaoka 2011). Similarly, Bowen, Chingos and McPherson (2009) found that, among students in North
Carolina in 1999, 40 percent did not attend the highest-tier institution for which they were likely eligible
given their academic performance. This concurs with a study of two nationally-representative cohorts of high
school graduates from 1992 and 2004 (Smith, Pender and Howell 2013).
         Hoxby and Avery (2012) and Dillon and Smith (2017) find that the main driver of mismatch is student
application choices rather than schools’ admissions decisions. That is, low-income students wind up at
schools of lower selectivity not because they were rejected from the better schools but because they never
applied. Dillon and Smith (2017) find that, among the students who undermatch, 72 percent applied to no
closely matched college; just six percent applied to such colleges but were rejected. Hoxby and Avery (2012)
show that many qualified students apply to no selective colleges at all.

    5 The authors refer to these institutions as the “Ivy Plus” and include the eight Ivy League schools plus MIT, Stanford, Duke, and the

University of Chicago.


                                                                    3
              In Michigan, as in the rest of the country, there are large differences in college choices between
low- and higher-income students. Among students whose high academic achievement makes them plausible
candidates for a selective school, low-income students are four percentage points less likely to attend any
college than their higher-income peers (see Figure I). Gaps in college selectivity are even wider than gaps in
college attendance: low-income students are eight percentage points less likely than more advantaged peers
to attend a highly selective school.

                                                       Figure I
                  Selectivity of Colleges Attended by High-Achieving Michigan Students, by Income



               100                                                                            Non-low-income students
                             88                                                               Low-income students
                                     84
                                                78
                80
                                                         67


                60
    Percent




                                                                        46

                40
                                                                               33


                                                                                             22
                20                                                                                   14


                                                                                                                    2       2
                  0
                           Any College         Competitive              Very                  Highly                Most
                                                or Above             Competitive            Competitive           Competitive
                                                                      or Above               or Above

Source: Michigan administrative data and National Student Clearinghouse data.
Notes: Sample is 11th grade students in Michigan public schools in 2013 who meet HAIL GPA and ACT criteria. College enrollment
measured at first institution attended in fall 2014. Low-income means eligible for free or reduced-price lunch in 11th grade. Selectivity
categories from Barron’s selectivity index.


              More selective schools typically offer more aid to low-income students, making them cheaper than
less selective schools (see Table I). The net cost of attendance at the University of Michigan for in-state
students with family income below $30,000 is $3,249.6 This makes the University of Michigan the cheapest
four-year option for low-income students in the state; their net cost of attendance is $7,058 at Michigan State
University, and $12,316 at Eastern Michigan University. For students with slightly higher family income
(between $30,000 and $48,000), the net cost of attendance at the University of Michigan is $5,575.7 For these

    6 From     College Scorecard data.
    7 This is roughly 130-185 percent of the federal poverty threshold for a family of four, and corresponds to the upper income thresholds

for free or subsidized meals in school.


                                                                    4
students, only a community college is a cheaper option than the University of Michigan (nearby Washtenaw
Community college costs $4,455).8
         Higher college quality is associated with higher graduation rates and salaries. Research indicates that
at least part of this relationship is causal (Hoekstra 2009; Zimmerman 2014; Dillon and Smith 2018). The
University of Michigan has a 91 percent graduation rate (within six years) and an average alumni salary of over
$63,000 (within ten years of attendance). The comparable statistics at nearby Eastern Michigan University
are 41 percent and $39,300. Shifting low-income students to the University of Michigan is therefore likely to
increase both their educational attainment and adulthood income.

                                                          Table I
                                   Characteristics of Selected Universities in Michigan

                                                               University         Michigan            Eastern          Washtenaw
                                                                  of                State            Michigan          Community
                                                               Michigan           University         University         College
    Barron’s selectivity category                                Highly             Very            Competitive          Not rated
                                                               competitive       competitive

    Average annual net cost for in-state students
      All students                                               $14,860           $18,576            $14,406             $5,286
      Students with family income $0-30K                          $3,249            $7,058            $12,316             $3,912
      Students with family income $30-48K                         $5,575           $13,116            $12,951             $4,455

    Graduation rate                                                0.91              0.79               0.41                0.15
    Median salary after attending                                $63,400           $53,600            $39,300             $29,200

Source: College Scorecard, https://collegescorecard.ed.gov, accessed May 30, 2019.
Notes: University of Michigan refers to the Ann Arbor campus. Average annual net cost is “derived from the full cost of attendance
(including tuition and fees, books and supplies, and living expenses) minus federal, state, and institutional grant/scholarship aid, for
full-time, first-time undergraduate Title IV-receiving students.” Average net cost is reported for this group as well as for subsets of
students in the two lowest income brackets reported by College Scorecard ($0-$30,000 and $30,001-$48,000). For reference, the cutoff
for free lunch eligibility for a family of four is $33,104 (130 percent of the federal poverty line), and for reduced-price eligibility it
is $47,638 (185 percent of the federal poverty line) as of 2019. The graduation rate for the four-year schools is the proportion of
first-time, full-time students who complete a bachelor’s degree within six years; for Washetenaw Community College it is the proportion
of first-time, full-time students who complete a two-year degree within three years. Median salary represents “the median earnings of
former students who received federal financial aid, at 10 years after entering the school." All quotes are from College Scorecard.




B     Lessons from previous literature and interventions
         The facts laid out above present a puzzle: given their substantial benefits and relatively low costs,
why aren’t selective colleges the destination for more low-income, high-achieving students? It is difficult to
square this behavior with the human capital model, in which people weigh the expected costs and benefits of
schooling, choosing the option that maximizes the return over a lifetime. We might conclude (and evidence
shows) that students are uninformed, and that providing information about the costs and benefits of college
would make a difference in their decisions (Avery and Kane 2004; Dynarski and Scott-Clayton 2006; Oreopoulos


    8 Table I includes four illustrative example schools, but the point holds more broadly. For students in the two lowest income

categories, the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor is the most affordable bachelor’s-degree-granting school in the state.


                                                                    5
and Dunn 2013).9 Unfortunately, multiple studies have found that information alone does not change student
behavior (Bettinger et al. 2012; Hoxby and Turner 2013; Bergman, Denning and Manoli 2019; Gurantz et al.
2019; Hyman 2019, although see Jensen 2010 for an exception).
         Behavioral economics provides plausible explanations for why low-income, high-achieving students
attend selective colleges at far lower rates than their higher-income peers.10 Research in the lab and in
the field has identified a number of behavioral phenomena that can explain consistently observed patterns in
educational decision-making. First, people often exhibit time-inconsistent preferences and appear present-biased
(Frederick, Loewenstein and O’Donoghue 2002; Stanovich, West and Toplak 2012). They act in ways
inconsistent with their stated goals for the future, and overemphasize short-term costs and benefits (Ainslie
1975; Laibson 1997). Due to their still-developing brain systems, which affect cognitive functioning and
critical thinking, adolescents are particularly susceptible to present bias (Chapman, Gamino and Mudar 2012;
Galván 2012; Bettinger and Slonim 2007). For example, students are swayed by small, short-term college
costs, such as application fees and the effort required to take the SAT or ACT; in a rational educational
investment model, these costs would be dwarfed by long-term benefits and would not affect choices on the
scale observed in many interventions that reduce these barriers (Oreopoulos and Ford 2019; Hoxby and Turner
2013; Goodman 2016; Pallais 2015; Bulman 2015).
         Loss aversion, a phenomenon in which people feel a loss more strongly than an equal-sized gain, may
cause students to underinvest in education to avoid the certain loss of time, effort, and money, even if the
potential future gain is high (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Similarly, debt aversion—an aversion that has no
place in a traditional investment model— may prevent many students from borrowing to finance college (Field
2009; Caetano, Palacios and Patrinos 2019; Scott-Clayton 2012). Students from lower income backgrounds
seem particularly prone to debt aversion (Baum and Schwartz 2015; Calender and Jackson 2005). Research
has documented the important roles loss and debt aversion play in education and career decisions (see, for
instance, Field 2009).
         Finally, psychologists and sociologists point to the importance of social identity in decision-making.
People tend to behave in ways consistent with their social identity and the norms of their social groups
(Benjamin, Choi and Strickland, 2010). Making certain aspects of students’ identities more salient (e.g. their
academic achievement) may prompt them to make choices more in line with that part of their identity (e.g.
applying to a selective college). Framing financial aid as a scholarship, rather than a need-based grant, calls
attention to the high-achieving dimension of a student’s identity, rather than their socioeconomic status (Avery
and Hoxby, 2003).
         All of the phenomena discussed above may be particularly important in contexts where there are
many choices, and the decision-making process is complex. In the presence of information overload or

     9 Classical economic models acknowledge that information is costly to acquire, but in our context, the returns to a college degree are

so large, and the opportunity costs of high school students so low, that it is virtually impossible to generate a scenario in which the costs
of acquiring information outweigh the benefits.
    10 In this section, we draw heavily from several excellent review papers about the behavioral economics of education: Damgaard and

Nielsen (2018); French and Oreopoulos (2017); Lavecchia, Liu and Oreopoulos (2016); Koch, Nafziger and Nielsen (2015); and Jabbar
(2011).


                                                                     6
choice overload—when there are too many factors or too many options to fully consider—people tend to
resort to heuristics or mental shortcuts to simplify the decision (Kahneman 2003). This could mean sticking
to the status quo (which may be inaction) or picking the most prominent option, even if it is not the best one.
College application and financial aid feature many choices and intense complexity. In this context, the default
may mean choosing the nearest community college or regional university. Indeed, two thirds of all college
students attend an institution within 25 miles of home, and nearly 85 percent attend an institution within 100
miles (authors’ calculations using the National Postsecondary Student Aid Study, 2016 cohort).
         In the presence of information overload, seemingly small changes to the environments in which
people make choices can have large consequences. Interventions aimed at simplifying or assisting with the
application and financial aid process, for instance, produce significant increases in student enrollment and
persistence in college (e.g. Bettinger et al. 2012; Castleman and Page 2016). Additionally, changing the
default option presented to people—without changing anything about the options available—has been shown
to strongly influence the choice they make (Marx and Turner 2019; Pallais 2015; Johnson and Goldstein 2009;
Beshears et al. 2013).


III       DATA , S AMPLE , AND R ANDOMIZATION
         Our target population is high-achieving, low-income students in Michigan. We identify these students
using longitudinal, student-level administrative data, which contain the universe of students attending public
high schools in the state.11
         We identify high-achieving students based on high school GPA, which comes from student transcript
data, and SAT score, which comes from mandatory, in-school 11th grade testing.12 Admissions officials at the
University of Michigan set the GPA and score cutoffs; they are analogous to the criteria the school uses when
gleaning prospective recruits from national data on ACT and SAT takers. Grades and scores do not determine
admission; like most highly selective colleges, the University of Michigan uses multiple criteria, including
extracurricular activities, to decide who gets in. Qualifying SAT scores start at 1100 while qualifying GPAs
start at 3.3. Students with higher test scores faced a lower GPA threshold (and vice versa). Students in the
sample had an average GPA of 3.8 and SAT of 1260.
         We do not have information on family income. We identify low-income students using data on
qualification for the federal subsidized-lunch program. Students with family income below 130 percent of
the federal poverty line qualify for a free lunch, while those with incomes up to 185 percent of the poverty
line can get a subsidized lunch. In 2018, these thresholds were $32,630 ($46,435) for a family of four.
Two-thirds of our sample qualifies for a free lunch and the remainder for a reduced-price lunch.13
         Of the 100,000 juniors in Michigan’s 1,000 public high schools, about 2,000 students in 500 schools

    11 Data come from the Michigan Department of Education (MDE) and the Michigan Center for Educational Performance and

Information (CEPI).
    12 In the 2015-16 school year, which corresponds to the second cohort of our intervention, the state switched from using the ACT as

part of the 11th grade standardized exam, to the SAT. We convert all ACT scores to SAT scores using official concordance tables.
    13 In Michigan, students automatically qualify for subsidized meals if their family receives means-tested benefits such as food stamps

or TANF. Qualification occurs through a data match between the education and human services administrative systems.


                                                                    7
meet the income and academic criteria for our intervention each year: 2,108 students from 529 schools for
the first cohort and 1,802 students from 497 schools for the second.14 As these numbers suggest, the typical
school in Michigan has only a handful of high-achieving, low-income students and half of the schools have
none. The modal school in our experimental sample has one student meeting the HAIL eligibility criteria (see
Figure II).
         Schools in the sample are widely dispersed throughout the state. While there are concentrations of
schools in the major metropolitan areas, there are also many schools in the Upper Peninsula and in other rural
areas (see Figure III).

                                                                        Figure II
                                                        Typical School Has Few Eligible Students
                                                             First and Second HAIL Cohorts
                                                                       5
                                                                   e=
                                                                 til
                                                               en
                                                                3
                                                   75 n =

                                                            rc
                                                         pe
                                                        ia
                                                     ed

                                                     th
                                                   M




                                  250

                                  200
              Number of Schools




                                  150

                                  100

                                   50

                                    0
                                        0                              10                         20                   30
                                                                    Number of Eligible Students in School
                                        Source: Michigan administrative data.
                                        Notes: Unit of analysis is the school-year.




A     Randomization
         We assign treatment status at the level of the high school. All students in a school who meet the
income and academic criteria are assigned the same treatment status. We do this because we hypothesize
treatment spillovers within schools, which (in the case of within-school randomization) would attenuate
estimated effects toward zero. We stratify the sample (into four groups) by the number of HAIL-eligible
students in each school and randomize within each stratum.15

    14 Pooling the two cohorts, 28,267 juniors met the academic criteria but not the income requirement, while 52,377 students met the

income requirement but did not meet the achievement criteria.
    15 For the second cohort, schools that had newly entered the sample (because they had no qualifying students in the first cohort but

did in the second) were randomly assigned using the same method. Similarly, some schools exited the sample during the second cohort.
See Appendix Table I for details on how many schools were in the sample for each cohort.


                                                                                      8
                                                      Figure III
                                 HAIL Students Are Widely Dispersed Across Michigan
                                           First and Second HAIL Cohorts




                                     HAI
                                       Lst
                                         ude
                                           ntsi
                                              nzi
                                                pcode
                                           1
                                          50
                                         100
                                                                          Gr
                                                                           andRapi
                                                                                 ds
                                         150
                                        ≥200



                                                                                      AnnAr
                                                                                          bor       Det
                                                                                                      roi
                                                                                                        t




         For the first cohort, the randomization resulted in 1,057 treated students and 1,051 control students in
262 treated schools and 267 control schools. In the second cohort, 875 students in 238 high schools were in
the treatment group, while 927 students in 259 high schools were in the control group.
         Sample characteristics are shown in Table II. The table shows tests for balance (within each cohort-stratum)
between treatment and control groups. Forty percent of the schools in the treatment and control groups are
in the Southeast region of the state, near Ann Arbor, Lansing, and Detroit. Another 14 percent of schools are
in the largely rural Upper Peninsula. The remaining schools are scattered across the Lower Peninsula, with
many concentrated in the Grand Rapids area. Over half the schools are rural, a third are suburban, and the
remainder urban.
         The overwhelming majority (84 percent) of sample students are white or Asian, reflecting the strong
correlation (in Michigan and the US) between academic achievement and race. Nine percent are black and
seven percent Hispanic, American Indian, or native Hawaiian.16 A majority are female (59 percent). All of
these statistics track patterns of academic achievement in the state.
         A glance through the table shows balance on nearly all characteristics. The only significant imbalance
is in schools’ historical rate of application to the University of Michigan. At treated schools, 5.5 percent of

    16 We group students into three race/ethnicity categories: white or Asian, black, and other. Race categories are mutually exclusive.

“Other” includes Hispanics, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and other Pacific Islanders. Students are coded as
Hispanic if they identify as Hispanic, regardless of race. For students of multiple races, a single race category is assigned according to
the following hierarchy: black, Native American, Asian, Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, white.


                                                                    9
students applied to the University of Michigan in 2015, before the experiment. At control schools the rate
was 6.7 percent. (Due to data limitations, this historical application rate is for all of a school’s students,
not just those who are low-income and high-achieving.) We find no other significant differences between
the treatment and control group using two-way t-tests. We test the sensitivity of results to controlling for
covariates.


IV      I NTERVENTION
        We designed the treatment to address the behavioral barriers discussed earlier. We drew on insights
from previous interventions attempting to reduce income-based gaps in college choices, as well as the behavioral
economics literature on decision-making.
        Students in the treatment group received personally-addressed packets at their homes in the first week
of September of their senior year of high school. Students in the control group received materials typically
sent to potential applicants by the University of Michigan (including booklets describing the school and its
financial aid).
        The treatment materials, designed by admissions staff, were large, glossy, and brightly colored in the
university’s signature “maize and blue” coloring. We recommended that they be eye-catching, and clearly
from the University of Michigan, to reduce the likelihood that students would discard the packets without
opening them (see pictures in Appendix A.1). In previous interventions, mailings sent in plain envelopes
from an unrecognized source were largely ignored or disregarded as fraudulent (Hoxby and Turner 2013;
Goldrick-Rab et al. 2016).
        Inside the packet, a letter from the president of the University of Michigan praised the recipients’
academic achievement and encouraged them to apply for admission. The letter then guaranteed four years
of tuition and fees if the student were accepted. The value of this offer was also expressed in dollar terms
($60,000). The offer was framed as a scholarship, rather than a need-based grant. In fact, the student’s
low-income status was referenced nowhere in the mailing.The mailing stated prominently that applicants did
not have to complete financial aid forms (the Free Application for Federal Student Aid, FAFSA, and the
College Scholarship Service Profile) in order to receive this scholarship; the only condition was admission
to the University of Michigan. Because the aid staff were concerned that this guarantee would discourage
students from completing aid forms, which would almost certainly qualify them for even more aid, students
were encouraged (in smaller type) to fill out the FAFSA and Profile. Eliminating the requirement to fill out
the forms at the time of applications was intended to address a key behavioral bias: administrative burdens
incurred in the present weigh heavily relative to uncertain benefits in the future (Oreopoulos and Ford 2019;
Hoxby and Turner 2013; Goodman 2016; Pallais 2015; Bulman 2015).
        A large, bright insert reiterated the scholarship offer in a format that resembled a coupon. Additional
“coupons" guaranteed that fees would be waived for all applications for admission and aid. These physical
coupons were intended to make the offers feel as concrete as possible.
        The packet also contained materials sent to all potential applicants: a flyer describing application and


                                                      10
                                                          Table II
                                       Balance Table: Selected School Characteristics
                                              First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                                                   Mean
                 Characteristic                                  Control schools         Treated schools         P-value
                 School characteristics
                 Upper Peninsula                                       0.150                   0.130              0.344
                                                                      (0.016)                 (0.015)
                 West Central                                          0.449                   0.476              0.359
                                                                      (0.022)                 (0.022)
                 Southeast                                             0.401                   0.394              0.788
                                                                      (0.021)                 (0.022)
                 Suburban                                              0.340                   0.360              0.537
                                                                      (0.021)                 (0.021)
                 City                                                  0.129                   0.100              0.148
                                                                      (0.015)                 (0.013)
                 Rural                                                 0.530                   0.540              0.718
                                                                      (0.022)                 (0.022)
                 # of 11th grade students in school                    189.1                   175.1              0.055
                                                                      (6.188)                 (6.126)
                 # of HAIL students in school                           3.8                     3.9               0.649
                                                                      (0.140)                 (0.163)
                 UM application rate in 2015                           0.067                   0.055              0.016
                                                                      (0.004)                 (0.004)

                 Student characteristics
                 Proportion female                                     0.571                   0.605              0.112
                                                                      (0.015)                 (0.015)
                 Proportion white or Asian                             0.834                   0.844              0.576
                                                                      (0.013)                 (0.012)
                 Proportion black                                      0.094                   0.087              0.618
                                                                      (0.011)                 (0.010)
                 Proportion other race/ethnicity                       0.072                   0.069              0.803
                                                                      (0.009)                 (0.008)
                 Proportion free lunch eligible                        0.709                   0.692              0.459
                                                                      (0.014)                 (0.015)
                 Proportion reduced-price lunch                        0.291                   0.308              0.459
                   eligible                                           (0.014)                 (0.015)
                 Average SAT (or equivalent)                           1254                    1260               0.194
                                                                      (2.690)                 (2.896)
                 Average GPA                                            3.82                    3.83              0.208
                                                                      (0.006)                 (0.006)

                 Number of school-years                                 526                     500               1,026
                 Number of students                                    1,978                   1,932              3,910
Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. P-values are from a t-test of the coefficient on treatment status from a regression of the
characteristic on treatment and strata dummies.“Other race/ethnicity” includes Hispanic, American Indian or Alaska Native, and Native
Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander students.




                                                                    11
admissions and brochures describing the University of Michigan. These materials encouraged students to
apply to the University of Michigan by November 1, which is the “early action” deadline for the school.
The University of Michigan admits most of its incoming class through early action, so students have the best
chance of being admitted if they apply by that date. Students would still be eligible for the scholarship if they
applied by the standard deadline of February 1, however.                  17

         Information was also mailed to parents, and emailed to principals, of eligible students (see Appendices
A.2 and A.3). Letters to parents, mailed two weeks after the student packets, described the scholarship and
encouraged them to help their children apply. Communications with principals, sent in late August, explained
the program, listed eligible students, and asked the principal to transmit the information to school staff who
supported students in their college applications.


V       E MPIRICAL S TRATEGY
         We evaluate the effect of the HAIL scholarship on application, admission, enrollment, and persistence
at the University of Michigan using internal data from the university. To measure enrollment and persistence
at institutions nationwide, and to measure college selectivity, we rely on National Student Clearinghouse
(NSC) data, available for all students in the treatment and control groups. We compare the outcomes of
treatment and control students, estimating the following models by ordinary least squares (OLS):


                                                  Y jt = β0 + β1 D j + β2 S jt + u jt                                                   (1)

                                              Y jt = γ0 + γ1 D j + γ2 S jt + γ3 Z jt + u jt                                             (2)

where Y jt is an outcome of interest at school j for cohort t. We collapse the individual student data to the
school-cohort level and conduct analysis on these means.18 D j is an indicator variable equal to one if the
school is randomized to the treatment group and zero if the school is randomized to the control group (note
that schools keep their randomization status from the first cohort to the second cohort). S jt is a vector of
strata-by-year dummies.
         β1 and γ1 are the parameters of interest and measure the causal effect of being randomized into the
treatment group, i.e. the estimated effect of the Intent to Treat (ITT). These parameters represent the treatment
effect on the outcomes of interest, with schools weighted equally.19
         Since we observe the outcomes for all students, and therefore all schools, there is no attrition due to
non-response. We do not observe whether a student actually receives the information packet (i.e. is effectively
treated), and students assigned to the control group cannot be treated, so we do not adjust for non-compliance.
         As described in our pre-analysis plan, we conduct subgroup analyses to check for heterogeneity in the
    17 Many selective colleges have an early application window for students who are particularly interested in that school. Some schools

accept early applications only from the students who agree to enroll if admitted (“early decision”). Others, like the University of
Michigan, inform students of their admission by the beginning of January but do not require students to accept the early offer (“early
action”).
    18 Unless otherwise noted, we conduct all analyses at the school-year level since that is the level of treatment; results are consistent

when conducted at the student-level.
    19 Estimates are similar when weighted by the number of sample students in each school.




                                                                    12
treatment effect.20 These subgroup analyses help to identify the potential mechanisms through which HAIL
affected application and enrollment. Previous research suggests that low-income, high-achieving students
who have few similar peers are less likely to attend selective institutions than those who are surrounded by
similar peers (Hoxby and Avery 2012). Of particular interest is whether the HAIL scholarship was effective
in raising application and enrollment rates among these isolated students (as found in a previous intervention
designed to increase application rates of low-income students to selective institutions, Hoxby and Turner
2013). We proxy for isolation by region (Southeast, West Central, or Upper Peninsula), urbanicity (city,
suburban, or town/rural), and the number of HAIL eligible students in the school.
         Similarly, research has suggested that a high school’s prior ties with a school predicts whether a student
will attend (Hoxby and Avery 2012). We test this hypothesis by evaluating heterogeneous treatment effects
as a function of schools’ baseline application and enrollment rates at University of Michigan at Ann Arbor.
         Additionally, we evaluate heterogeneity by gender (male vs. female), race (white/Asian, black, other),
academic achievement (SAT score and GPA), and two measures of economic disadvantage. Finally, we
summarize our heterogeneity analyses with a single index predicting the likelihood that a student would have
attended a selective college in the absence of the intervention.


VI        R ESULTS
A     Evidence of HAIL Awareness from Website Activity
         If we were to find no effect of the intervention, it is important to understand whether the materials
went unread, or if the message they contained was ineffective in changing behavior. We therefore examine
a crude measure of whether students and parents opened and read the personalized mailings. We assigned
each student a personalized web address and included it in the student packets, along with encouragement
to log onto a website that described in greater detail the HAIL Scholarship and University of Michigan. To
encourage students to go to the site, the packet offered them a free University of Michigan t-shirt.
         About 40 percent of students offered HAIL visited the website at least once. Among students who
visited the website, the average number of views was 5.5 with a median of three. This provides a lower bound
on the number of students who read the packet, as many may have read the packet but not visited the website.
         First-time visits to the website are concentrated in the days after student and parent letters were mailed
(Figure IV). One spike occurs a few days after the student letter was mailed and another after the parent letter
was mailed. This suggests that some parents prodded their children to log onto the website, since only the
student packet contained login instructions.21




    20 We show tests for balance in these subgroups in Appendix Table III. See https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1831 for our

pre-analysis plan.
    21 The pattern is similar for the second cohort, though (due to delays in printing packets) student and parent letters were sent only

three days apart (see Appendix Figure Ic). In addition to first-time page views, we also track total page views of personalized HAIL
websites. See Appendix Figures Ib and Id for graphs of the total number of visits to HAIL websites for the first and second HAIL cohorts,
respectively.


                                                                  13
                                                                                    Figure IV
                                                                       First-time Visits to HAIL Webpages
                                                                                First HAIL Cohort
                                                          Ea
                                                             rly




                                                                                                            Re
                                                               ac




                                                                                                            gu
                                                                 tio
           St

                                    Pa




                                                                                                             la
                      ud

                                        re




                                                                   n




                                                                                                                 rd
                                                                   de
                                          nt
                                   en




                                                                                                                 ea
                                                                       ad
                                   tl

                                            le




                                                                                                                   dl
                                               t
                                    et




                                                                       lin
                                             te




                                                                                                                      in
                                       te

                                               r(




                                                                        e(




                                                                                                                      e(
                                        r(

                                                   Se




                                                                            N
                                         Se




                                                                                                                        Fe
                                                      p




                                                                             ov
                                           p




                                                                                                                          b
                                                     21
                                             1)




                                                                                1)




                                                                                                                           1)
                                                          )




                                   40
    First-time visits to webpage




                                   30


                                   20


                                   10


                                    0
                                        Sep 1                                Nov 1                      Jan 1                   Mar 1
                                                                                     Date (2015-2016)

Source: University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: Unit of analysis is a first-time visit to the personalized URL associated with a treated HAIL student, aggregated by date.




                                                                                       14
B     Application, Admission, and Enrollment at the University of Michigan
         Students in treated schools were substantially more likely to apply to, gain admission to, and enroll at
the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor than those in control schools (see Table III for regression estimates
and Appendix Figure II for treatment and control means).22
         At control schools, 26 percent of low-income, high-achieving students applied to the University of
Michigan, compared to 68 percent at treatment schools. That is, the treatment increased the application rate
by 42 percentage points. Results were virtually identical across the two cohorts.23
         The intervention materials encouraged students to apply by the early action deadline of November 1.24
Early application is a signal of a student’s commitment to a school, so the attractiveness of the scholarship
offer could have changed the timing of application for inframarginal as well as marginal students. Early
application is already a popular choice for University of Michigan applicants; of students in the control group
who applied, around three-quarters applied early action. We find that the intervention did not change this
proportion, with three-quarters of the effect on application coming from students induced to apply early and
the remaining quarter from students who were moved to apply regular decision. (See Appendix Table IV
for full results on application timing.) Though we cannot observe application behavior at schools other than
the University of Michigan, this suggests that the HAIL offer did not change the level of commitment to the
school among those who applied.
         These large differences in application rates translated into large differences in admissions rates. The
(unconditional) admission rate was 15 percent in control schools and 32 percent in treated schools, a treatment
effect of 17 percentage points. This is the net effect of the treatment on the joint likelihood of applying to and
being admitted to the University of Michigan.
         We do not have experimental evidence of the effect of the intervention on admission conditional upon
application, because application is affected by the treatment. Another way to put this is that treatment is
not randomly assigned among applicants. However, comparing conditional admission rates gives a sense
of the qualifications of the marginal applicant. Of the 589 control students who applied, 52.5 percent were
accepted; of the 1,306 treated students who applied, 45.6 percent were accepted (see Appendix Table V). Note
that the overall acceptance rate to the University of Michigan was 28.6 percent in 2016-17, indicating that the
applicants in our sample (including those induced to apply) are more qualified than the average applicant.25
         Students in the treatment group were significantly more likely to enroll at the University of Michigan
than those in the control group.26 The (unconditional) enrollment rate for students in the control schools is
   22 Reported values in all results using application, admission, and enrollment data from the University of Michigan’s Office of

Enrollment Management have changed slightly since the December, 2018 NBER working paper version of this study. This was due to
uncovering a small number of students who had been assigned duplicate administrative data IDs, and who we were therefore incorrectly
coding as not applying to (or subsequently enrolling at) the University of Michigan. This affects Tables III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, and IX
and Figures V and VI but none of our substantive conclusions.
   23 We pool the two cohorts for most analyses; results separately by cohort are available upon request.
   24 Students who apply by the early action deadline are typically notified of their admission status by the end of the calendar year.

While early decision deadlines are binding—students must enroll if accepted—the University of Michigan uses an early action deadline,
which does not compel students to enroll if admitted.
   25 Source: University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data. In the subsequent year, which corresponds to the second

cohort of the HAIL intervention, the overall acceptance rate was 26.5 percent.
   26 In addition to our standard sampling-based inference, we test the likelihood of obtaining our estimated treatment effect on University




                                                                    15
12 percent while in the treatment schools it is 27 percent. This translate into an increased enrollment of about
150 low-income students for each of the two cohorts.
         Treatment effects estimated by differences in means (shown in Appendix Figure II), a regression
controlling for strata (Model (1), shown in the first column of Table III), and a regression controlling for
strata and additional school covariates (Model (2), shown in the second column of Table III) are virtually
identical.27

                                                  Table III
             Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment
                                       First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                                                             Control
                                           Outcome                  Treatment effect          mean


                                 Applied                            0.422        0.419         0.259
                                                                   (0.021)      (0.019)

                                 Admitted                           0.176        0.164         0.149
                                                                   (0.019)      (0.017)

                                 Enrolled                           0.151        0.143         0.117
                                                                   (0.018)      (0.016)

                                 Strata dummies                        X            X
                                 Covariates                                         X
                                 Number of school-years                    1,026
                                 Number of students                        3,910

Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Covariates include all characteristics listed in Appendix Table II. Robust standard
errors reported. Application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following expected high school graduation.
Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application.




C     Mechanisms: Isolation and Disconnection
         Low-income, high-achieving students isolated from other high-achieving peers in rural areas are less
likely to apply to selective institutions than those living in urban areas with a higher concentration of such
peers (Hoxby and Avery 2012). Indeed, among control schools, application, admission, and enrollment
rates were approximately twice as high in the Southeast (which includes Detroit and Ann Arbor, where the
University of Michigan is located), compared to the West Central (a mix of rural and urban areas such as
Grand Rapids) and the Upper Peninsula (a rural area).
         HAIL equalized student outcomes across region and urbanicity, with the largest treatment effects in the

of Michigan enrollment (as well as other key enrollment margins) using randomization-based inference. In this approach, randomness
comes from assignment of a fixed number of units to treatment rather than sampling from a super-population. The conclusions are
unchanged (and the p-values are nearly identical): the intervention treatment effects we find are highly unlikely to have occurred by
chance. See Appendix B for details.
   27 For the remainder of the paper, we report treatment effects estimated controlling for strata only. Regression results including all

controls are in Appendix Tables VII, IX through XI, and XIII through XVI.


                                                                  16
regions with the lowest control means (see Table IV for regression treatment effect estimates and Appendix
Figures IV and V for treatment and control means). For the application margin, the treatment effect was
largest in the West Central region (47 percentage points) and smallest in the Southeast (38 percentage points).
         Reflecting the regional pattern, effects were largest in the rural areas, where control means are lowest.
In the control group, the enrollment rate is 22 percent in the urban areas and 8 percent in rural schools; the
enrollment effects were 12 and 18 percentage points, respectively. HAIL reduced the gap in enrollment rates
between urban and rural schools by half: from 14 percentage points in the control group to 7 percentage
points in the treatment group. The outsized impact of the treatment on students in more rural areas of the
state as well as locales farther from University of Michigan is consistent with the treatment compensating for
student isolation, a potential mechanism we test in greater detail below.

                                               Table IV
   Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment by Geography
                                    First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                     Panel A. Region                           Panel B. Urbanicity
                                                          West         Upper                                        Town
                                         Southeast       Central      Peninsula           Suburb        City       or Rural
        Applied                             0.378         0.466          0.398            0.384        0.318         0.487
                                           (0.031)       (0.029)        (0.059)          (0.031)      (0.062)       (0.028)
                                           [0.364]        [0.2]         [0.156]          [0.336]      [0.464]       [0.159]

        Admitted                            0.159         0.187          0.187            0.156        0.061         0.228
                                           (0.031)       (0.026)        (0.054)          (0.029)      (0.066)       (0.026)
                                           [0.202]       [0.116]        [0.105]          [0.164]      [0.319]       [0.097]

        Enrolled                            0.145         0.152          0.176            0.133        0.117         0.183
                                           (0.029)       (0.024)        (0.051)          (0.027)      (0.061)       (0.024)
                                           [0.167]       [0.085]         [0.08]           [0.14]      [0.221]       [0.078]

        Number of school-years               408           474            144              359          118           549
        Number of students                  1,848         1,646           416             1,784         530          1,596

Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from separate regressions of outcome on treatment status and
strata dummies, estimated on the subgroup. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Control mean for subgroup in brackets.
Application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following expected high school graduation. Admission and
enrollment are unconditional on application.




         Building on the results by region and urbanicity, we additionally test how HAIL affected isolated
students by estimating variation in the treatment effects by baseline, school-level application and enrollment
rates to the University of Michigan. We also estimate heterogeneity by the number of HAIL-eligible students
in the school (see Table V and Figure V).28 We estimate heterogeneity by these school-level characteristics
by interacting the treatment indicator with linear terms for the baseline application/enrollment rates and the

    28 Prior University of Michigan application and enrollment rates are for the graduating class of 2015. The number of HAIL-eligible

students in each high school is cohort-specific.


                                                                 17
number of HAIL students in each school. For ease of interpretation, we present treatment effects in Table V
calculated for the 25th percentile, median, and 75th percentile of each measure of isolation.29
            Though treatment effects were large for schools across the distribution of prior UM application rates,
we find slightly larger effects for students who were more disconnected from other high-achieving peers and
selective colleges. Treatment effects are largest in schools that previously had no students apply to or enroll
at the University of Michigan. The effect on application is 47 percentage points for high schools at the 25th
percentile of baseline application rates (this is a school where less than 2 percent of students applied). For
high schools at the 75th percentile (where 7 percent applied) the effect is 42 percentage points. We find
similar patterns for admission and enrollment, though the interaction terms were not statistically significant
on these margins. Results are quite similar when we use prior enrollment rates rather than prior application
rates (Panel B, Table V).
            We also examine treatment effect heterogeneity by the number of HAIL students in the school. In
assigning schools to treatment, we stratified on this characteristic because we hypothesized that the number
of similarly high-achieving but low-income peers in a school would affect students’ baseline propensity to
apply to a selective school. The results (Panel C of Table V, Figure V) suggest isolation plays an important
role in undermatch: treatment effects are largest at schools with the fewest HAIL-eligible students. For
a school at the 25th percentile of this measure (two HAIL-eligible students), the effect on application is
45.1 percentage points. For a school at the 75th percentile (five HAIL-eligible students), the effect is 40.1
percentage points. Similarly, on the enrollment margin, the treatment effect is 16.6 percentage points for
schools at the 25th percentile, and 14 percentage points for schools at the 75th percentile. Together, the
results in Table V suggest that the HAIL scholarship had slightly larger effects on students who were the sole
recipient of the HAIL scholarship in their schools and among students who attended high schools with weak
prior connections to the University of Michigan.
            Finally, we report treatment effects by an additional measure of connection to the University of
Michigan. When students take the SAT as part of the 11th grade exam (before treatment), they can send their
scores to up to four colleges. In the control group, students who sent their scores to the University of Michigan
were nearly three times more likely to apply (42 versus 16 percent) and nearly four times more likely to enroll
(20 versus 6 percent) than peers who did not send their scores (Table VI). Proportionally, treatment effects
were much larger among students who did not send their scores to the University of Michigan, resulting in a
tripling of their application and enrollment rates.
            Collectively, these results confirm that our up-front, unconditional scholarship offer changed behavior
most for students who were initially the most isolated and disconnected from—and therefore least likely to
apply to—the University of Michigan.




   29 For   estimated regression coefficients, see Appendix Table VIII.


                                                                    18
                                                   Table V
             Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment
                    by Historical School Connection to UM and Number of HAIL Students
                                       First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                                                                             P-value on
                                                               Percentile of interacted variable             interaction
                                                                25th        Median        75th                  term
                                     Panel A. Prior School-Level UM Application Rate
               Estimated treatment effect
               Applied                                           0.47           0.451          0.419            0.000

               Admitted                                         0.197            0.19          0.179            0.152

               Enrolled                                         0.166           0.162          0.154            0.349


               Prior application rate at percentile             0.019           0.038          0.071
                                     Panel B. Prior School-Level UM Enrollment Rate
               Estimated treatment effect
               Applied                                          0.486            0.45          0.413            0.000

               Admitted                                         0.201           0.189          0.177             0.13

               Enrolled                                         0.171           0.162          0.152            0.233


               Prior enrollment rate at percentile                 0            0.013          0.027
                                        Panel C. Number of HAIL Students in School
               Estimated treatment effect
               Applied                                          0.451           0.435          0.401            0.000

               Admitted                                         0.192           0.183          0.164            0.036

               Enrolled                                         0.166           0.158           0.14            0.032


               # of HAIL students at percentile                    2               3              5

Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Results are from a regression of the outcome on treatment, the named variable, the
interaction of the two, and strata dummies. Robust standard errors estimated. Estimated treatment effects at percentiles calculated by
adding the estimated coefficient on treatment to the product of the estimated interaction term and the value of the interacted variable at
the percentile. Prior UM application rate and enrollment rates are for the graduating class of 2015.




                                                                   19
                                                                                   Figure V
                                              Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment
                                                                    by Number of HAIL Students in School
                                                                        First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                             (a) Applied                                                                                                                                               (b) Admitted


                                .8                                                                                                                                                 .8
                                               0.69            0.70                                              0.70
                                                                                                                                         0.66
  Average UM application rate




                                                                                                                                                       Average UM admission rate
                                .6                                                                                                                                                 .6




                                .4                                                                                                                                                 .4                  0.37                   0.36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.34
                                                                                                                                0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.28
                                                        0.26
                                       0.24

                                .2                                                                                                                                                 .2         0.18
                                                                                                      0.16                                                                                                           0.15                               0.15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.08


                                0                                                                                                                                                  0
                                        C       T        C      T                                         C          T           C          T                                                  C        T             C        T        C      T         C      T

                                     1 HAIL student   2 HAIL students                          3 HAIL students 4+ HAIL students                                                             1 HAIL student         2 HAIL students   3 HAIL students 4+ HAIL students



                                                                                                                                         (c) Enrolled


                                                                                                     .8
                                                                        Average UM enrollment rate




                                                                                                     .6




                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                                                         0.32                   0.31
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.22
                                                                                                     .2         0.15
                                                                                                                                       0.12                                                                   0.11
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.06

                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                 C        T             C        T                                      C          T           C          T

                                                                                                              1 HAIL student         2 HAIL students                         3 HAIL students 4+ HAIL students



Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following
expected high school graduation. Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application. Schools with 1 HAIL student make up 24
percent of sample, while schools with 2, 3, and 4 or more HAIL students represent 21 percent, 13 percent, and 42 percent of the sample,
respectively.




                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                 Table VI
            Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment
                                      by Pre-Treatment Interest in UM
                                      First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                     Sent SAT Scores to UM           Did Not Send Scores
                    Applied                                     0.372                         0.437
                                                               (0.029)                       (0.023)
                                                               [0.421]                       [0.161]

                    Admitted                                    0.169                         0.165
                                                               (0.030)                       (0.019)
                                                               [0.255]                       [0.081]

                    Enrolled                                    0.157                         0.140
                                                               (0.028)                       (0.018)
                                                               [0.199]                       [0.059]

                    Number of school-years                       663                           882
                    Number of students                          1,514                         2,396
Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from separate regressions of school-subgroup-level outcome rate
on treatment status and strata dummies. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Control mean for subgroup in brackets. UM
application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following expected high school graduation. Admission and
enrollment are unconditional on application.




D     Mechanisms: Extent of Economic Disadvantage
         Though all students in our sample are from low-income households, they vary in the degree of their
economic disadvantage. We might expect larger treatment effects among the most disadvantaged students,
who face stricter constraints than their peers.
         While we lack income data, we have a few ways of identifying the most disadvantaged students. We
can distinguish between students who received a free meal in school (whose family income is below 130
percent of the federal poverty line) and those who received a reduced-price meal (who have family income
between 130 and 185 percent of the federal poverty line). Additionally, we follow the finding of Michelmore
and Dynarski (2017) that students who spend more years eligible for subsidized school meals come from
families with the lowest incomes. We therefore group students by whether they were eligible for free or
reduced-price lunch in all of their pre-treatment high school years (grades 9 through 11) or only for some of
their high school years.30
         Table VII shows treatment effects by these two proxy measures of income. We find weak evidence
that the intervention had a larger effect for more disadvantaged students. Though the estimated effects are
statistically indistinguishable, the effects for the more disadvantaged students—those who qualify for a fully
free lunch and those who were disadvantaged for all of high school—are consistently larger in magnitude

   30 The majority of students in our sample received a free lunch (70 percent) compared to a reduced-price lunch (30 percent). 84

percent of students in our sample qualified as economically disadvantaged for every year we observed them, while the remaining 16
percent were disadvantaged for only some of their high school years.


                                                               21
than for their more advantaged peers.


E     Mechanisms: Academic Qualifications
         Though all students in our sample were selected based on academic qualifications that gave them a
reasonable chance at acceptance to the University of Michigan, there may be heterogeneous effects within
this group of high achievers. To test this, we estimate interaction effects between the treatment and SAT score
(scaled by 100), controlling for GPA.31 Analogously, we interact the treatment with GPA, controlling for SAT
score.
         Table VIII shows treatment effect heterogeneity by SAT score and GPA. On the application margin,
we find a negative relationship between treatment effect and student achievement, with HAIL having a larger
effect on the lower achieving students in the sample. Among students scoring one standard deviation (about
90 points) below the average SAT in our sample, the treatment effect is 6 percentage points higher; for those
with a GPA one standard deviation (0.185 grade points) below the sample average, the treatment effect is
about 2 percentage points higher.32
         In contrast, on the admission and enrollment margin, we find larger treatment effects for the relatively
higher-achieving students in the sample. Among students scoring one standard deviation above the the average
SAT in our sample, the treatment on enrollment effect is 2.7 percentage points higher; for those with a GPA
one standard deviation above the sample average, the treatment effect is 5 percentage points higher.
         Together, these results suggest that while the intervention was most successful in inducing relatively
lower-achieving students to apply to the University of Michigan, because students with higher test scores and
GPAs were more likely to gain admission, the intervention was most successful in inducing higher-achieving
students to enroll.


F     Mechanisms: Additional Student Characteristics
         We find substantial differences in treatment effects across race and ethnic groups (see Table IX and
Appendix Figure VII). This closely tracks the geographic variation, and is in fact difficult to distinguish from
it. In Michigan, black and Hispanic students are concentrated in the cities, while the rural areas are largely
white. We have insufficient support in our sample to precisely estimate racial effects within region (or regional
effects within race).
         Given that we found the largest effects outside the urban Southeast, it is unsurprising that our treatment
effects are largest among white and Asian students. This is driven by racial differences in behavior within the
control group, in which underrepresented minority students (who are concentrated in cities) were much more
likely to apply to and attend the university than white students.

    31 Due to the nature of the HAIL academic criteria, which allow students with lower test scores to qualify if they have a higher GPA

and vice versa, in our sample test score and GPA are negatively correlated. This means that a standard heterogeneity analysis where we
interact SAT score (or GPA) with the treatment would be hard to interpret, since the two measures of academic achievement move in
opposite directions. We include dummies for GPA [or, when estimating effects by GPA, SAT score] to control for this.
    32 Note that these standard deviations—90 points for SAT and 0.185 for GPA—differ from the standard deviations reported in Table

II because the latter are calculated at the school-year level. Though we conduct most analyses at the level of treatment, the school-year
level, results by academic achievement are done at the student level.


                                                                  22
                                                  Table VII
             Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment
                                              by Economic Status
                                       First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                           Panel A. Free or Reduced                    Panel B. Persistence of
                                            Price Lunch Eligibility                    Economic Disadvantage
                                             Free          Reduced-                  Always               Sometimes
                                            Lunch           Price                 Disadvantaged         Disadvantaged
          Applied                           0.419            0.414                     0.423                  0.402
                                           (0.023)          (0.032)                   (0.022)                (0.041)
                                            [0.27]          [0.245]                   [0.259]                [0.302]

          Admitted                          0.170            0.142                     0.177                  0.152
                                           (0.021)          (0.029)                   (0.020)                (0.037)
                                            [0.27]          [0.146]                   [0.149]                [0.167]

          Enrolled                          0.146            0.112                     0.153                  0.140
                                           (0.020)          (0.026)                   (0.019)                (0.035)
                                           [0.116]          [0.118]                   [0.118]                 [0.13]

          Number of school-years             923              607                       982                    425
          Number of students                2,748            1,162                     3,268                   642
Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from separate regressions of school-subgroup-level outcome rate
on treatment status and strata dummies. A student is always disadvantaged if they are economically disadvantaged for every year they
are observed between 9th and 11th grade (including repeated grades). Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Control mean
for subgroup in brackets. UM application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following expected high school
graduation. Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application. In Panel A, eligibility is measured in 11th grade. In Panel B,
"always disadvantaged" is defined as being eligible for free or reduced-price lunch every (observed) year of high school through 11th
grade.




                                                                23
                                                 Table VIII
             Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment
                                         by Academic Achievement
                                       First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                 Panel A. Heterogeneity by SAT (controlling for GPA)
                                                                                                             Change in
                                                                                                         treatment effect
                                     Treatment          SAT score/100             Interaction            for 1 sd increase
               Outcome              (main effect)        (main effect)         (Treat*SAT/100)            in SAT (90 pts)
        Applied                          0.371                0.150                   -0.065                    -.059
                                        (0.023)              (0.013)                 (0.016)

        Admitted                         0.143                0.135                   0.034                      .031
                                        (0.018)              (0.012)                 (0.017)

        Enrolled                         0.120                0.101                   0.031                      .027
                                        (0.016)              (0.011)                 (0.017)

                                                 Panel B. Heterogeneity by GPA (controlling for SAT)
                                                                                                             Change in
                                                                                                          treatment effect
                                     Treatment              GPA                   Interaction            for 1 sd increase
                                    (main effect)        (main effect)           (Treat*GPA)            in GPA (0.185 pts)
        Applied                          0.374                0.461                   -0.095                    -.018
                                        (0.023)              (0.062)                 (0.081)

        Admitted                         0.145                0.569                   0.328                      .061
                                        (0.018)              (0.050)                 (0.070)

        Enrolled                         0.122                0.472                   0.270                      .05
                                        (0.016)              (0.045)                 (0.062)

        Number of students                                                    3,910
Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: Coefficients in Panel A are from student-level regression of the outcome on treatment, SAT score/100, the interaction between the
two, strata dummies, and dummies for bin of GPA. SAT score has been centered around its mean and scaled by 100; a one unit increase
should be interpreted as 100 points on the SAT. Coefficients in Panel B are from student-level regression of the outcome on treatment,
GPA, the interaction between the two, strata dummies, and dummies for bin of SAT score. GPA has been centered around its mean. The
standard deviations of SAT and GPA are calculated at the student level. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Application,
admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following expected high school graduation. Admission and enrollment are
unconditional on application.




                                                                  24
                                                 Table IX
            Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment
                                       by Student Gender and Race
                                      First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                  Panel A. Gender                Panel B. Race/Ethnicity
                                                                              White or
                                                   Male       Female           Asian         Black       Other
                 Applied                          0.406        0.422            0.438        0.262        0.242
                                                 (0.028)      (0.024)          (0.022)      (0.060)     (0.068)
                                                 [0.286]      [0.239]          [0.234]      [0.478]     [0.393]

                 Admitted                         0.141        0.188            0.182        0.072        0.043
                                                 (0.024)      (0.022)          (0.019)      (0.059)     (0.062)
                                                 [0.139]      [0.143]          [0.129]      [0.283]     [0.258]

                 Enrolled                         0.118        0.164            0.154        0.037        0.072
                                                 (0.022)      (0.021)          (0.018)      (0.055)     (0.058)
                                                 [0.105]      [0.115]          [0.103]      [0.234]     [0.199]

                 Number of school-years            729          855              948          206            191
                 Number of students               1,637        2,273            3,312         330            268
Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from separate regressions of school-subgroup-level outcome rate
on treatment status and strata dummies. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Control mean for subgroup in brackets. UM
application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following expected high school graduation. Admission and
enrollment are unconditional on application.




                                                               25
        Nearly half of black students in the control group applied to University of Michigan (48 percent),
compared to only 23 percent of white and Asian students. About a quarter of black students enrolled (23
percent), compared to ten percent of whites and Asians. The intervention reduced these differences by
equalizing treatment outcomes across racial groups: treatment effects on enrollment are largest for whites
and Asians (15 percentage points) and smaller (and imprecise) for other minority students (7 percentage
points) and black students (4 percentage points).
        Finally, we examine differences by gender. Men are known to be more confident in their skills than
women and are more likely to prefer competitive environments (Niederle and Vesterlund 2007). In the control
group, women were five percentage points less likely to apply than men (24 vs. 29 percent) but slightly more
likely to enroll (12 vs. 11 percent), suggesting that, absent the treatment, female applicants are more qualified
than male applicants. The HAIL treatment narrowed the gender gap in application from five percentage points
to three (66 percent of women and 69 percent of men applied to University of Michigan from the treatment
group) and widened the female advantage in enrollment from one percentage point to six. These results
are consistent with HAIL compensating for women’s lower levels of confidence about applying to a highly
selective school.


G     Summary of Mechanisms
        All of the above results point to a consistent finding: the HAIL intervention was most successful at
changing application behavior for the students who were least likely to apply, whether because of geographic
distance from the university, a lack of peers considering selective schools, or academic achievement. On the
other hand, the intervention was most successful in enrolling students who were previously disconnected from
the university but academically competitive enough to get in.
        To summarize these effects, we create a single index that captures how likely a student would be,
in the absence of the intervention, to attend a highly selective school, generated by estimating a regression
predicting attendance at a highly competitive (or above) college.33 We estimate this regression for cohorts of
low-income, high-achieving students in the two years prior to HAIL. We apply the estimated coefficients to
our analysis sample to obtain predicted probabilities of selective college-going.              34

        Figure VI shows how this index predicts observed application, admission, and enrollment, and how
the intervention changed the relationship. We display scatterplots with 20 equally sized bins of students,
where the x-value is the within-bin mean of the index. A quadratic line is fitted through the binned points.
For each of the three main outcomes, we show scatterplots by treatment status as well as a version that shows
treatment effects (the within-bin treatment – control difference).
        Focusing first on the application decision (panels (a) and (b)), there is a strong positive relationship
between the index and the likelihood of applying to the University of Michigan. The HAIL intervention
weakened this relationship, most affecting the applications of students who were, at baseline, least likely to
   33 Based on race, gender, ACT, GPA, urbanicity and region of high school, number of low-income, high-achieving students in the

school, historical school rate of UM attendance, and persistence of economic disadvantage. Attendance at a highly selective school
measured using data from the National Student Clearinghouse.
   34 The estimated coefficients from this exercise are shown in Appendix Table XII.




                                                               26
attend a selective school.
         For admission and enrollment, the picture tells a different story. As with application, the control
students with the highest predicted probabilities of selective attendance are most likely to be admitted and
enroll at the University of Michigan (this is true almost by construction). In contrast to the application
outcome, the treatment effects on admission and enrollment are larger for students who were more likely to
attend in the first place (though the treatment had a positive effect at every point on the distribution).


VII         W ELFARE E FFECTS AND U NINTENDED C ONSEQUENCES
         The results discussed thus far illustrate HAIL’s effect on sample students’ application and enrollment
at the University of Michigan. But the welfare implications are unclear. The intervention could have reduced
enrollment in other highly selective schools, for example.
         In this next section, we examine the implications of these behavioral responses for student and social
welfare. We test whether HAIL increased the share of low-income, high-achieving students attending highly
selective colleges, whether students induced to enroll persisted in college, how their financial aid packages
compared to other low-income students, and whether HAIL had any spillover effects on students attending
HAIL-treated schools.


A     Did the Intervention Poach Students from Other Selective Colleges?
         It is possible that the intervention simply diverted students from schools as selective as UM (e.g.,
Berkeley, Harvard), which would produce little change in (or even harm) the long-term welfare of the affected
students. It is also possible that the packet encouraged students to apply to selective schools other than
University of Michigan. We turn to data from the National Student Clearinghouse to examine enrollment
nationwide (we do not have application or admissions data for schools other than the University of Michigan).
         We find no diversion from colleges at least as selective as the University of Michigan (Table X
and Appendix Figure VIII). The offer of the HAIL scholarship increased enrollment at a highly (or most)
selective college by 14.6 percentage points. This is identical to the effect on attendance at University of
Michigan, which implies that on net, HAIL neither discouraged, nor encouraged students from enrolling at
other highly-selective institutions.35
         Students in the treatment group were 3.9 percentage points more likely to attend any post-secondary
institution than those in the control group. That is, roughly one quarter of the increase in enrollment at the
University of Michigan is driven by students who would not have attended any college in the absence of the
treatment. We did not anticipate this result; it seemed unlikely that students this well prepared would be on
the margin of not attending college.
         Additionally, the offer of HAIL increased the share of students enrolling at any four-year college (7.4
percentage points) and decreased the share enrolling at two-year colleges (3.5 percentage points). Together,

    35 This estimate (which uses National Student Clearinghouse data) and the previously discussed estimate (based on University of

Michigan data, Table III) are nearly identical: 14.6 versus 14.9 percentage points. The minor difference is attributable to differences in
the dates on which NSC and University of Michigan record enrollment.


                                                                   27
                                                                            Figure VI
                                   Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship by Predicted Probability of Selective College Attendance
                                                                 First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                          (a) Application by Predicted Probability of Selective                                           (b) Application Treatment Effect by Predicted Probability
                               College Attendance and Treatment Status                                                                 of Selective College Attendance

                                                                                                                                                                  .6
                              .8
                                          Treated students




                                                                                                                          Treatment Effect on Application to UM
                                                                                        Control students
  Proportion Applied to UM




                              .6
                                                                                                                                                                  .4



                              .4


                                                                                                                                                                  .2
                              .2



                              0                                                                                                                                   0
                                   -.2          0                    .2                   .4                    .6                                                         -.2         0                    .2                   .4        .6
                                           Predicted probability of attending a selective college                                                                                 Predicted probability of attending a selective college


(c) Admission by Predicted Probability of Selective College (d) Admission Treatment Effect by Predicted Probability of
            Attendance and Treatment Status                               Selective College Attendance

                              .8
                                                                                                                                                                  .25
                                                                                                                          Treatment Effect on Admission to UM




                                                                   Treated students
                              .6                                                                                                                                   .2
  Proportion Admitted to UM




                                                                                                                                                                  .15
                              .4                                                        Control students


                                                                                                                                                                   .1

                              .2

                                                                                                                                                                  .05


                              0
                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                   -.2          0                    .2                   .4                    .6                                                          -.2        0                    .2                   .4        .6
                                           Predicted probability of attending a selective college                                                                                 Predicted probability of attending a selective college


(e) Enrollment by Predicted Probability of Selective College (f) Enrollment Treatment Effect by Predicted Probability of
             Attendance and Treatment Status                                Selective College Attendance

                              .6

                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                   Treated students
                                                                                                                          Treatment Effect on Enrollment to UM
  Proportion Enrolled at UM




                              .4                                                             Control students                                                     .15



                                                                                                                                                                   .1
                              .2


                                                                                                                                                                  .05


                              0
                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                   -.2          0                    .2                   .4                    .6                                                          -.2        0                    .2                   .4        .6
                                           Predicted probability of attending a selective college                                                                                 Predicted probability of attending a selective college


Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: This analysis is done at the student level. Selective college attendance is predicted based on a regression of attending a highly
competitive or above school on race, gender, ACT, GPA, urbanicity and region of high school, number of eligible students in school,
historical school rate of UM attendance, and persistence of economic disadvantage, estimated on the two cohorts prior to HAIL.
Application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following expected high school graduation. Admission and
enrollment are unconditional on application.


                                                                                                                     28
                                                        Table X
                                Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on College Choice
                                            First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                   College attended                 Treatment effect          Control mean


                            Highly competitive or above                    0.146                  0.135
                                                                          (0.018)

                            UM                                             0.146                  0.107
                                                                          (0.016)

                            Highly competitive or above                    0.000                  0.028
                            other than UM                                 (0.007)

                            Four-year                                      0.074                  0.675
                                                                          (0.020)

                            Two-year                                      -0.035                  0.116
                                                                          (0.013)

                            Any                                            0.039                  0.791
                                                                          (0.018)

                            In Michigan                                    0.045                  0.727
                                                                          (0.020)

                            Public in Michigan                             0.062                  0.645
                                                                          (0.021)

                            Outside Michigan                              -0.006                  0.064
                                                                          (0.010)

                            Number of school-years                                    1,026
                            Number of students                                        3,910

Source: Michigan administrative data and National Student Clearinghouse data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from regressions of outcome on treatment status and strata dummies.
Robust standard errors reported. Enrollment is measured at the first college attended in the fall following expected high school graduation
and is unconditional on any college enrollment.




                                                                   29
these results show that nearly half of HAIL’s effect on enrollment is diversion from two-year colleges and
non-attendance. The other half of the enrollment effect is drawn from four-year colleges that are less selective
than the University of Michigan.36
         These results are consistent with responses from focus groups held among students from the treatment
group who enrolled at the University of Michigan. Of the 15 students interviewed in the focus groups, 12
had no intention of applying to the University of Michigan before the intervention. Typical among the target
institutions mentioned by students were regional, four-year institutions such as Grand Valley State, Ferris
State, Central Michigan University, Wayne State University, and Eastern Michigan University. One student
in the focus group had contemplated a two-year college, while another explained that they “didn’t count on
going to college at all until I got the packet” (Glasener et al. 2018, and unpublished focus group transcripts).


B     Did Students Induced to Attend Quickly Drop Out?
         Did those induced by HAIL into a highly selective college persist in college, or quickly drop out?
Before undermatch was a hot topic, overmatch was a key concern, with some worried that disadvantaged
students induced to attend highly selective schools would not be able to handle the academic competition.
But recent research suggests that students are more likely to graduate if they attend the best school they can
get into (Hoekstra 2009; Zimmerman 2014; Dillon and Smith 2018). While we cannot yet observe graduation,
we do have data on attendance in two consecutive years for the first cohort of students, which allows us to
examine persistence in college. We find that the HAIL effects persist into the second year (Table XI). Students
offered the HAIL Scholarship are 13.5 percentage points more likely than controls to be enrolled in a highly
(or most) selective college for two years. That is, the two-year effect on attending such a selective college is
88 percent (=13.5/15.3) of the one-year effect.
         On all other measures, we find larger treatment effects over a two-year horizon than over one year.
Students offered HAIL are 11 percentage points more likely to be enrolled in a four-year college for two
years (the one-year effect is 9.1 percentage points), and they are eight percentage points more likely than
controls to enroll in any college for two consecutive years. This is partly driven by HAIL getting students into
college in the first place (the increase of four percentage points seen in Table X) and partly by inframarginal
college students attending a more selective college with a higher retention rate.37 This is consistent with
the hypothesis that students induced into more selective schools, with their better-prepared peers and more
resources, are more likely to remain in school and graduate.


    36 Appendix Table XIV presents subgroup results by region, urbanicity, race, and gender. Consistent with results discussed thus far,

we found largest college enrollment effects among students in the more rural areas of the state, substantially narrowing urban/rural gaps
in college choices. Effects were slightly larger for women compared to men, particularly on the any-college margin. Results by race were
more nuanced: in the absence of the treatment, white and Asian treated students would have attended less selective four-year institutions,
while treated students from other minority groups would not have gone to college at all or would have attended two-year institutions. We
found no statistically significant effects on college choice for black students, though point estimates are noisy.
    37 Persistence effects are largest in suburban and rural areas of the state, and for female students (see Appendix Table XVI). Persistence

effects by race/ethnicity are consistent with the initial enrollment results: we find larger effects among white and Asian students, while
effects for other racial minorities are noisy and often not significant. Control group means were also higher among these other minorities,
which again points to the treatment having the largest impact on students who were otherwise less likely to attend a highly selective
school.


                                                                     30
C     Was the Intervention Costly?
         The cost of printing and mailing the intervention packages was low, approximately $10 per student.
Beyond the cost of the packet, did the promise of free tuition cost the university more in financial aid than they
would otherwise provide low-income students? In analyzing prior cohorts of low-income students enrolled at
the University of Michigan, we found that 90 percent of students received at least a full-tuition scholarship.
This implies that, for the vast majority of students in our sample, the HAIL scholarship offer informs students
about financial aid for which they were already eligible.

                                                   Table XI
                   Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on College Enrollment and Persistence
                                              First HAIL Cohort

                                        Attended fall following high school                  Attended two consecutive falls
                                                    graduation                              following high school graduation
         College attended               Treatment effect          Control mean              Treatment effect        Control mean


 Highly competitive or above                   0.153                   0.129                       0.135                 0.126
                                              (0.024)                                             (0.023)

 UM                                            0.147                   0.104                       0.128                 0.102
                                              (0.022)                                             (0.022)

 Four-year                                     0.091                   0.651                       0.109                 0.557
                                              (0.028)                                             (0.029)

 Any                                           0.057                   0.779                       0.079                 0.683
                                              (0.025)                                             (0.027)

 Number of school-years                                                             529
 Number of students                                                                2,108

Source: Michigan administrative data and National Student Clearinghouse data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from regressions of outcome on treatment status and strata dummies.
Robust standard errors reported. Enrollment is measured at the first college attended in the two falls following expected high school
graduation and is unconditional on any college enrollment.



         Not surprisingly then, we find no significant differences in the financial aid packages of students in
the treatment and control groups who enrolled at the University of Michigan (see Table XII). Since HAIL
induced students to enroll, we do not interpret these results in any causal way, but provide this information
to illustrate that HAIL students were treated identically (in terms of their financial aid packages) as other
low-income students enrolled at the University of Michigan.
         Students from the treatment and control groups came from families with similar incomes ($36,000),
and similar expected family contributions (just over $3,000). Treated students had slightly higher earnings
than those in the control group, of about $300 in their first year of college, but financial aid packages were
nearly identical. Both treatment and control students received, on average, around $24,000 in grants and
scholarships in their first year, and the vast majority of that came from university grants. Approximately 85

                                                                 31
percent of students received Pell grants, and the average amount was over $4,000. Treated students were
slightly more likely to receive work study, generating differences in their average work study amounts. These
comparisons are quite similar in the first and second year of enrollment. Overall, Table XII suggests that HAIL
does not cost the university more in terms of financial aid than they would otherwise provide low-income
students.




                                                      32
                                                                                     Table XII
                          Financial Aid for HAIL Treatment and Control Students Enrolled at UM, by Year of College Enrollment (Non-experimental Results)
                                                                          First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                                                                                         First Year                                 Second Year
                                                                                                                    Mean                                          Mean
                                                                                                          Treatment         Control       P-Value       Treatment        Control       P-Value


                              Adjusted Gross Income (Parent)                                                $36,029        $35,553         0.850         $36,261         $37,144         0.737
                                                                                                             (1368)         (2294)                        (1434)          (2397)
                              Adjusted Gross Income (Student, Dependent)                                    $1,001           $674          0.034         $1,379            $947          0.019
                                                                                                               (97)           (95)                         (118)           (117)
                              Expected Family Contribution                                                  $3,306         $3,312          0.989         $3,171          $3,621          0.354
                                                                                                              (267)          (401)                         (250)           (472)

                              Total Grants + Scholarships                                                   $23,907        $24,566         0.138         $24,525         $25,413         0.095
                                                                                                             (214)          (460)                         (280)           (501)
33




                              UM Grants                                                                     $18,977        $19,431         0.193         $19,559         $20,129         0.170
                                                                                                             (153)          (388)                         (204)           (420)
                              Pell Grant                                                                    $4,299         $4,537          0.168         $4,287          $4,516          0.217
                                                                                                             (100)          (139)                         (109)           (149)
                              State Grants                                                                    $31            $40           0.609           $88            $142           0.019
                                                                                                              (11)           (13)                          (13)            (19)
                              Federal Grants                                                                 $600           $557           0.459          $592            $626           0.568
                                                                                                              (33)           (47)                          (34)            (48)

                              Loans                                                                         $1,752          $1,342         0.063          $1,946          $1,543         0.099
                                                                                                             (128)           (175)                         (143)           (195)
                              Work Study                                                                    $1,625          $1,144         0.000          $1,482          $1,305         0.105
                                                                                                              (60)            (86)                          (64)            (89)

                              Number of students in the study                                                1,932           1,978         3,910           1,932          1,978          3,910
                              Number of students enrolled at UM                                               480             238           718             450            235            685
                              Number of students with FAFSA data                                              478             234           712             440            228            668
                              Number of students with data on aid awarded                                     480             236           716             450            232            682

     Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
     Notes: Analyses done at the student level, for students enrolled at UM and with financial aid information available. First Year refers to the first year of college enrollment, i.e., the academic year following high
     school graduation.
D     Did the Intervention Discourage Any Students?
         There are at least two ways in which the intervention could have harmed some students. Students in the
treatment group who applied but were rejected from the University of Michigan may have been discouraged
from applying to or attending other colleges. A second channel is that HAIL may have affected students
outside of the study population. The University of Michigan is a highly-selective college: If a HAIL student
gains admission, it means that another student does not. By implication, there would be spillover effects on
students outside of the study population. For instance, peers attending HAIL-treated schools who saw their
classmates receive these offers but did not receive them themselves may have been discouraged from applying
to the University of Michigan. Additionally, if the university uses informal quotas for each high school, an
additional HAIL student gaining admission could crowd out other applicants from the same high school.
         For the first type of student—those from the treatment group who applied but were rejected—the key
question is whether they would have been better off if they had not applied at all than to have applied and
been rejected. One scenario is that students are so encouraged by the mailings that they focus all of their
application efforts on University of Michigan, to the exclusion of other colleges. This would tend to reduce
the rate of college attendance in the treatment group, relative to the control group.
         While we cannot use the experimental design to address this question directly since we do not have
random variation in admission among applicants, we find that the treatment increased the likelihood of
attending any college by four percentage points and the likelihood of attending a four-year college by seven
percentage points (see Table X). If there were any discouragement effects they were more than offset by the
encouragement effects of the intervention.
         The HAIL intervention may have also affected the college choices of high school classmates who were
ineligible for the HAIL scholarship (those who failed to meet the income or academic criteria). The sign of
any spillover effect is theoretically ambiguous. Seeing a peer offered the HAIL Scholarship may suggest to a
student that she is not University of Michigan material, decreasing the likelihood of application. On the other
hand, seeing a peer offered the HAIL scholarship may make the University of Michigan seem more accessible
to students (or adults around them), thereby increasing the likelihood of application. Finally, the University
of Michigan may have informal quotas for each school, which would mechanically constrain admissions for
classmates.
         To check for spillover effects, we replicate our analysis among students not eligible for HAIL, with
the treatment dummy indicating that their school is in the HAIL treatment group. We find no evidence of
negative (or positive) spillover effects on students attending HAIL-treated schools who did not receive the
offer.38 Despite dramatically increasing enrollment of low-income, high-achieving students, this result is not
entirely surprising, since HAIL students make up a small fraction of the total freshman class size. Each year,
HAIL induced approximately 150 additional students to enroll, while the freshman class at the University of
    38 See Appendix Table XVII. In unconditional regression models, we find that the application rate is 1.1 percentage points lower for

non-HAIL students at treatment schools than at control schools. But, after we control for baseline application rates, this negative spillover
effect disappears. Recall (see Table II) that the treatment and control schools were slightly imbalanced on this baseline attribute. Among
cohorts graduating prior to the HAIL scholarship intervention, students from treated schools were 1.2 percentage points less likely to
apply to the University of Michigan than students from control schools.


                                                                    34
Michigan is over 6,000 students.39


VIII          C ONCLUSION
         We close the paper with the statistics that motivated it: gaps in college choice between low-income
students and their higher-income peers in Michigan (Figure VII). HAIL closed by half the income gap in
college attendance among high-achieving students: the college attendance rate is 88 percent among upper-income
students, 85 percent among low-income students in the treatment group, and 81 percent among low-income
students in the control group.
         HAIL also narrowed, eliminated, and even reversed income gaps in college selectivity. The intervention
shifted students away from two-year and less selective four-year colleges (Table X and Appendix Figure VIII).
The gap in attending an institution considered “selective” or above was reduced from 12 percentage points to
4 percentage points, and the income gap in attending an institution considered “very selective” or above was
eliminated. Low-income, high-achieving students offered HAIL are more likely to attend a university at least
as selective as University of Michigan than their higher-income peers: 26 vs. 20 percent, respectively. We
find no evidence that HAIL diverted students from other highly selective institutions. Finally, these effects
have lasted: students offered the HAIL Scholarship have persisted in college at substantially higher rates than
students in the control group.
         These results indicate that a low-cost, low-touch intervention can strongly affect student application
and enrollment at selective colleges. This contrasts with the conclusion of Carrell and Sacerdote (2017) that
only high-touch, “boots on the ground” interventions can have large effects on students’ decisions to apply to
and attend college.
         The behavioral patterns uncovered by this study have broad implications for policy. People frequently
make consequential decisions in complex, uncertain environments. Our study adds to a body of evidence
showing that the design of those environments can profoundly shape the decisions made (Madrian and Shea
2001; Pallais 2015; Herd and Moynihan 2018; Marx and Turner 2019).
         This is true whether the design is intentional or the product of a series of uncoordinated decisions.
Like many means-tested programs, the student aid system in the US is rife with detailed rules and extensive
paperwork. Many of these rules are the accidental product of well-intentioned actors. A legislator may,
for example, sponsor a provision to extend additional aid to homeless students. Depending on how this is
implemented, this could further add to program complexity. In 2007, Congress passed legislation guaranteeing
aid eligibility to homeless students. The Department of Education implemented this directive by adding three
lengthy, legalistic questions to the FAFSA that probe for homeless status.
         The broadest conclusion to be drawn is that the “last mile” of policy implementation can have serious
distributional consequences. The design of a user interface, the length of a form, and the timing of information
delivery can have profound effects on behavior. Research suggests that this is especially true for poor people
    39 In the first year of the intervention, the University of Michigan grew its class size, meaning that the increase in low-income students

enrolling because of HAIL would not necessarily displace other students. In the second year, while no such class size adjustments were
intentionally made, the entering freshman class was also substantially larger than in previous years.


                                                                     35
                                                                   Figure VII
                                    Selectivity of Colleges Attended by High-Achieving Michigan Students,
                                                     by Income and HAIL Treatment Status
                                                         First and Second HAIL Cohorts



                           100                                                          HAIL Control
                                                88                                      HAIL Treated
                                           85
                                      81
                                                                                        Non-low-income high-achieving
                             80                                   77
                                                             73

                                                        65
    Percent of students




                             60
                                                                              47   46

                             40                                          34

                                                                                                 26
                                                                                                      20
                             20                                                             14


                                                                                                              1     1     2
                              0
                                      Any College       Competitive          Very             Highly            Most
                                                         or Above         Competitive       Competitive       Competitive
                                                                           or Above          or Above

Source: Michigan administrative data and National Student Clearinghouse data.
Notes: Sample is 11th grade students in Michigan public schools in 2015 and 2016 who meet HAIL GPA and ACT/SAT criteria.
College enrollment measured at first institution attended in fall following expected high school graduation. Low-income means eligible
for free or reduced-price lunch in 11th grade. Selectivity categories from Barron’s selectivity index.


(Mullainathan and Shafir 2013). But even among white-collar professionals, details of program administration
can affect decisions as consequential as whether to save for retirement. Making employee participation in a
company 401(k) opt-out rather than opt-in dramatically increases savings rates (Madrian and Shea 2001).
                          Most narrowly, our results inform the current discussion about “free college,” a policy that is widely
discussed in state legislatures, in presidential campaigns, and on Capitol Hill. Our findings suggest that the
implementation details will be central to the success of these tuition policies. Critics have noted that some
of these programs do nothing to reduce college costs for low-income students, who are already eligible for
need-based aid that can fully cover the cost of tuition. They therefore, the argument goes, primarily benefit
middle- and upper-income students who do not get need-based aid.
                          Ex ante, a critic could have precisely made the same critique of our intervention, which did not change
the price of college for low-income students. These students were already eligible for the scholarships
we offered them. Yet, as we found in our experiment, the details of how “free tuition” is presented will
substantially shape its impact. Free-college programs can be designed with required aid forms and back-loaded


                                                                        36
information about eligibility, which is what our control students experienced. Alternatively, they can offer an
early, broad guarantee, which is what our treatment students were given.
       Our findings suggest that a system that is based on high tuition and high aid for low-income students
may not be as effective as a free-tuition regime if the former requires time and effort to learn the net cost of
attendance. A free-tuition regime may be worth the loss of targeting if it helps reduce inequality in educational
decisions.

R EFERENCES
Ainslie, George. 1975. “Specious reward: a behavioral theory of impulsiveness and impulse control.”
  Psychological bulletin, 82(4): 463.
Andrews, Rodney J, Scott A Imberman, and Michael F Lovenheim. 2016. “Recruiting and supporting
  low-income, high-achieving students at flagship universities.” NBER Working Paper No. 22260, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Athey, Susan, and Guido W Imbens. 2017. “The Econometrics of Randomized Experiments.” In Handbook
  of Economic Field Experiments. Vol. 1, 73–140. Elsevier.
Avery, Christopher, and Caroline Hoxby. 2003. “Do and should financial aid packages affect students’
  college choices?” NBER Working Paper No. 9482, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
  MA.
Avery, Christopher, and Thomas J Kane. 2004. “Student perceptions of college opportunities: The Boston
  COACH program.” In College choices: The economics of where to go, when to go, and how to pay for it.
  University of Chicago Press Chicago.
Bailey, Martha, and Susan M Dynarski. 2011. “Inequality in postsecondary attainment.” In Whither
  Opportunity. Russell Sage New York.
Baum, Sandy, and Saul Schwartz. 2015. “Student aid, student behavior, and educational attainment.” In
  Decision making for student success: Behavioral insights to improve college access and persistence.
  Routledge New York.
Benjamin, Daniel, James Choi, and Joshua Strickland. 2010. “Social identity and preferences.” American
  Economic Review, 100(4): 1913–28.
Bergman, Peter, Jeffrey T. Denning, and Dayanand Manoli. 2019. “Is information enough? The
  effect of information about education tax benefits on student outcomes.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
  Management, 0(0): 1–26.
Bergman, Peter, Jeffrey T Denning, and Day Manoli. 2017. “Broken tax breaks? Evidence from a tax
  credit information experiment with 1,000,000 students.” Working paper.
Beshears, J, James Choi, David Laibson, and B Madrian. 2013. “Simplification and saving.” Journal of
  Economic Behavior and Organization, 95(1): 130–145.
Bettinger, Eric, and Robert Slonim. 2007. “Patience among children.” Journal of Public Economics,
  91(1-2): 343–363.
Bettinger, Eric P, Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopoulos, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2012. “The role
  of application assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA
  experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1205–1242.
Black, Dan A, and Jeffrey A Smith. 2006. “Estimating the returns to college quality with multiple proxies
  for quality.” Journal of labor Economics, 24(3): 701–728.
Bowen, William G, Matthew M Chingos, and Michael S McPherson. 2009. Crossing the finish line:
  Completing college at America’s public universities. Princeton University Press.
Bulman, George. 2015. “The effect of access to college assessments on enrollment and attainment.”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(4): 1–36.
Caetano, Gegorio, Miguel Palacios, and Harry Patrinos. 2019. “Measuring aversion to debt: An
  experiment among student loan candidates.” Journal of Family and Economic Issues, 40(1): 117–131.
Calender, C, and J Jackson. 2005. “Does the fear of debt deter students from higher education?” Journal of
  Social Policy, 34(4): 509–540.
Carrell, Scott, and Bruce Sacerdote. 2017. “Why do college-going interventions work?” American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(3): 124–51.


                                                       37
Castleman, Benjamin L, and Lindsay C Page. 2016. “Freshman year financial aid nudges: An experiment
  to increase FAFSA renewal and college persistence.” Journal of Human Resources, 51(2): 389–415.
Chapman, Sandra B, Jacquelyn F Gamino, and Raksha Anand Mudar. 2012. “Higher order strategic
  gist reasoning in adolescence.” In The adolescent brain: Learning, reasoning, and decision making. ,
  ed. Valerie F Reyna, Sandra B Chapman, Michael R Dougherty and Jere Confrey, 123–151. American
  Psychological Association.
Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan. 2017. “Mobility
  report cards: The role of colleges in intergenerational mobility.” NBER Working Paper No. 23618, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Cohodes, Sarah R, and Joshua S Goodman. 2014. “Merit aid, college quality, and college completion:
  Massachusetts’ Adams scholarship as an in-kind subsidy.” American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 6(4): 251–85.
Damgaard, Mette, and Helena Nielsen. 2018. “Nudging in education.” Economics of Education Review,
  64(1): 313–342.
Dillon, Eleanor Wiske, and Jeffrey Andrew Smith. 2017. “Determinants of the match between student
  ability and college quality.” Journal of Labor Economics, 35(1): 45–66.
Dillon, Eleanor Wiske, and Jeffrey A Smith. 2018. “The consequences of academic match between students
  and colleges.” NBER Working Paper No. 25069, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Dynarski, Susan M, and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2006. “Cost of complexity in federal student aid: Lessons
  from optimal tax theory and behavioral economics.” National Tax Journal, 59(2): 319–356.
Fernandes, Daniel, John G Lynch Jr, and Richard G Netemeyer. 2014. “Financial literacy, financial
  education, and downstream financial behaviors.” Management Science, 60(8): 1861–1883.
Field, Erica. 2009. “Educational debt burden and career choice: Evidence from a financial aid experiment at
  NYU law school.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1): 1–21.
Fischer, Mira, and Valentin Wagner. 2018. “Effects of timing and reference frame of feedback: Evidence
  from a field experiment.” IZA Discussion Paper.
Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue. 2002. “Time discounting and time
  preference: A critical review.” Journal of economic literature, 40(2): 351–401.
French, Robert, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2017. “Behavioral barriers transitioning to college.” Labour
  Economics, 47(1): 48–63.
Galván, Adriana. 2012. “Risky behavior in adolescents: The role of the developing brain.” In The adolescent
  brain: Learning, reasoning, and decision making. , ed. Valerie F Reyna, Sandra B Chapman, Michael R
  Dougherty and Jere Confrey, 267–289. American Psychological Association.
Glasener, Kristen, Kelly Slay, Steven Lonn, and Kedra Ishop. 2018. “Beyond Access: Examining
  Low-Income Students’ Academic and Social Transition to a Highly Selective Public University.” Working
  Paper, Univeristy of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
Goldrick-Rab, Sara, Robert Kelchen, Douglas N Harris, and James Benson. 2016. “Reducing income
  inequality in educational attainment: Experimental evidence on the impact of financial aid on college
  completion.” American Journal of Sociology, 121(6): 1762–1817.
Goodman, Joshua. 2016. “Learning from the test: Raising selective college enrollment by providing
  information.” Review of Economics of Statistics, 98(4): 671–684.
Gurantz, Oded, Jessica Howell, Michael Hurwitz, Cassandra Larson, Matea Pender, and Brooke
  White. 2019. “Realizing Your College Potential? Impacts of College Board’s RYCP Campaign
  on Postsecondary Enrollment.” EdWorkingPaper No.19-40, Annenberg Institute at Brown Univeristy,
  Providence, RI.
Herd, Pamela, and Donald Moynihan. 2018. Administrative burden: Policymaking by other means. Russell
  Sage Foundation.
Hoekstra, Mark. 2009. “The effect of attending the flagship state university on earnings: A
  discontinuity-based approach.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4): 717–724.
Hoxby, Caroline, and Sarah Turner. 2013. “Expanding college opportunities for high-achieving, low
  income students.” Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 12-014, Stanford,
  CA.
Hoxby, Caroline M, and Christopher Avery. 2012. “The missing “one-offs": The hidden supply of
  high-achieving, low income students.” NBER Working Paper No. 18586, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Cambridge, MA.


                                                    38
Hyman, Joshua. 2019. “Can Light-Touch College-Going Interventions Make a Difference? Evidence From
  a Statewide Experiment in Michigan.” Forthcoming, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.
Jabbar, Huriya. 2011. “The behavioral economics of education: New directions for research.” Educational
  Researcher, 40(9): 446–453.
Jensen, Robert. 2010. “The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 125(2): 515–548.
Johnson, Eric, and Daniel Goldstein. 2009. “Do defaults save lives?” Science, 302(1): 1338–1339.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2003. “Maps of bounded rationality: Psychology for behavioral economics.” American
  economic review, 93(5): 1449–1475.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.”
  Econometrica, 47(2): 263–291.
Koch, Alexander, Julia Nafziger, and Helena Nielsen. 2015. “Behavioral economics of education.” Journal
  of Economic Behavior and Organization, 115(1): 3–17.
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  112(2): 443–478.
Lavecchia, Adam, Heidi Liu, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2016. “Behavioral economics of education: Progress
  and possibilities.” In Handbook of Economics of Education. Vol. 5. Elsevier.
Madrian, Brigitte, and Dennis Shea. 2001. “The Power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) participation and
  savings behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1149–1187.
Marx, Benjamin, and Lesley Turner. 2019. “Student loan nudges: Experimental evidence on borrowing and
  educational attainment.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(2): 108–141.
Michelmore, Katherine, and Susan Dynarski. 2017. “The gap within the gap: Using longitudinal data to
  understand income differences in educational outcomes.” AERA Open, 3(1): 2332858417692958.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Eldar Shafir. 2013. Scarcity: Why having too little means so much. Macmillan.
Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2007. “Do women shy away from competition? Do men compete
  too much?” The quarterly journal of economics, 122(3): 1067–1101.
Oreopoulos, Philip, and Reuben Ford. 2019. “Keeping college options open: A field experiment to help all
  high school seniors through the college application process.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
  38(2): 426–454.
Oreopoulos, Philip, and Ryan Dunn. 2013. “Information and college access: Evidence from a randomized
  field experiment.” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 115(1): 3–26.
Pallais, Amanda. 2015. “Small differences that matter: mistakes in applying to college.” Journal of Labor
  Economics, 33(2): 493–520.
Patterson, Richard, Nolan Pope, and Aaron Feudo. 2019. “Timing is Everything: Evidence from College
  Major Decisons.” CESifo Working Paper.
Roderick, Melissa, Vanessa Coca, and Jenny Nagaoka. 2011. “Potholes on the road to college: High
  school effects in shaping urban students’ participation in college application, four-year college enrollment,
  and college match.” Sociology of Education, 84(3): 178–211.
Scott-Clayton, Judith. 2012. “What explains trends in labor supply among U.S. undergraduates.” National
  Tax Journal, 65(1): 181–210.
Smith, Jonathan, Matea Pender, and Jessica Howell. 2013. “The full extent of student-college academic
  undermatch.” Economics of Education Review, 32: 247–261.
Stanovich, Keith E, Richard F West, and Maggie E Toplak. 2012. “Judgment and decision making in
  adolescence: Separating intelligence from rationality.” In The adolescent brain: Learning, reasoning, and
  decision making. , ed. Valerie F Reyna, Sandra B Chapman, Michael R Dougherty and Jere Confrey,
  337–378. American Psychological Association.
Zimmerman, Seth D. 2014. “The returns to college admission for academically marginal students.” Journal
  of Labor Economics, 32(4): 711–754.




                                                      39
F OR O NLINE P UBLICATION : A PPENDICES
A     HAIL Materials
A.1   Student Packet




                       Exhibit I Front view of packet




                       Exhibit II Back view of packet




                                    40
        Exhibit III Inside flap of packet




Exhibit IV Open view of packet; insert materials




                       41
Exhibit V Packet insert: Becoming a Wolverine Guide




                        42
A.2   Parent Letter
Dear Parent or Guardian of <<first name>> <<last name>>:

Success in life is due, in part, to seizing opportunities as they are presented. Since your child is an excellent
student, we want to offer a potentially transformative college opportunity: If <<first name>> applies and
is admitted to the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor, your child will be awarded the HAIL Scholarship
covering the entire cost of U-M tuition and fees for four years. This is an offer we are delighted to make,
worth approximately $60,000. Furthermore, after a review of their financial aid applications, your student
will likely be eligible for additional aid to cover other costs such as housing and textbooks.

The ability to pay for college shouldn’t determine whether or not a child attends. All academically high-achieving
seniors, like <<first name>>, have worked hard and challenged themselves throughout high school, and
deserve access to an outstanding college experience. A world of opportunity is within reach in Ann Arbor–relatively
close to home–where one of the top 25 universities in the world offers the resources and support that enables
our students to stay in school, graduate, and achieve great things.

<<first name>> should have recently received a separate packet in the mail with more information on
applying to Michigan. We know the process can be challenging, and we want to assure you that we’re here to
support <<first name>> and make it as easy as possible.

We encourage your student to apply for admission by our November 1 Early Action deadline, or no later than
our February 1 Regular Decision deadline. Our brochure shows the steps to applying through the Common
Application, with the $75 fee waived. We will also waive the $25 application fee for the CSS/Profile, which
is available October 1 and will enable your student to be considered for additional aid from U-M. The Free
Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) will be open January 1, 2016, and will likely provide your
student additional federal aid to cover other costs.

You and <<first name>> can also visit a special website together to find out more information about how
your student was selected for this scholarship, as well as contact information for personal U-M admissions
and financial aid counselors, and a place to sign up for a free U-M t-shirt. Your student’s packet contains their
personalized website address.

At Michigan, we’re deeply committed to college access and equity for Michigan high school students. I’m
excited to offer this unique opportunity to attend one of the world’s premier universities with tuition and fees
completely covered, should your student apply and be admitted.

If you have any questions, do not hesitate to contact Jody Gore in our Office of Undergraduate Admissions at
734-764-7433, or Steven Foster in our Office of Financial Aid at 734-763-2941.

Sincerely,
Kedra Ishop, PhD
Associate Vice President
Office of Enrollment Management




                                                       43
A.3   Principal Letter
Dear {PRINCIPAL FIRST} {PRINCIPAL LAST},

I’m delighted to inform you that several seniors in your school are eligible for our pilot HAIL Scholarship,
an outstanding offer of four years of free in-state tuition and fees at the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor,
a value of about $60,000 per student. Furthermore, they will likely qualify for more aid to cover additional
expenses such as housing and textbooks if they apply for aid.

As a public institution committed to the well-being of the residents of the state of Michigan, we want to
increase academic opportunities among Michigan’s high-achieving, low-income teens. The HAIL Scholarship
is a unique effort to show talented seniors who qualify for free or reduced lunch that a world of opportunity
is accessible relatively close to home.

The list of your students who qualify for the scholarship is attached. We hope you might meet with them and
tell them a little about the University of Michigan, our stellar academic ranking, renowned professors, and
near-limitless list of majors. You can see more at admissions.umich.edu.

The students will receive an information packet from us, which outlines how they apply to Michigan through
the Common Application - with their $75 admissions fee waived - and instructions on how to file the correct
forms and documentation for additional financial aid. Students will need to file the Free Application for
Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) when it opens Jan. 1, and the CSS/Profile, which opens Oct. 1, to receive
likely additional aid to cover other expenses. We will waive the $25 CSS/Profile processing fee.

Students will also be given a link to a personalized scholarship website, which provides even more clarification
about the scholarship, and a connection to personal U-M admissions and financial aid counselors.

We are excited to offer this special scholarship opportunity, and we hope your eligible students take advantage
of it by applying before our Early Action deadline of November 1, or no later than our Regular Decision
deadline of February 1.

If you have any questions, please feel free to contact Jody Gore in the Office of Undergraduate Admissions at
734-764-7433, Steven Foster in the Office of Financial Aid at 734-763-2941, or your school’s U-M admissions
counselor, who can be found here: http://admissions.umich.edu/contact-us Go Blue!

Sincerely,
Kedra Ishop, PhD
Associate Vice President
Office of Enrollment Management

University of Michigan - Ann Arbor HAIL Scholarship-eligible students.
Please inform your University of Michigan - Ann Arbor admissions counselor if a student no longer attends
your school.

{STUDENT FIRST} {STUDENT LAST}, {BIRTHDATE}




                                                      44
B    Randomization-Based Inference
       The effects presented here are extremely large and are unlikely to have occurred by chance. We
demonstrate this with a simulation exercise following Athey and Imbens (2017), who recommend randomization-
based statistical inference for significance tests. This approach calculates the likelihood of obtaining the
observed treatment effects by random chance, where the randomness comes from assignment of a fixed
number of units (in our case, high schools) to treatment, rather than from random sampling from a population.
       Using the first and second cohorts of 1,026 schools, we re-assign treatment status using the same
procedure used in the original randomization. We then estimate “treatment effects” based on this reassignment.
We repeat this procedure 10,000 times to generate a distribution of potential treatment effects that could be due
to baseline differences between schools assigned to treatment and control. For each outcome, we calculate the
share of the 10,000 simulated treatment-control differences that is larger in absolute value than the difference
observed in the actual random assignment discussed throughout the paper. This proportion represents the
randomization-based p-value.
       The results are summarized in Appendix Figure III, where we plot the distribution of treatment effects
from the 10,000 iterations for a selection of outcomes. The dashed vertical line in each graph plots the actual
treatment effect. Results are also presented in Appendix Table VI.
       Our findings cannot be explained by random differences between the treatment and control schools. As
we would expect under successful randomization, for each outcome the average simulated treatment effect is
zero, indicating no difference between the randomly-assigned treated and control schools in average outcomes
over 10,000 iterations.
       For our key outcome, enrollment at University of Michigan, we never observe a simulated treatment
effect as large as the actual treatment effect in any of the 10,000 iterations. In other words, the randomization-
based p-value is precisely zero. For the other outcomes, the randomization-based p-values are comparable
to the sampling-based p-values shown earlier in the paper. For example, we showed earlier that the offer of
HAIL increased college enrollment by 3.9 percentage points, with a sampling-based p-value of 0.031. In the
simulations, we observe a treatment effect this large 385 times out of 10,000, or 3.9 percent of the time (a
randomization-based p-value of 0.039).
       For enrollment at any highly selective institution and enrollment at a four-year institution, there
is less than a four percent chance of observing an effect at least as large as the actual treatment effect
in the 10,000 simulations. Although they represent different conceptual approaches, the sampling-based
and randomization-based analyses produce virtually identical conclusions about the effects of the HAIL
intervention.




                                                       45
C   Appendix Tables

                                         Appendix Table I
               Number of Students in Schools in Treatment and Control Group, by Cohort

                                                                   Number of       Number of
                                                                    schools         students
                  First cohort
                  Treatment                                            262           1,057
                  Control                                              267           1,051

                  Total Y1                                             529           2,108

                  Second cohort
                  Treatment (from Y1)                                  211            832
                  Treatment (newly randomized)                         27             43
                  Treated in Y1, no HAIL students in Y2                51              -
                  Total Treatment                                      238            875

                  Control (from Y1)                                    227            867
                  Control (newly randomized)                           32             60
                  Control in Y1, no HAIL students in Y2                 40             -
                  Total Control                                        259            927

                  Total Y2                                             497           1,802

                     Source: Michigan administrative data.




                                          Appendix Table II
                           Balance Table: Full Set of School Characteristics
                                   First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                                       Mean
                     Characteristic                   Control schools        Treated schools   P-value
        Region, urbanicity, and distance
        Upper Peninsula                                       0.150               0.130        0.344
                                                             (0.016)             (0.015)
        West Central                                          0.449               0.476        0.359
                                                             (0.022)             (0.022)
        Southeast                                             0.401               0.394        0.788
                                                             (0.021)             (0.022)
        Suburban                                              0.340               0.360        0.537
                                                             (0.021)             (0.021)
        City                                                  0.129               0.100        0.148
                                                             (0.015)             (0.013)
        Rural                                                 0.530               0.540        0.718
                                                             (0.022)             (0.022)
        Distance from UM                                       93.2                96.4        0.529
                                                             (3.545)             (3.673)


                                                                               Continued on next page

                                                        46
                                              Appendix Table II (Continued)
                                      Balance Table: Full Set of School Characteristics
                                              First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                                                      Mean
                              Characteristic                       Control schools         Treated schools          P-value
               Student demographic characteristics
               Proportion female                                           0.571                  0.605              0.112
                                                                          (0.015)                (0.015)
               Proportion white or Asian                                   0.834                  0.844              0.576
                                                                          (0.013)                (0.012)
               Proportion black                                            0.094                  0.087              0.618
                                                                          (0.011)                (0.010)
               Proportion other race/ethnicity                             0.072                  0.069              0.803
                                                                          (0.009)                (0.008)
               Proportion free lunch eligible                              0.709                  0.692              0.459
                                                                          (0.014)                (0.015)
               Proportion reduced-price lunch                              0.291                  0.308              0.459
               eligible                                                   (0.014)                (0.015)

               Student academic characteristics
               Average SAT (or equivalent)                                 1254                   1260               0.194
                                                                          (2.690)                (2.896)
               Average GPA                                                  3.82                  3.83               0.208
                                                                          (0.006)                (0.006)
               Proportion limited English proficient                       0.002                  0.004              0.410
                                                                          (0.001)                (0.001)
               Proportion receiving special                                0.009                  0.013              0.367
               education services                                         (0.003)                (0.004)
               Proportion who sent ACT/SAT                                 0.365                  0.377              0.695
               scores to UM                                               (0.015)                (0.016)
               UM application rate in 2015                                 0.067                  0.055              0.016
                                                                          (0.004)                (0.004)
               Missing 2015 app rate                                       0.004                  0.020              0.015
                                                                          (0.003)                (0.006)

               School size
               # of 11th grade students in school                          189.1                  175.1              0.055
                                                                          (6.188)                (6.126)
               # of HAIL students in school                                 3.8                    3.9               0.649
                                                                          (0.140)                (0.163)

               Number of schools                                           526                     500               1,026
               Number of students                                         1,978                   1,978              3,910

Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. P-values are from a t-test of the coefficient on treatment status from a regression of the
characteristic on treatment and strata dummies. “Other race/ethnicity" includes Hispanic, American Indian or Alaska Native, and Native
Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander students.




                                                                     47
                                                         Appendix Table III
                                          Balance Table: School Characteristics by Subgroup
                                                   First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                          Upper Peninsula                       West Central                        Southeast
                               Control       Treatment      P-value   Control    Treatment     P-value   Control    Treatment   P-value

           Upper Peninsula        -              -             -           -          -           -         -           -          -

               West Central       -              -             -           -          -           -         -           -          -

                  Southeast       -              -             -           -          -           -         -           -          -

                  Suburban      0.000          0.000           -       0.157        0.176      0.429       0.673      0.701     0.944
                                                                      (0.024)      (0.025)                (0.032)    (0.033)
                       City     0.000          0.000           -       0.153        0.118      0.294        0.2        0.1      0.338
                                                                      (0.023)      (0.021)                (0.025)    (0.022)
                      Rural     1.000          1.000           -       0.691        0.706      0.878       0.175      0.188     0.439
                                                                      (0.030)      (0.030)                (0.026)    (0.028)
         Distance from UM       243.3           268.1       0.139       97.5         98.8      0.544        32.2       36.7     0.004
                               (9.872)        (10.240)                (2.138)      (2.155)                (1.044)    (1.110)
         Proportion female      0.569           0.615       0.369      0.563        0.593      0.365       0.580      0.617     0.215
                               (0.041)         (0.048)                (0.023)      (0.024)                (0.024)    (0.022)
  Proportion white or Asian     0.894           0.904       0.818      0.868        0.861      0.774       0.772      0.803     0.472
                               (0.028)         (0.027)                (0.016)      (0.017)                (0.025)    (0.022)
           Proportion black     0.034           0.019       0.434      0.052        0.055      0.802       0.165      0.148     0.734
                               (0.016)         (0.016)                (0.010)      (0.011)                (0.022)    (0.020)
           Proportion other     0.072           0.077       0.809      0.080        0.083      0.867       0.063      0.049     0.444
              race/ethnicity   (0.024)         (0.023)                (0.013)      (0.013)                (0.014)    (0.011)
      Proportion free lunch     0.702           0.575       0.065      0.690        0.671      0.500       0.732      0.756     0.320
                    eligible   (0.039)         (0.049)                (0.022)      (0.022)                (0.021)    (0.019)
   Proportion reduced-price     0.298           0.425       0.065         0            0       0.500       0.268      0.244     0.320
              lunch eligible   (0.039)         (0.049)                (0.022)      (0.022)                (0.021)    (0.019)
           Average SAT (or      1253            1252        0.846      1252         1257       0.318       1257       1265      0.252
                 equivalent)   (7.340)         (8.268)                (4.033)      (4.094)                (4.145)    (4.696)
              Average GPA       3.846           3.850       0.813      3.831        3.837      0.659       3.806      3.822     0.170
                               (0.018)         (0.017)                (0.008)      (0.008)                (0.009)    (0.009)
 Proportion limited English     0.000           0.000          -       0.003        0.003      0.898       0.003      0.006     0.351
                  proficient                                          (0.002)      (0.001)                (0.002)    (0.003)
      Proportion special ed      0.000         0.005        0.286      0.011        0.021      0.339       0.009      0.006     0.523
                                (0.000)       (0.005)                 (0.005)      (0.007)                (0.004)    (0.003)
      Proportion who sent        0.305         0.286        0.605      0.372        0.360      0.679       0.380      0.426     0.273
  ACT/SAT scores to UM          (0.037)       (0.042)                 (0.023)      (0.023)                (0.025)    (0.025)
UM application rate in 2015      0.045         0.025        0.009      0.055        0.042      0.011       0.090      0.084     0.497
                                (0.006)       (0.004)                 (0.004)      (0.003)                (0.007)    (0.009)
     Missing 2015 app rate       0.013         0.000        0.335      0.000        0.013      0.080       0.005      0.036     0.023
                                (0.013)       (0.000)                 (0.000)      (0.007)                (0.005)    (0.013)
    # of 11th grade students     94.4          77.8         0.199      162.9        145.5      0.151       253.8      242.8     0.081
                   in school   (10.008)       (7.832)                 (6.832)      (6.848)               (11.257)   (11.075)
         # of HAIL students       2.9           2.8         0.789        3.6          3.4      0.849         4.3        4.8     0.921
                   in school    (0.235)       (0.312)                 (0.159)      (0.187)                (0.282)    (0.320)

   Number of school-years        79             65           144       236          238         474        211         197       408
      Number of students         231            185          416       842          804         1646       905         943       1848




                                           Continued on next page



                                                                      48
                                                  Appendix Table III (Continued)
                                          Balance Table: School Characteristics by Subgroup
                                                   First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                            Suburb                              City                           Rural
                               Control      Treatment   P-value    Control    Treatment   P-value   Control   Treatment   P-value

           Upper Peninsula      0.000         0.000         -       0.000       0.000        -       0.283      0.241     0.235
                                                                                                    (0.027)    (0.026)
               West Central     0.207         0.233      0.602      0.529       0.560     0.784      0.584      0.622     0.320
                               (0.030)       (0.032)               (0.061)     (0.071)              (0.030)    (0.030)
                  Southeast     0.793         0.767      0.602      0.471       0.440     0.784      0.133      0.137     0.917
                               (0.030)       (0.032)               (0.061)     (0.071)              (0.020)    (0.021)
                  Suburban        -             -           -         -           -          -         -          -          -

                       City       -             -           -           -         -          -         -          -          -

                      Rural       -             -           -           -         -          -         -          -          -

         Distance from UM         46.8         52.3      0.150        65.1       64.5     0.829      129.9      131.6     0.856
                                (2.484)      (2.570)                (5.258)    (4.996)              (5.485)    (5.695)
         Proportion female       0.557        0.620      0.054       0.574      0.575     0.975      0.579      0.601     0.424
                                (0.025)      (0.021)                (0.042)    (0.052)              (0.022)    (0.023)
  Proportion white or Asian      0.845        0.810      0.132       0.574      0.574     0.835      0.890      0.916     0.156
                                (0.021)      (0.021)                (0.049)    (0.059)              (0.015)    (0.012)
           Proportion black      0.104        0.151      0.037       0.308      0.212     0.115      0.036      0.022     0.186
                                (0.018)      (0.020)                (0.049)    (0.048)              (0.009)    (0.007)
           Proportion other      0.051        0.039      0.406       0.118      0.214     0.082      0.074      0.062     0.428
              race/ethnicity    (0.013)      (0.008)                (0.030)    (0.046)              (0.012)    (0.010)
      Proportion free lunch      0.712        0.740      0.224       0.838      0.768     0.192      0.675      0.646     0.402
                    eligible    (0.022)      (0.019)                (0.030)    (0.050)              (0.021)    (0.021)
   Proportion reduced-price      0.288        0.260      0.224       0.162      0.232     0.192      0.325      0.354     0.402
              lunch eligible    (0.022)      (0.019)                (0.030)    (0.050)              (0.021)    (0.021)
           Average SAT (or       1263         1268       0.833       1252       1250      0.875      1249       1256      0.174
                 equivalent)    (4.380)      (4.683)                (7.296)    (9.939)              (3.804)    (3.935)
              Average GPA        3.788        3.820      0.013       3.828      3.841     0.671      3.845      3.839     0.594
                                (0.010)      (0.009)                (0.016)    (0.024)              (0.008)    (0.008)
 Proportion limited English      0.002        0.003      0.772       0.012      0.019     0.306      0.000      0.001     0.157
                  proficient    (0.002)      (0.001)                (0.006)    (0.012)              (0.000)    (0.001)
      Proportion special ed      0.013        0.011      0.599       0.000      0.011     0.278      0.008      0.015     0.252
                                (0.007)      (0.006)                (0.000)    (0.010)              (0.003)    (0.006)
      Proportion who sent        0.391        0.397      0.730       0.386      0.489     0.160      0.343      0.342     0.885
  ACT/SAT scores to UM          (0.025)      (0.024)                (0.044)    (0.056)              (0.021)    (0.022)
UM application rate in 2015      0.089        0.078      0.329       0.110      0.098     0.928      0.043      0.034     0.009
                                (0.007)      (0.009)                (0.015)    (0.014)              (0.003)    (0.002)
     Missing 2015 app rate       0.006        0.028      0.062       0.000      0.040     0.151      0.004      0.011     0.300
                                (0.006)      (0.012)                (0.000)    (0.028)              (0.004)    (0.006)
    # of 11th grade students      288         262.3      0.018       207.1      199.4     0.814      121.2      112.4     0.253
                   in school   (12.401)     (11.421)               (13.533)   (20.064)              (4.790)    (4.859)
         # of HAIL students        4.8          5.2      0.986         4.4        4.7     0.160        3         2.9      0.724
                   in school    (0.283)      (0.302)                (0.549)    (0.888)              (0.119)    (0.124)

   Number of school-years        179           180        359        68         50         118       279        270        549
      Number of students         852           932        1784       297        233        530       829        767        1596




                                          Continued on next page



                                                                   49
                                                 Appendix Table III (Continued)
                                         Balance Table: School Characteristics by Subgroup
                                                  First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                            Male                            Female
                               Control     Treatment   P-value    Control   Treatment   P-value

           Upper Peninsula      0.150        0.121      0.294      0.144      0.118     0.267
                               (0.018)      (0.017)               (0.017)    (0.016)
               West Central     0.446        0.451      0.837      0.449      0.456     0.813
                               (0.026)      (0.027)               (0.024)    (0.024)
                  Southeast     0.404        0.428      0.600      0.407      0.426     0.606
                               (0.025)      (0.027)               (0.024)    (0.024)
                  Suburban      0.360        0.405      0.293      0.343      0.400     0.083
                               (0.025)      (0.026)               (0.023)    (0.024)
                       City     0.129        0.098      0.174      0.134      0.095     0.065
                               (0.017)      (0.016)               (0.016)    (0.014)
                      Rural     0.512        0.497      0.893      0.523      0.506     0.637
                               (0.026)      (0.027)               (0.024)    (0.024)
         Distance from UM        93.6         91.7      0.869       91.4       92.7     0.794
                               (4.241)      (4.132)               (3.791)    (3.877)
         Proportion female        -            -           -         -          -

  Proportion white or Asian     0.864        0.853      0.547      0.832      0.837     0.736
                               (0.015)      (0.017)               (0.015)    (0.015)
           Proportion black     0.066        0.061      0.794      0.096      0.101     0.839
                               (0.011)      (0.011)               (0.012)    (0.012)
           Proportion other     0.070        0.086      0.296      0.072      0.062     0.450
              race/ethnicity   (0.011)      (0.013)               (0.010)    (0.009)
      Proportion free lunch     0.710        0.681      0.345      0.693      0.698     0.765
                    eligible   (0.019)      (0.020)               (0.018)    (0.017)
   Proportion reduced-price     0.290        0.319      0.345      0.307      0.302     0.765
              lunch eligible   (0.019)      (0.020)               (0.018)    (0.017)
           Average SAT (or      1275         1278       0.697      1245       1249      0.393
                 equivalent)   (3.565)      (4.102)               (3.184)    (3.324)
              Average GPA       3.778        3.786      0.466      3.851      3.855     0.566
                               (0.008)      (0.009)               (0.006)    (0.006)
 Proportion limited English     0.003        0.011      0.203      0.002      0.003     0.452
                  proficient   (0.002)      (0.005)               (0.001)    (0.002)
      Proportion special ed     0.019        0.017      0.897      0.004      0.009     0.235
                               (0.006)      (0.006)               (0.002)    (0.004)
      Proportion who sent       0.400        0.422      0.607      0.337      0.350     0.711
  ACT/SAT scores to UM         (0.021)      (0.022)               (0.018)    (0.018)
UM application rate in 2015     0.072        0.061      0.062      0.071      0.059     0.048
                               (0.004)      (0.005)               (0.004)    (0.004)
     Missing 2015 app rate      0.003        0.009      0.262      0.002      0.021     0.009
                               (0.003)      (0.005)               (0.002)    (0.007)
    # of 11th grade students     205         199.5      0.282      201.7      188.9     0.146
                   in school   (7.420)      (7.793)               (7.041)    (6.790)
         # of HAIL students      4.5          4.7       0.726       4.2        4.3      0.673
                   in school   (0.177)      (0.214)               (0.161)    (0.185)

   Number of school-years       381           348        729       432        423        855
      Number of students        853           784        1637      1125       1148       2273




                                         Continued on next page



                                                                  50
                                                      Appendix Table III (Continued)
                                              Balance Table: School Characteristics by Subgroup
                                                       First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                              White or Asian                                Black                               Other race/ethnicity
                                   Control      Treatment      P-value        Control     Treatment     P-value         Control      Treatment     P-value

              Upper Peninsula        0.156         0.135       0.320           0.059         0.019       0.147            0.137        0.135           0.960
                                    (0.017)       (0.016)                     (0.024)       (0.013)                      (0.035)      (0.035)
                  West Central       0.469         0.485       0.587           0.327         0.314       0.876            0.558        0.562           0.826
                                    (0.023)       (0.023)                     (0.047)       (0.046)                      (0.051)      (0.051)
                     Southeast       0.375         0.380       0.874           0.614         0.667       0.486            0.305        0.302           0.842
                                    (0.022)       (0.022)                     (0.049)       (0.046)                      (0.047)      (0.047)
                     Suburban        0.346         0.359       0.654           0.446         0.705       0.001            0.284        0.312           0.903
                                    (0.022)       (0.022)                     (0.050)       (0.045)                      (0.047)      (0.048)
                           City      0.104         0.079       0.177           0.337         0.162       0.011            0.211        0.229           0.975
                                    (0.014)       (0.012)                     (0.047)       (0.036)                      (0.042)      (0.043)
                         Rural       0.550         0.562       0.705           0.218         0.133       0.172            0.505        0.458           0.889
                                    (0.023)       (0.023)                     (0.041)       (0.033)                      (0.052)      (0.051)
            Distance from UM          95.6          97.7       0.721           66.2           58.1       0.383            96.7         102.5           0.534
                                    (3.728)       (3.827)                     (6.827)       (4.231)                      (7.448)      (8.397)
             Proportion female       0.562         0.604       0.061           0.636         0.718       0.153            0.575        0.512           0.452
                                    (0.016)       (0.016)                     (0.044)       (0.040)                      (0.049)      (0.047)
    Proportion white or Asian          -             -                           -             -            -               -            -               -

              Proportion black         -             -                            -            -            -               -             -              -

             Proportion other          -             -                            -            -            -               -             -              -
                race/ethnicity
        Proportion free lunch        0.690         0.666       0.334           0.812         0.812       0.608            0.775        0.750           0.635
                      eligible      (0.015)       (0.016)                     (0.036)       (0.035)                      (0.041)      (0.043)
     Proportion reduced-price        0.310         0.334       0.334           0.188         0.188       0.608            0.225        0.250           0.635
                lunch eligible      (0.015)       (0.016)                     (0.036)       (0.035)                      (0.041)      (0.043)
             Average SAT (or         1260          1264        0.358           1239          1250        0.270            1251         1237            0.169
                   equivalent)      (2.978)       (3.004)                     (7.360)       (6.799)                      (8.325)      (8.473)
                Average GPA          3.822         3.831       0.270           3.812         3.791       0.540            3.802        3.841           0.126
                                    (0.006)       (0.006)                     (0.016)       (0.018)                      (0.019)      (0.017)
    Proportion limited English       0.002         0.003       0.437           0.010         0.005       0.657            0.007        0.005           0.786
                     proficient     (0.001)       (0.001)                     (0.010)       (0.005)                      (0.007)      (0.005)
         Proportion special ed       0.009         0.013       0.438           0.005         0.014       0.550            0.011        0.016           0.595
                                    (0.003)       (0.004)                     (0.005)       (0.011)                      (0.011)      (0.012)
        Proportion who sent          0.369         0.374       0.919           0.457         0.384       0.118            0.410        0.419           0.902
    ACT/SAT scores to UM            (0.016)       (0.017)                     (0.046)       (0.043)                      (0.049)      (0.048)
  UM application rate in 2015        0.068         0.055       0.013           0.090         0.086       0.713            0.073        0.059           0.100
                                    (0.004)       (0.004)                     (0.010)       (0.014)                      (0.009)      (0.007)
        Missing 2015 app rate        0.004         0.015       0.089           0.000         0.029       0.068            0.000        0.010           0.342
                                    (0.003)       (0.006)                     (0.000)       (0.016)                      (0.000)      (0.010)
      # of 11th grade students        193           179        0.095           234.1          264        0.364            205.2        227.1           0.467
                     in school      (6.640)       (6.365)                    (12.684)      (16.545)                     (12.777)      (0.000)
           # of HAIL students          4             4         0.634            4.8           5.8        0.264             4.8          6.1            0.068
                     in school      (0.149)       (0.171)                     (0.341)       (0.503)                      (0.307)      (0.584)

      Number of school-years         480           468          948             101          105          206             95            96             191
         Number of students          1688          1624         3312            162          168          330             128           140            268

Source: Michigan administrative data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. For region and urbancity subgroups, p-values are from a t-test of the coefficient on treatment status from
a regression of the characteristic on treatment and strata dummies, estimated on the subgroup. For gender and race, p-values are from separate regressions
of school-subgroup-level characteristic on treatment status and strata dummies.




                                                                             51
                                                         Appendix Table IV
                               Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on Timing of Application to UM
                                                   First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                                         Treatment effect         Control mean
                                     Applied (any)                              0.422                 0.259
                                                                               (0.021)

                                     Applied Early Action                       0.321                 0.201
                                                                               (0.021)

                                     Applied Regular Decision                   0.102                 0.058
                                                                               (0.014)

                                     Number of school-years                               1,026
                                     Number of students                                   3,910

Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Robust standard errors reported. Application measured in the summer and fall following expected high
school graduation.




                                                    Appendix Table V
                   University of Michigan Admission Rates Conditional on Application, by Treatment Status
                                               (Non-Experimental Results)
                                             First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                                         Control       Treated            P-value from
                                                                         students      students          two-way t-test


                                            Proportion admitted            0.525        0.456                 0.006
                                                                          (0.021)      (0.014)

                             Number of students who applied                 589          1,306

Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. P-value is from a two-way t-test with unequal variances. For reference, the overall UM acceptance rate in 2016-17
was 28.6 percent.




                                                                          52
                                                                                       Appendix Table VI
                                                                    Randomization-Based Inference on College Choice Outcomes
                                                                                 First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                                                                 Simulated treatment effects (10,000 iterations)
                                                                            Estimated                                                           # greater           Randomiz.-        Sampling-
                                                                            treatment                                                          than estim.            based             based
                                  College Attended                            effect           Mean       Std. Dev.       Min        Max          effect             p-value           p-value
                  Highly competitive or above                                  0.146           0.000        0.020        -0.077      0.075            0                 0.000            0.000
                  UM                                                           0.146           0.000        0.019        -0.064      0.083            0                 0.000            0.000
                  Highly competitive or above other than UM                    0.000           0.000        0.007        -0.023      0.024         9,809                0.981            0.981
                  Four-year                                                    0.074           0.000        0.022        -0.082      0.081           11                 0.001            0.000
                  Two-year                                                    -0.035           0.000        0.014        -0.051      0.053          112                 0.011            0.007
                  Any                                                          0.039           0.000        0.019        -0.079      0.064          385                 0.039            0.031
                  In Michigan                                                  0.045           0.000        0.020        -0.084      0.084          265                 0.027            0.021
                  Public in Michigan                                           0.062           0.000        0.021        -0.085      0.086           30                 0.003            0.003
                  Outside Michigan                                            -0.006           0.000        0.010        -0.036      0.036         5,432                0.543            0.531

     Source: Michigan administrative data and National Student Clearinghouse data.
53




     Notes: Each simulated treatment effect comes from first randomly assigning schools to treatment using the same randomization algorithm used for true assignment, then running a regression of the outcome on
     “treatment" status, including controls for strata. Exact p-value is calculated as the number of simulated effects greater in absolute value than the estimated effect.
                                             Appendix Table VII
             Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment
                           by High School Geography, With and Without Covariates
                                       First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                          Panel A. Region
                                               Southeast                   West Central               Upper Peninsula
             Applied                       0.378        0.370            0.466        0.466            0.398       0.415
                                          (0.031)      (0.030)          (0.029)      (0.027)          (0.059)      (0.056)
                                          [0.364]                        [0.2]                        [0.156]

             Admitted                      0.159        0.130           0.187         0.177            0.187       0.215
                                          (0.031)      (0.027)          (0.026)      (0.024)          (0.054)      (0.050)
                                          [0.202]                       [0.116]                       [0.105]

             Enrolled                      0.145        0.122            0.152        0.146            0.176       0.198
                                          (0.029)      (0.026)          (0.024)      (0.023)          (0.051)      (0.049)
                                          [0.167]                       [0.085]                        [0.08]

             Covariates                      N            Y                N            Y                N            Y
             Number of schools                     408                           474                          144
             Number of students                   1848                          1646                          416
                                                        Panel B. Urbanicity
                                                 Suburb                         City                     Town/Rural
             Applied                       0.384        0.369            0.318        0.310            0.487       0.487
                                          (0.031)      (0.030)          (0.062)      (0.056)          (0.028)      (0.027)
                                          [0.336]                       [0.464]                       [0.159]

             Admitted                      0.156        0.119            0.061        0.006            0.228       0.223
                                          (0.029)      (0.025)          (0.066)      (0.056)          (0.026)      (0.023)
                                          [0.164]                       [0.319]                       [0.097]

             Enrolled                      0.133        0.101            0.117        0.083            0.183       0.183
                                          (0.027)      (0.024)          (0.061)      (0.050)          (0.024)      (0.023)
                                           [0.14]                       [0.221]                       [0.078]

             Covariates                      N            Y                N            Y                N            Y
             Number of schools                     359                           118                          549
             Number of students                   1784                           530                          1596

Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from separate regressions of outcome on treatment status and strata
dummies, estimated on the subgroup. Covariates include all characteristics listed in Appendix Table II. Robust standard errors reported in
parentheses. Control mean for subgroup in brackets. Application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following
expected high school graduation. Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application.




                                                                   54
                                        Appendix Table VIII
          Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment
 by Historical School Connection to UM and Number of HAIL Students (First and Second HAIL Cohorts):
                                          Regression Results

                                                                 Applied      Admitted        Enrolled
                                    Panel A. Prior School-Level UM Application Rate
                             Treatment                             0.489          0.203          0.170
                                                                 (0.025)        (0.024)        (0.023)
                             Prior UM application rate             1.226          0.741          0.643
                                                                 (0.177)        (0.179)        (0.174)
                             Interaction                          -0.984         -0.341         -0.225
                                                                 (0.219)        (0.238)        (0.240)

                                    Panel B. Prior School-Level UM Enrollment Rate
                             Treatment                             0.486          0.201          0.171
                                                                 (0.024)        (0.023)        (0.021)
                             Prior UM enrollment rate              2.843          1.725          1.531
                                                                 (0.356)        (0.412)        (0.406)
                             Interaction                          -2.690         -0.872         -0.691
                                                                 (0.549)        (0.575)        (0.579)

                                       Panel C. Number of HAIL Students in School
                             Treatment                             0.485          0.210          0.184
                                                                 (0.033)        (0.032)        (0.030)
                             Number of HAIL students               0.019          0.012          0.010
                                                                 (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.003)
                             Interaction                          -0.017         -0.009         -0.009
                                                                 (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.004)

                             Number of school-years                              1,026

Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Results are from a regression of the outcome on treatment, the named variable and a
missing dummy, the interaction of the two, and strata dummies. Robust standard errors estimated. Prior UM application and enrollment
rates are for the high school graduating class of 2015.




                                                                 55
                                             Appendix Table IX
             Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment
                        by Pre-Treatment Interest in UM, With and Without Covariates
                                       First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                                 Pre-Treatment Interest in UM
                                                    Sent SAT Scores to UM                Did Not Send Scores
                   Applied                           0.372             0.368              0.437         0.436
                                                    (0.029)           (0.028)            (0.023)       (0.022)
                                                    [0.421]                              [0.161]

                   Admitted                          0.169             0.156              0.165         0.159
                                                    (0.030)           (0.027)            (0.019)       (0.018)
                                                    [0.255]                              [0.081]

                   Enrolled                          0.157             0.149              0.140         0.134
                                                    (0.028)           (0.026)            (0.018)       (0.017)
                                                    [0.199]                              [0.059]

                   Covariates                           N               Y                   N              Y
                   Number of school-years                       663                                 882
                   Number of students                          1,514                               2,396
Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from separate regressions of school-subgroup-level outcome rate on
treatment status and strata dummies. Covariates include all characteristics listed in Appendix Table II and are at the school-subgroup
level. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Control mean for subgroup in brackets. UM application, admission and enrollment
measured in the summer and fall following expected high school graduation. Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application.




                                                                 56
                                           Appendix Table X
Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment by Economic Status,
                                      With and Without Covariates
                                    First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                       Panel A. Free or Reduced Price Lunch Eligibility
                                                           Free Lunch                       Reduced-Price Lunch
                Applied                             0.419            0.418                0.414              0.412
                                                   (0.023)          (0.021)              (0.032)            (0.030)
                                                    [0.27]                               [0.245]

                Admitted                            0.170            0.160                0.142              0.135
                                                   (0.021)          (0.019)              (0.029)            (0.026)
                                                    [0.27]                               [0.146]

                Enrolled                            0.146            0.138                0.112              0.109
                                                   (0.020)          (0.018)              (0.026)            (0.024)
                                                   [0.116]                               [0.118]

                Covariates                             N                 Y                  N                  Y
                Number of school-years                         923                                     607
                Number of students                            2,748                                   1,162
                                                        Panel B. Persistence of Economic Disadvantage
                                                   Always Disadvantaged                  Sometimes Disadvantaged
                Applied                             0.423            0.420                0.402              0.399
                                                   (0.022)          (0.021)              (0.041)            (0.038)
                                                   [0.259]                               [0.302]

                Admitted                            0.177            0.170                0.152              0.125
                                                   (0.020)          (0.018)              (0.037)            (0.032)
                                                   [0.149]                               [0.167]

                Enrolled                            0.153            0.148                0.140              0.116
                                                   (0.019)          (0.017)              (0.035)            (0.032)
                                                   [0.118]                                [0.13]

                Covariates                             N                 Y                  N                  Y
                Number of school-years                         982                                     425
                Number of students                            3,268                                    642
Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from separate regressions of school-subgroup-level outcome rate on
treatment status and strata dummies. Covariates include all characteristics listed in Appendix Table II and are at the school-subgroup
level. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Control mean for subgroup in brackets. UM application, admission and enrollment
measured in the summer and fall following expected high school graduation. Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application.
In Panel A, eligibility is measured in 11th grade. In Panel B, "always disadvantaged" is defined as being eligible for free or reduced-price
lunch every (observed) year of high school through 11th grade.




                                                                    57
                                          Appendix Table XI
Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment by Selected Student
                             Characteristics, With and Without Covariates
                                    First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                         Panel A. Gender
                                                 Male                        Female
             Applied                      0.406        0.402           0.422        0.419
                                         (0.028)      (0.026)         (0.024)      (0.023)
                                         [0.286]                      [0.239]

             Admitted                     0.141        0.135           0.188        0.185
                                         (0.024)      (0.022)         (0.022)      (0.020)
                                         [0.139]                      [0.143]

             Enrolled                     0.118        0.113           0.164        0.164
                                         (0.022)      (0.021)         (0.021)      (0.020)
                                         [0.105]                      [0.115]

             Covariates                     N            Y               N            Y
             Number of schools                   729                          855
             Number of students                 1,637                        2,273
                                                    Panel B. Race/Ethnicity
                                          White or Asian                     Black                        Other
             Applied                      0.438        0.437           0.262        0.303           0.242        0.259
                                         (0.022)      (0.021)         (0.060)      (0.061)         (0.068)      (0.064)
                                         [0.234]                      [0.478]                      [0.393]

             Admitted                     0.182        0.173           0.072        0.102           0.043        0.053
                                         (0.019)      (0.017)         (0.059)      (0.056)         (0.062)      (0.063)
                                         [0.129]                      [0.283]                      [0.258]

             Enrolled                     0.154        0.148           0.037        0.048           0.072        0.083
                                         (0.018)      (0.016)         (0.055)      (0.052)         (0.058)      (0.060)
                                         [0.103]                      [0.234]                      [0.199]

             Covariates                     N            Y               N            Y            N               Y
             Number of schools                    948                          206                          191

Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from separate regressions of school-subgroup-level outcome rate on
treatment status and strata dummies. Covariates include all characteristics listed in Appendix Table II and are at the school-subgroup
level. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Control mean for subgroup in brackets. UM application, admission and enrollment
measured in the summer and fall following expected high school graduation. Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application.




                                                                 58
                                               Appendix Table XII
                     Coefficients from Regression Used to Predict Selective College Attendance

                                Outcome: Enrolled at highly competitive or above college
                                ACT score                                                     0.034
                                                                                            (0.002)
                                GPA                                                           0.354
                                                                                            (0.026)
                                Black                                                         0.174
                                                                                            (0.019)
                                Other race/ethnicity                                          0.086
                                                                                            (0.020)
                                Female                                                       -0.007
                                                                                            (0.010)
                                Always economically disadvantaged                             0.008
                                                                                            (0.012)
                                High school in city                                           0.035
                                                                                            (0.014)
                                High school in town or rural area                           -0.023
                                                                                            (0.013)
                                High school in Upper Peninsula                              -0.050
                                                                                            (0.018)
                                High school in West Central Michigan                         -0.031
                                                                                            (0.012)
                                # of HAIL students in school                                -0.001
                                                                                            (0.001)
                                UM application rate in 2015                                  1.345
                                                                                            (0.131)

                                N                                                            4,529
                                R-squared                                                    0.152

Source: Michigan administrative data, University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data, and National Student
Clearinghouse data.
Notes: Coefficients and standard errors from a regression of highly selective college attendance on all of the listed characteristics,
estimated on the population of high-achieving, low-income students in Michigan who were in 11th grade during the 2012-13 and 2013-14
school years. Sample criteria are the same as for HAIL scholarship students in the subsequent year. College attendance is measured at
the first college attended in the fall following expected high school graduation and is unconditional on any college enrollment. Selectivity
is based on Barron’s selectivity index.




                                                                    59
                                            Appendix Table XIII
             Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on College Choice, With and Without Covariates
                                       First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                  College attended                Treatment effect          Control mean


                          Highly competitive or above              0.146        0.141            0.135
                                                                  (0.018)      (0.017)

                          UM                                       0.146        0.139            0.107
                                                                  (0.016)      (0.016)

                          Highly competitive or above              0.000        0.002            0.028
                          other than UM                           (0.007)      (0.007)

                          Four-year                                0.074        0.080            0.675
                                                                  (0.020)      (0.020)

                          Two-year                                -0.035       -0.036            0.116
                                                                  (0.013)      (0.013)

                          Any                                      0.039        0.045            0.791
                                                                  (0.018)      (0.018)

                          In Michigan                              0.045        0.047            0.727
                                                                  (0.020)      (0.020)

                          Public in Michigan                       0.062        0.064            0.645
                                                                  (0.021)      (0.021)

                          Outside Michigan                        -0.006       -0.003            0.064
                                                                  (0.010)      (0.010)

                          Covariates                                   N          Y
                          Number of school-years                                   1,026
                          Number of students                                       3,910

Source: Michigan administrative data and National Student Clearinghouse data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from regressions of outcome on treatment status and strata dummies.
Covariates include all characteristics listed in Appendix Table II. Robust standard errors reported. Enrollment is measured at the first
college attended in the fall following expected high school graduation and is unconditional on any college enrollment.




                                                                  60
                                        Appendix Table XIV
Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on College Choice by Selected School and Student Characteristics,
                                    With and Without Covariates
                                   First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                             Panel A. Region
                                       Southeast               West Central      Upper Peninsula
    Highly competitive or above     0.129      0.108        0.163      0.156     0.160     0.180
                                   (0.030)    (0.028)      (0.024)    (0.022)   (0.052)   (0.052)
                                   [0.199]                 [0.092]              [0.091]
    UM                              0.133      0.108        0.155      0.148     0.167     0.191
                                   (0.029)    (0.027)      (0.022)    (0.022)   (0.052)   (0.050)
                                   [0.162]                 [0.068]              [0.078]
    Four-year                       0.041      0.045        0.114      0.120     0.037     0.049
                                   (0.029)    (0.030)      (0.031)    (0.031)   (0.060)   (0.062)
                                   [0.774]                 [0.579]              [0.697]
    Any                             0.024      0.022        0.045      0.056     0.061     0.069
                                   (0.026)    (0.027)      (0.027)    (0.028)   (0.055)   (0.057)
                                    [0.84]                 [0.758]              [0.757]

    Covariates                       N            Y            N           Y       N           Y
    Number of school-years                408                       474                144
    Number of students                   1,848                     1,646               416
                                          Panel B. Urbanicity
                                         Suburb                    City           Town or Rural
    Highly competitive or above     0.136      0.100        0.079      0.072     0.181     0.184
                                   (0.029)    (0.025)      (0.063)    (0.059)   (0.024)   (0.022)
                                   [0.163]                 [0.249]              [0.088]
    UM                              0.126      0.095        0.078      0.052     0.187     0.188
                                   (0.027)    (0.025)      (0.058)    (0.052)   (0.023)   (0.022)
                                   [0.139]                 [0.203]              [0.063]
    Four-year                       0.039      0.034        0.007      0.029     0.103     0.115
                                   (0.030)    (0.029)      (0.064)    (0.069)   (0.030)   (0.030)
                                   [0.746]                 [0.704]              [0.622]
    Any                             0.014      0.013        0.018      0.049     0.053     0.064
                                   (0.027)    (0.027)      (0.056)    (0.064)   (0.026)   (0.026)
                                   [0.838]                 [0.783]              [0.762]

    Covariates                       N            Y            N           Y       N           Y
    Number of school-years                359                      118                  549
    Number of students                   1,784                     530                 1,596




                                Continued on next page


                                                      61
                                   Appendix Table XIV (Continued)
  Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on College Choice by Selected School and Student Characteristics,
                                      With and Without Covariates
                                     First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                         Panel C. Gender
                                                       Male                        Female
        Highly competitive or above            0.110        0.107           0.167        0.167
                                              (0.023)      (0.022)         (0.021)      (0.020)
                                              [0.135]                      [0.125]
        UM                                     0.112        0.108           0.161        0.161
                                              (0.022)      (0.020)         (0.020)      (0.019)
                                               [0.1]                       [0.104]
        Four-year                              0.073        0.072           0.086        0.087
                                              (0.027)      (0.027)         (0.025)      (0.024)
                                              [0.672]                      [0.671]
        Any                                    0.029        0.029           0.055        0.059
                                              (0.023)      (0.023)         (0.021)      (0.021)
                                              [0.798]                      [0.793]

        Covariates                                N            Y               N            Y
        Number of school-years                          729                         855
        Number of students                             1,637                       2,273
                                                      Panel D. Race/Ethnicity
                                                White or Asian                     Black                        Other
        Highly competitive or above            0.151        0.147            0.061       0.060            0.082       0.099
                                              (0.018)      (0.017)         (0.057)      (0.052)          (0.057)     (0.059)
                                              [0.119]                      [0.272]                       [0.179]
        UM                                     0.150        0.145            0.018       0.020            0.079       0.097
                                              (0.017)      (0.016)         (0.052)      (0.049)          (0.056)     (0.058)
                                              [0.096]                      [0.214]                       [0.167]
        Four-year                              0.072        0.078           -0.041       -0.050           0.167       0.187
                                              (0.022)      (0.021)         (0.055)      (0.055)          (0.064)     (0.063)
                                              [0.675]                      [0.792]                       [0.593]
        Any                                    0.031        0.036           -0.062       -0.077           0.121       0.146
                                              (0.018)      (0.018)         (0.049)      (0.049)          (0.055)     (0.054)
                                              [0.801]                      [0.848]                       [0.716]

        Covariates                                N            Y               N            Y               N            Y
        Number of school-years                          948                         206                          191
        Number of students                             3,312                        330                          268

Source: Michigan administrative data and National Student Clearinghouse data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. For Panels A and B, coefficients are from separate regressions of outcome on
treatment status and strata dummies, estimated on the subgroup. For Panels C and D, coefficients are from separate regressions of
school-subgroup-level outcome rate on treatment status and strata dummies. Covariates include all characteristics listed in Appendix
Table II and are at the school-subgroup level. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Control mean for subgroup in brackets.
Enrollment is measured at the first college attended in the fall following expected high school graduation and is unconditional on any
college enrollment.




                                                                   62
 Appendix Table XV Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on College Enrollment and Persistence, With
                                      and Without Covariates
                                        First HAIL Cohort

                                             Attended fall following high                Attended two consecutive falls
                                                  school graduation                     following high school graduation
                                                                       Control                                       Control
     College attended                         Treatment effect          mean             Treatment effect             mean


     Highly competitive or above              0.153        0.152        0.129            0.135        0.134           0.126
                                             (0.024)      (0.020)                       (0.023)      (0.020)

     UM                                       0.147        0.144        0.104            0.128        0.126           0.102
                                             (0.022)      (0.020)                       (0.022)      (0.019)

     Four-year                                0.091        0.097        0.651            0.109        0.115           0.557
                                             (0.028)      (0.028)                       (0.029)      (0.029)

     Any                                      0.057        0.063        0.779            0.079        0.085           0.683
                                             (0.025)      (0.025)                       (0.027)      (0.027)

     Covariates                                 N            Y                              N           Y
     Number of school-years                                                          529
     Number of students                                                             2,108

Source: Michigan administrative data and National Student Clearinghouse data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from regressions of outcome on treatment status and strata dummies.
Covariates include all characteristics listed in Appendix Table II. Robust standard errors reported. Enrollment is measured at the first
college attended in the two falls following expected high school graduation and is unconditional on any college enrollment.




                                                                  63
                                  Appendix Table XVI
         Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on Second Year College Persistence
        by Selected School and Student Characteristics, With and Without Covariates
                                    First HAIL Cohort

                                        Panel A. Region
                                 Southeast                West Central     Upper Peninsula
Highly competitive or above    0.127      0.117        0.148      0.145     0.132      0.167
                              (0.039)    (0.033)      (0.029)    (0.028)   (0.067)    (0.055)
                              [0.183]                 [0.089]              [0.091]
UM                             0.113      0.097        0.144      0.144     0.125      0.156
                              (0.037)    (0.031)      (0.028)    (0.027)   (0.066)    (0.054)
                              [0.145]                  [0.07]              [0.091]
Four-year                      0.091      0.108        0.146      0.150     0.046      0.045
                              (0.042)    (0.041)      (0.043)    (0.044)   (0.083)    (0.089)
                              [0.667]                 [0.462]              [0.563]
Any                            0.084      0.091        0.085      0.092     0.053      0.055
                              (0.038)    (0.039)      (0.041)    (0.043)   (0.080)    (0.083)
                              [0.746]                 [0.632]              [0.676]

Covariates                      N            Y            N          Y        N         Y
Number of school-years               204                      247                  78
Number of students                   951                      927                 230
                                     Panel B. Urbanicity
                                    Suburb                    City          Town or Rural
Highly competitive or above    0.160      0.125         0.016     0.051     0.150      0.152
                              (0.035)    (0.031)      (0.085)    (0.083)   (0.031)    (0.027)
                              [0.115]                 [0.267]               [0.1]
UM                             0.129      0.103        -0.006     -0.025    0.161      0.162
                              (0.033)    (0.029)      (0.079)    (0.085)   (0.030)    (0.027)
                              [0.096]                 [0.234]              [0.076]
Four-year                      0.112      0.110         0.057     0.057     0.118      0.131
                              (0.044)    (0.041)      (0.085)    (0.094)   (0.042)    (0.042)
                              [0.623]                 [0.646]              [0.498]
Any                            0.109      0.109         0.050     0.053     0.067      0.074
                              (0.041)    (0.039)      (0.072)    (0.093)   (0.040)    (0.040)
                              [0.722]                 [0.739]              [0.648]

Covariates                      N            Y            N          Y        N         Y
Number of school-years               179                       60                 290
Number of students                   930                      284                 894




                          Continued on next page


                                                 64
                                        Appendix Table XVI (Continued)
                    Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on Second Year College Persistence
                   by Selected School and Student Characteristics, With and Without Covariates
                                               First HAIL Cohort

                                                         Panel C. Gender
                                                       Male                        Female
        Highly competitive or above             0.120        0.110           0.150        0.156
                                               (0.030)      (0.028)         (0.028)      (0.025)
                                               [0.118]                      [0.115]
        UM                                      0.119        0.110           0.136        0.142
                                               (0.029)      (0.026)         (0.026)      (0.024)
                                               [0.091]                      [0.098]
        Four-year                               0.116        0.114           0.112        0.113
                                               (0.039)      (0.038)         (0.036)      (0.034)
                                               [0.561]                       [0.56]
        Any                                     0.030        0.030           0.105        0.106
                                               (0.036)      (0.036)         (0.032)      (0.032)
                                                [0.71]                      [0.682]

        Covariates                                N            Y               N            Y
        Number of school-years                          384                         441
        Number of students                              883                        1,225

                                                      Panel D. Race/Ethnicity
                                                White or Asian                     Black                         Other
        Highly competitive or above             0.145        0.148            0.100       0.085           0.051        0.060
                                               (0.024)      (0.021)         (0.076)      (0.064)         (0.072)      (0.076)
                                                [0.11]                      [0.221]                      [0.183]
        UM                                      0.142        0.144            0.016       0.023           0.051        0.058
                                               (0.023)      (0.020)         (0.067)      (0.062)         (0.071)      (0.074)
                                                [0.09]                      [0.177]                      [0.175]
        Four-year                               0.105        0.110           -0.018       0.015           0.089        0.082
                                               (0.031)      (0.030)         (0.089)      (0.105)         (0.090)      (0.088)
                                               [0.552]                      [0.695]                      [0.497]
        Any                                     0.072        0.078           -0.014       0.007           0.047        0.060
                                               (0.029)      (0.029)         (0.080)      (0.092)         (0.086)      (0.086)
                                               [0.687]                      [0.757]                      [0.615]

        Covariates                                N            Y               N            Y                N           Y
        Number of school-years                          496                          100                          114
        Number of students                             1,786                         165                          157

Source: Michigan administrative data and National Student Clearinghouse data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. For Panels A and B, coefficients are from separate regressions of outcome on
treatment status and strata dummies, estimated on the subgroup. For Panels C and D, coefficients are from separate regressions of
school-subgroup-level outcome rate on treatment status and strata dummies. Covariates include all characteristics listed in Appendix
Table II and are at the school-subgroup level. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Control mean for subgroup in brackets.
Enrollment is measured at the first college attended in the two falls following expected high school graduation and is unconditional on
any college enrollment.




                                                                   65
                                              Appendix Table XVII
                      Estimated Spillover Effect of HAIL Scholarship on Non-HAIL Students
                                          First and Second HAIL cohorts

                                                                              (1)          (2)         (3)
                                                     Panel A. Application
                       Treatment Effect on non-HAIL students                -0.011       -0.000      0.001
                                                                           (0.005)      (0.002)     (0.002)

                       R-squared                                            0.030        0.852       0.870
                       Strata dummies                                         X            X           X
                       2015 application rate                                               X           X
                       2009-2014 application rates                                                     X

                                                      Panel B. Admission
                       Treatment Effect on non-HAIL students                -0.005       -0.000      0.000
                                                                           (0.003)      (0.001)     (0.001)

                       R-squared                                            0.024        0.782       0.828
                       Strata dummies                                         X            X           X
                       2015 admission rate                                                 X           X
                       2009-2014 admission rates                                                       X

                                                      Panel C. Enrollment
                       Treatment Effect on non-HAIL students                -0.004       -0.000      0.000
                                                                           (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.001)

                       R-squared                                            0.022        0.725       0.770
                       Strata dummies                                         X            X           X
                       2015 enrollment rate                                                X           X
                       2009-2014 enrollment rates                                                      X
                       Number of school-years                                            1,025

Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Coefficients are from regression of outcome rate for non-HAIL eligible students
on treatment status and strata dummies, plus controls as indicated. Schools missing historical rates are assigned values of zero, and
regressions include missingness indicators. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses.




                                                                66
D   Appendix Figures




                       67
                                                                                                                                              Appendix Figure I
                                                                                                                        First-time and Total Visits to HAIL Webpages, by HAIL Cohort




                                                                                      Ea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ea
                                                                                         r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r
                                                                                        ly




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ly
                                                                                                                                       Re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Re
                                                                                           ac




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ac
                                                                                                                                         gu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      gu
                                                                                             tio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tio
                                      St

                                                                Pa




                                                                                                                                                                                   St

                                                                                                                                                                                              Pa
                                                                                                                                          la




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        la
                                        ud




                                                                                                                                                                                     ud
                                                                    re




                                                                                              n




                                                                                                                                                                                                  re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                                                                             r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                de




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              de
                                                                     nt




                                                                                                                                                                                                   nt
                                                              en




                                                                                                                                                                                            en
                                                                                                                                              de




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            de
                                                                                                   ad




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ad
                                                              tl




                                                                                                                                                                                             tl
                                                              le




                                                                                                                                                                                             le
                                                                                                                                                 ad




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ad
                                                                 tte




                                                                                                                                                                                                tte
                                                                 et




                                                                                                                                                                                                et
                                                                                                   lin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lin
                                                                                                                                                 lin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lin
                                                                    te




                                                                                                                                                                                                   te
                                                                     r(




                                                                                                                                                                                                    r(
                                                                                                     e(




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e(
                                                                                                                                                   e(




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e(
                                                                       r(




                                                                                                                                                                                                      r(
                                                                        Se




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Se
                                                                                                        N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                          Se




                                                                                                                                                      Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Se




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fe
                                                                           p




                                                                                                         ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                          p




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ov
                                                                             p




                                                                                                                                                        b




                                                                                                                                                                                                            p




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        b
                                                                              21




                                                                                                                                                                                                             21
                                                                               1)




                                                                                                             1)




                                                                                                                                                           1)




                                                                                                                                                                                                              9)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1)
                                                                                )




                                                                                                                                                                                                                )
                                                               40                                                                                                                           120




                               First-time visits to webpage
                                                                                                                                                                                            100
                                                               30




                                                                                                                                                                        Visits to webpage
                                                                                                                                                                                             80

                                                               20                                                                                                                            60

                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                0                                                                                                                             0
                                                                    Sep 1                                  Nov 1                      Jan 1                     Mar 1                             Sep 1                                  Nov 1                      Jan 1                     Mar 1
                                                                                                                   Date (2015-2016)                                                                                                              Date (2015-2016)
68




                                                                            (a) First HAIL Cohort, First Time Page Views                                                                                     (b) First HAIL Cohort, Total Page Views
                                                              St




                                                                                                                                                                                            St
                                                                ud




                                                                                                                                                                                              ud
                                                                en




                                                                                                                                                                                              en
                                                                                      Ea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ea
                                                                    t&




                                                                                                                                                                                                  t&
                                                                                       rly




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rly
                                                                      pa




                                                                                                                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                                                       Re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Re
                                                                                           ac




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ac
                                                                         re




                                                                                                                                                                                                       re
                                                                                                                                         gu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       gu
                                                                                             tio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tio
                                                                          nt




                                                                                                                                                                                                        nt
                                                                                                                                            la




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          la
                                                                                              n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n
                                                                            le




                                                                                                                                                                                                          le
                                                                                                                                              rd




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r
                                                                                                de




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              de
                                                                              tte




                                                                                                                                                                                                            tte




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            de
                                                                                                                                              ea
                                                                                                   ad




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ad
                                                                                  r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ad
                                                                                 s(




                                                                                                                                                                                                               s(
                                                                                                                                                 dl
                                                                                                   lin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lin
                                                                                                                                                   in
                                                                                  O




                                                                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                       e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                      e(




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e(
                                                                                   ct




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ct
                                                                                                        (N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (N
                                                                                      4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                       Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fe
                                                                                                           ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ov
                                                                                       &




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      &
                                                                                                                                                          b




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          b
                                                                                          7)




                                                                                                             1)




                                                                                                                                                           1)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1)
                                                               40                                                                                                                           120
                               First-time visits to webpage




                                                                                                                                                                                            100




                                                                                                                                                                        Visits to webpage
                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                                             80

                                                               20                                                                                                                            60

                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                0                                                                                                                             0
                                                                    Sep 1                                  Nov 1                      Jan 1                     Mar 1                             Sep 1                                  Nov 1                      Jan 1                     Mar 1
                                                                                                                   Date (2016-2017)                                                                                                              Date (2016-2017)


                                                                         (c) Second HAIL Cohort, First Time Page Views                                                                                      (d) Second HAIL Cohort, Total Page Views

     Source: University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
     Notes: For first time views, unit of analysis is a first-time visit to the personalized URL associated with a treated HAIL student, aggregated by date. For total views, unit of analysis is a visit to a personalized
     URL associated with a treated HAIL student, aggregated by date.
                                                                     Appendix Figure II
                                     Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment
                                                               First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                   (a) Applied                                                                                                        (b) Admitted


                                .8                                                                                                               .8

                                                                                             0.68
  Average UM application rate




                                                                                                                     Average UM admission rate
                                .6                                                                                                               .6




                                .4                                                                                                               .4
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.32
                                         0.26
                                .2                                                                                                               .2           0.15


                                0                                                                                                                0
                                         Control                                            Treatment                                                       Control                  Treatment




                                                                                                            (c) Enrolled


                                                                                       .8
                                                          Average UM enrollment rate




                                                                                       .6




                                                                                       .4

                                                                                                                                                       0.27

                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                    0.12


                                                                                       0
                                                                                                  Control                                             Treatment




Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following
expected high school graduation. Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application.




                                                                                                                69
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Appendix Figure III
                                                                                                                                                                                              Randomization-Based Inference

                                                                  (a) Highly competitive or above                                                                                                                    (b) UM                                                                                (c) Highly competitive or above other than UM

                                                                                                         Estimated effect = 0.146                                                                                                     Estimated effect = 0.146                                                                Estimated effect = 0.000
            Fraction of randomization iterations       .1                                                                                                                          .1                                                                                                                       .1




                                                                                                                                           Fraction of randomization iterations




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fraction of randomization iterations
                                                      .08                                                                                                                         .08                                                                                                                      .08



                                                      .06                                                                                                                         .06                                                                                                                      .06



                                                      .04                                                                                                                         .04                                                                                                                      .04



                                                      .02                                                                                                                         .02                                                                                                                      .02



                                                       0                                                                                                                            0                                                                                                                        0
                                                            -.1      -.05     0       .05           .1              .15                                                                 -.1          -.05            0     .05   .1              .15                                                             -.1   -.05              0               .05       .1   .15
70




                                                                            (d) Four-year                                                                                                                       (e) Two-year                                                                                                             (f) Any

                                                                                   Estimated effect = 0.074                                                                                    Estimated effect = -0.035                                                                                                                Estimated effect = 0.039

                                                       .1                                                                                                                          .1                                                                                                                       .1
               Fraction of randomization iterations




                                                                                                                                    Fraction of randomization iterations




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fraction of randomization iterations
                                                      .08                                                                                                                         .08                                                                                                                      .08



                                                      .06                                                                                                                         .06                                                                                                                      .06



                                                      .04                                                                                                                         .04                                                                                                                      .04



                                                      .02                                                                                                                         .02                                                                                                                      .02



                                                        0                                                                                                                          0                                                                                                                        0
                                                            -.1      -.05     0       .05            .1             .15                                                                 -.1          -.05           0      .05   .1             .15                                                              -.1   -.05             0                .05       .1   .15




     Notes: Each simulated treatment effect comes from first randomly assigning schools to treatment using the same randomization algorithm used for true assignment, then running a regression of the outcome
     on "treatment" status, including controls for strata. Exact p-value is calculated as the number of simulated effects greater in absolute value than the estimated effect.
                                                                      Appendix Figure IV
                                 Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment by Region
                                                                First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                       (a) Applied                                                                                                                             (b) Admitted


                                .8                                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                                                                        0.74

                                                                                              0.67
  Average UM application rate




                                                                                                                                        Average UM admission rate
                                .6             0.55
                                                                                                                                                                    .6




                                .4                                                                             0.36                                                 .4                                                       0.36

                                                                                                                                                                                     0.29                    0.31


                                                          0.20                                                                                                                                                      0.20
                                .2    0.16                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                                                                            0.10                     0.12



                                0                                                                                                                                    0
                                       C        T          C                                   T                C        T                                                   C        T               C       T      C        T

                                     Upper Peninsula      West Central                                           Southeast                                                 Upper Peninsula           West Central     Southeast



                                                                                                                             (c) Enrolled


                                                                                              .8
                                                                 Average UM enrollment rate




                                                                                              .6




                                                                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.31
                                                                                                               0.25                                                 0.24

                                                                                              .2                                                                                     0.17

                                                                                                      0.08                       0.09


                                                                                               0
                                                                                                       C        T                 C                                  T                C        T

                                                                                                     Upper Peninsula             West Central                                          Southeast



Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following
expected high school graduation. Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application. Schools in the UP make up 14 percent of
sample, while schools in West Central and Southeast Michigan represent 46 percent and 40 percent of the sample, respectively.




                                                                                                                                 71
                                                                  Appendix Figure V
                           Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment by Urbanicity
                                                            First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                          (a) Applied                                                                                                                               (b) Admitted


                                .8                 0.76                                                                                                                .8
                                                                                                 0.72

                                                                                                                             0.64
  Average UM application rate




                                                                                                                                           Average UM admission rate
                                .6                                                                                                                                     .6

                                     0.46


                                .4                                                                                                                                     .4                   0.36
                                                             0.34                                                                                                                                                                  0.33
                                                                                                                                                                              0.32                                  0.31



                                .2                                                                                    0.16                                             .2                                 0.16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.10



                                0                                                                                                                                       0
                                      C             T         C                                   T                    C      T                                                C             T             C            T    C      T

                                            City                  Suburb                                              Town/Rural                                                     City                      Suburb       Town/Rural



                                                                                                                               (c) Enrolled


                                                                                                 .8
                                                                    Average UM enrollment rate




                                                                                                 .6




                                                                                                 .4
                                                                                                                      0.33

                                                                                                                                                                       0.26                        0.26
                                                                                                        0.22
                                                                                                 .2
                                                                                                                                    0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.08


                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                         C             T             C                                  T                    C      T

                                                                                                               City                      Suburb                                             Town/Rural



Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: All analyses done at the school-year level. Application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following
expected high school graduation. Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application. Schools in suburban areas make up 35
percent of sample, while schools in cities and town or rural areas represent 12 percent and 54 percent of the sample, respectively.




                                                                                                                                    72
                                                                      Appendix Figure VI
                                 Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment by Gender
                                                                First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                         (a) Applied                                                                                                                            (b) Admitted


                                .8                                                                                                                                .8
                                                    0.69
                                                                                                                    0.66
  Average UM application rate




                                                                                                                                      Average UM admission rate
                                .6                                                                                                                                .6




                                .4                                                                                                                                .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.33
                                      0.29                                                                                                                                                0.28
                                                                                                  0.24

                                .2                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                                                        0.14                                   0.14




                                0                                                                                                                                 0
                                       C             T                                             C                 T                                                      C                 T                 C               T

                                             Male                                                          Female                                                                 Male                                Female



                                                                                                                             (c) Enrolled


                                                                                             .8
                                                                Average UM enrollment rate




                                                                                             .6




                                                                                             .4

                                                                                                                                                                                         0.28
                                                                                                                     0.22
                                                                                             .2
                                                                                                   0.11                                                                0.12



                                                                                             0
                                                                                                       C                 T                                              C                 T

                                                                                                             Male                                                               Female



Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: Rates are gender-specific school-year averages. Application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall
following expected high school graduation. Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application. 83 percent of HAIL schools
have at least one female HAIL student; 71 percent have at least one male. Female students represent 58 percent of the sample and male
students represent 42 percent.




                                                                                                                                 73
                                         Appendix Figure VII
 Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on UM Application, Admission, and Enrollment by Race/Ethnicity
                                    First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                      (a) Applied                                                                                                                                       (b) Admitted


                                .8                                                                                                                                      .8
                                                                                              0.74

                                              0.67
                                                                                                                             0.64
  Average UM application rate




                                                                                                                                            Average UM admission rate
                                .6                                                                                                                                      .6

                                                         0.48

                                                                                                              0.39
                                .4                                                                                                                                      .4                                                   0.36
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.31                                                       0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.26
                                     0.23

                                .2                                                                                                                                      .2
                                                                                                                                                                               0.13




                                0                                                                                                                                        0
                                      C        T          C                                    T               C              T                                                 C        T                     C              T      C              T

                                     White or Asian             Black                                                Other                                                     White or Asian                        Black                 Other



                                                                                                                               (c) Enrolled


                                                                                              .8
                                                                 Average UM enrollment rate




                                                                                              .6




                                                                                              .4

                                                                                                              0.26                                                      0.27                           0.27
                                                                                                                                    0.23
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.20
                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                     0.10



                                                                                               0
                                                                                                      C        T                     C                                   T               C              T

                                                                                                     White or Asian                        Black                                               Other



Source: Michigan administrative data and University of Michigan Office of Enrollment Management data.
Notes: Rates are race-specific school-year averages. Application, admission and enrollment measured in the summer and fall following
expected high school graduation. Admission and enrollment are unconditional on application. 92 percent of HAIL schools have at least
one white or Asian HAIL student; 20 percent have at least one black student and 19 percent have at least one student of another race or
ethnicity. White and Asian students represent 85 percent of the sample; black students and students of another race or ethnicity
represent 8 percent and 7 percent, respectively.




                                                                                                                                    74
                                                                                                                               Appendix Figure VIII
                                                                                                               Estimated Effect of HAIL Scholarship on College Choice
                                                                                                                           First and Second HAIL Cohorts

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (c) Highly competitive or above
                                                            (a) Highly competitive or above                                                                                                    (b) UM               other than UM

                                                                            .8                                                                                                .8                                                                                           .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Average non-UM highly compet.+ enrollment rate
                           Average highly competitive+ enrollment rate




                                                                                                                                         Average UM enrollment rate
                                                                            .6                                                                                                .6                                                                                           .6




                                                                            .4                                                                                                .4                                                                                           .4

                                                                                                    0.28
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.25
                                                                            .2                                                                                                .2                                                                                           .2
                                                                                 0.13
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.03                 0.03
                                                                            0                                                                                                 0                                                                                             0
                                                                                 Control           Treatment                                                                         Control            Treatment                                                                 Control             Treatment




                                                                                   (d) Four-year                                                                                        (e) Two-year                                                                                        (f) Any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.83
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.79
75




                                                                            .8                       0.75                                                                    .8                                                                                            .8

                                                                                  0.67




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Average any college enrollment rate
                                 Average four-year enrollment rate




                                                                                                                           Average two-year enrollment rate
                                                                            .6                                                                                               .6                                                                                            .6




                                                                            .4                                                                                               .4                                                                                            .4




                                                                            .2                                                                                               .2                                                                                            .2
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.08

                                                                             0                                                                                               0                                                                                             0
                                                                                 Control           Treatment                                                                         Control            Treatment                                                                 Control             Treatment




                                                                                 (g) In Michigan                                                                                   (h) Michigan Public                                                                          (i) Not in Michigan

                                                                            .8                       0.77                                                                    .8                                                                                            .8
                                                                                  0.73
                                                                                                                           Average Michigan public college enrollment rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.71




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Average non-Michigan college enrollment rate
                                 Average Michigan college enrollment rate




                                                                                                                                                                                     0.64
                                                                            .6                                                                                               .6                                                                                            .6




                                                                            .4                                                                                               .4                                                                                            .4




                                                                            .2                                                                                               .2                                                                                            .2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.06                 0.06
                                                                             0                                                                                               0                                                                                             0
                                                                                 Control           Treatment                                                                         Control            Treatment                                                                 Control             Treatment




     Source: Michigan administrative data and National Student Clearinghouse data.
     Notes: All analyses done at the school-year-level. Enrollment measured at the first institution attended in the fall following expected high school graduation. Enrollment unconditional on any college
     enrollment.
