                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MEDIA SENTIMENT AND INTERNATIONAL ASSET PRICES

                                       Samuel P. Fraiberger
                                            Do Lee
                                          Damien Puy
                                        Romain Rancière

                                       Working Paper 25353
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25353


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2018, Revised March 2020




We are grateful to the IMF Big data initiative for financial support, as well as participants in the
CEPR Inter- national Macroeconomic and Finance meeting, the FRB-IMF seminar on
International Macro and Finance and the Macro-Financial Research Seminar of the IMF for
helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF, the World Bank, their Executive Boards,
their management, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Samuel P. Fraiberger, Do Lee, Damien Puy, and Romain Rancière. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Media Sentiment and International Asset Prices
Samuel P. Fraiberger, Do Lee, Damien Puy, and Romain Rancière
NBER Working Paper No. 25353
December 2018, Revised March 2020
JEL No. F3,G12,G14,G15

                                         ABSTRACT

We investigate the relationship between media sentiment and international equity prices using a
new dataset of 4 million news articles published between 1991 and 2015. Three key results
emerge. First, news sentiment robustly predicts (future) daily returns around the world. However,
we find a sharp contrast between the effect of local news and that of global news: whereas local
news optimism (pessimism) predicts a small and transitory increase (decrease) in local equity
returns, global news sentiment has a larger impact on returns that does not reverse in the short
run. Second, news sentiment affects local prices mainly through the investment decisions of
foreign — rather than local — investors. Third, large variations in global news sentiment
predominantly happen in the absence of new information about fundamentals, suggesting that
movements in global sentiment capture variations in investors sentiment. Taken together, our
findings illustrate the key role played by foreign news and investors sentiment in driving local
asset prices.

Samuel P. Fraiberger                            Damien Puy
World Bank                                      International Monetary Fund
1818 H Street, NW                               700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20433                            Washington, DC 20431
samuel.fraiberger@nyu.edu                       dpuy@imf.org

Do Lee                                          Romain Rancière
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
New York University                             University of Southern California
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor                   Los Angeles, CA 90097
New York, NY 10012                              and NBER
dql204@nyu.edu                                  ranciere@usc.edu
1.     Introduction

This paper formally investigates the link between media sentiment and equity prices around the

world, focusing on the following questions. First, does news sentiment predict international equity

returns, and can we isolate the effect of foreign news from that of country-specific news? Second,

what type of investors are reacting to news sentiment? Third, does news sentiment capture new

information about economic fundamentals, or rather “animal spirits” fueled by journalists (Shiller

(2015))?

     Using 4 million Reuters articles published around the world between 1991 and 2015, we highlight

three key results. First, in line with previous studies, we find that news tone – our measure of

news sentiment – robustly predicts future daily returns both in advanced economies (AE) and in

emerging markets (EM) even after controlling for known determinants of stock prices. However, not

all news has the same impact. Changes in local (country-specific) news sentiment have a small and

temporary impact on local equity returns that is reversed after a few days. By contrast, changes

in global news sentiment have a much larger impact on equity returns around the world that is not

reversed in the short run.

     Second, by analyzing daily equity flows from international mutual funds between 2007 and 2015,

we find an effect that is strikingly close to that of stock returns: although local news optimism at-

tracts equity flows for a few days only, global sentiment optimism attracts them more permanently.

This effect is entirely driven by the (net) asset demand from foreign funds domiciled outside of the

country rather than local funds domiciled in the country, indicating that news tone predominantly

affects local equity prices through the investment decisions of foreign investors.

     Third, we find that large variations in global news sentiment typically happen in the absence

of new information about fundamentals in core countries (e.g. the US, the Eurozone, or China).

We also find that global news sentiment shocks have a stronger impact (i) in troubled times, when

investors are more anxious, and (ii) on the allocation of international Exchange Traded Funds

(ETFs), whose investors tend to pay little attention to the fundamentals of countries these funds

ultimately invest in. Taken together, these results show strong empirical support for the existence

of animal spirits shocks at a global level.

     Our core empirical strategy relies on estimating the response of equity prices to sentiment shocks


                                                   1
using Jordà (2005)’s local projection method. First, we construct news sentiment indices for 25

advanced and emerging countries at a daily frequency using using a bag-of-words method.1 We

then quantify the effect of variations in US news sentiment on US equity returns, finding estimates

similar to those obtained in previous studies (e.g. Tetlock (2007)). Next, we test whether these

results extend to all countries, controlling for known sources of predictability in international equity

returns both locally and globally. Overall, the magnitude of our panel estimates is close to the US

benchmark: a one standard deviation increase in news sentiment is associated with an increase in

equity returns of 10 basis points that partially reverses after a few days, indicating that the effect

of news sentiment on asset prices is a pervasive phenomenon that is not limited to the US.

      To further investigate what drives this partial reversal, we then isolate the effect of local news

from that of global news. We recompute the sentiment index of each country after excluding any

article mentioning any other country, allowing us to capture the sentiment of purely local news.

We also construct a global news sentiment index capturing the tone of news published in the world

every day.2 While the effect of local sentiment shocks is still significant, its magnitude is roughly

cut in half, peaking around 5 basis points before vanishing after a week. By contrast, global news

sentiment shocks have a stronger impact on equity returns that does not reverse in the short run

(i.e. at least 3 weeks). A one standard deviation increase in global news optimism (or pessimism)

generates a permanent increase (decrease) of 25 basis points that reaches its peak slowly after ten

to fifteen days, both in AE and in EM alike. These findings are robust to a variety of tests and

extensions: they remain stable over time and across countries, they are not driven by extreme

values, crisis events or by having the US in our sample, and they are not sensitive to varying the

bag-of-words model used to compute the sentiment index.

      To uncover which type of investors drive these movements in equity prices, we then extend our

analysis to international equity flows. Using data on daily flows from international equity mutual

funds between 2007 and 2015, we explore how funds’ allocations react to changes in local and global

news sentiment. Overall, we find a very similar response to that of stock returns: although local

news optimism attracts equity fund flows for a few days only, global optimism generates an inflow

that peaks after two weeks. Using the official domicile of each fund as a proxy for its location,
  1
      Details are provided in Section 2.
  2
      Details are provided in Section 3.



                                                    2
we also find that while foreign equity funds strongly respond to changes in news sentiment, the

response from local funds is muted, suggesting that news tone affects prices mostly through foreign

investors.

      From a theoretical perspective, our results suggest that local news affect investors sentiment,

leading to temporary variations in asset prices resulting from the investment decisions of either

noise or liquidity traders (Long, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann (1990), Campbell, Grossman

and Wang (1993)). We also find that such traders are more likely to be foreigners than locals.

We also uncover evidence on the nature of global news sentiment shocks. In theory, the longer

and more sustained response of equity prices to global news sentiment shocks could indicate that

global news convey new information on fundamentals that is slowly incorporated into local asset

prices (Veldkamp (2011)). Alternatively, the tone of global news could induce swings in investors

sentiment – or so-called “animal spirits” – leading to movements in local asset prices occurring

even though no new information on the state of the world economy has emerged (Shiller (2015)).

Although distinguishing these two hypotheses is difficult, we present indirect evidence favoring the

latter. First, while measures of macroeconomic surprises in major economies correlate with the

global news sentiment, they only capture 20% of its total variance.3 Furthermore, our results are

robust to the inclusion of these surprise measures as controls in our estimations, suggesting that

global investor sentiment rather than global news shocks about macroeconomic fundamentals drive

our results. We also find that global news sentiment shocks have a stronger impact in troubled times

when investors are more anxious: the impact of global news sentiment is four times stronger in

global “bear” markets than in global “bull” markets (Garcia (2013)). Finally, we find that global

news sentiment shocks have a stronger impact on investors who tend to be much less informed

about fundamentals. More specifically, the investment response of Exchange Trade Funds (ETFs)

to a change in global news sentiment is roughly twice as large as the response of active funds.

Taken together, these results strengthen the view that global sentiment shocks capture variations

in investors sentiment that are are not arbitraged away in the short run (Shleifer and Vishny

(1997)).

      Given the large impact of global news sentiment shocks on international asset prices, we close
  3
   Macroeconomic surprises are measured by the difference between actual data releases and the Bloomberg survey
median.



                                                      3
the paper by investigating its properties in more details. First, we find that global news sentiment

shocks explain a larger portion of the variance in international equity returns than those of the

VIX. Although both indices capture the same spikes in risk aversion during times of high financial

market stress, our index tracks a much broader set of events than the VIX, especially when it comes

to periods of global market optimism. We also show that our key results are robust to introducing

the Economic Policy Uncertainty index (EPU) in our estimation (Baker, Bloom and Davis (2016)),

suggesting that changes in global news sentiment are not driven by variations in the uncertainty

expressed in economic news.4

       Our results contribute to two main branches of the literature. The first is the vast literature

documenting the strength – and rise – of co-movements in asset prices and capital flows (Fratzscher

(2012), Raddatz and Schmukler (2012), Jotikasthira, Lundblad and Ramadorai (2012), Ghosh,

Qureshi, Kim and Zalduendo (2014), Broner, Didier, Erce and Schmukler (2013), Rey (2015), Puy

(2016), Cerutti, Claessens and Puy (2019)).5 Most of the debate has focused on the importance

of global (or push) factors for (local) asset price movements, and on the role of foreign investors

in propagating shocks across countries. A growing consensus has emerged on the importance of

foreign factors rather than local ones in explaining asset price movements, especially in EM and

small open economies.6 Our results support this view, global news having a strong impact on local

asset prices through international investors. However, we are the first to explore these questions

using cross-country news data at such high frequency, allowing us to disentangle the effect of local

news from that of global news, and bridging the gap between prices and quantities which are

typically analysed separately. Local news sentiment can serve as a proxy for sudden changes in

local conditions – or “pull” factors – that we find to be affecting both asset prices and flows, a

result that is missing from studies only relying on macroeconomic proxies.7 We also introduce a

new index of global news sentiment that captures more events than the VIX, thereby offering a

better proxy for “push” factors.
   4
      This finding holds also when we include our own news uncertainty index in the estimation.
   5
      Our results on the long-lasting impact of global sentiments on flows and returns also relates our paper to the
literature on the effect global growth news shocks on international portfolio-reallocation and returns (Colacito, Croce,
Gavazzoni and Ready (2018)).
    6
      See, for instance, the ongoing debate on the existence and strength of a global financial cycle, and its impact on
asset prices in EM (Rey (2015).
    7
      For instance, the capital flows literature finds little to no role for local conditions – usually measured by domestic
output growth – in affecting gross equity flows dynamics (see, among others, Forbes and Warnock (2012) or Cerutti
et al. (2019) and references therein).


                                                             4
    Our findings also relate to the growing body of research investigating the link between the news

media, investors sentiment, and asset prices (Tetlock (2007), Garcia (2013), Manela and Moreira

(2017), Calomiris and Mamaysky (2019)). We contribute to this literature in several ways. To our

knowledge, we are the first to assess the link between news sentiment and high-frequency equity

returns in a large sample of AE and EM using a large dataset of news articles.8 Going beyond the

US and using media articles across countries allows us to estimate the relative contribution of local

and foreign news to local equity returns. The use of a vast scope of news also extends previous

contributions that have focused exclusively on financial news, complementing recent contributions

showing the importance of policy news in driving asset prices (Baker, Bloom, Davis and Kost

(2019)).

    We are also the first to assess the effect of news sentiment on high frequency capital flows

data, casting light on the speed at which flows respond to news. For instance, the protracted

response of international equity flows in response to global news sentiment shocks is consistent

with Albuquerque, Bauer and Schneider (2005), who found that US investors build and unwind

foreign equity positions gradually. Our results also shed light on the type of investors who are

the most sensitive to sudden changes in news sentiment. The overreaction of ETFs complements

recent findings showing how ETFs amplify the global financial cycle, especially in EM (Williams,

Converse and Levy-Yeyati (2018)). Finally, we are closely connected to the vast empirical literature

that has focused on measuring investors sentiment and quantifying its effects on a variety of financial

market outcomes (see Baker and Wurgler (2007) for a review). Our findings strengthen the view

that the news media plays a key role in capturing investors’ sentiment. We also provide new

sentiment measures that are transparent, easy to replicate, and readily available for researchers

and practitioners alike. The high frequency and large cross-sectional coverage of our measures

make them particularly attractive for vast range of applications.               9


    Finally, from a technical perspective, we contribute to the recent and fast-growing literature
   8
     This literature has largely focused on the US using a relatively small sample of news. For instance, Garcia (2013)
and Tetlock (2007) use one column in one newspaper per day to capture US news sentiment, representing roughly
30,000 and 3,000 articles respectively. For the US only, we use 1.8 million articles. Our work complements Calomiris
and Mamaysky (2019), who assess the predictive power of (i) topic-specific sentiment, frequency, and unusualness
(entropy) of word flow (ii) on monthly and one-year ahead stock market outcomes in 51 countries. In contrast, we
focus on the very short run impact of news tone, exploring very different questions i.e. the differential effect of local
and global news and the channels through which news propagate.
   9
     Both local and global news sentiment indices are available on the authors’ websites. Although our analysis stops
in 2015, data are available until December 2019.


                                                           5
that links textual information to both economic and financial outcomes (see Gentzkow, Kelly and

Taddy (2017) for a review). Among many others, Baker et al. (2016) develop an index of economic

policy uncertainty from US newspaper articles, showing that it forecasts declines in investment,

output, and employment.10 Using daily internet search volume from millions of households in

the US, Da, Engelberg and Gao (2014) find that the volume of queries related to economic issues

(e.g. “recession,” “unemployment,” and “bankruptcy”) can predict short-term return reversals,

temporary increases in volatility, and mutual fund flows out of equity and into bond funds.

      The rest of the paper is constructed as follows. Section 2. presents our data our news sentiment

measures. Section 3. presents our empirical framework and our key findings. Section 4. provides

further results on the properties of the global news sentiment index. Section 5. reports extensions

and robustness checks. The last section concludes.



2.      Data Description

Our empirical analysis relying on three main data sources: (i) a dataset of news articles, (ii) a

dataset of asset prices, trading volumes, and volatility measures, and (iii) a dataset of capital flows.

We detail them in turn.


2.A.       News articles and Sentiment measures

2.A.1.      News articles

Our dataset of news comes from Factiva.com. Each article is annotated with topics and geographic

tags generated by Factiva using a proprietary algorithm. We focused on English articles published

by Reuters between 1991 and 2015 and tagged with either “economic news” or “financial market

news” as well as with one of the 25 countries in our sample – 9 AE and 16 EM. Summary statistics

of our news dataset are provided in Appendix table A1. Overall, our dataset covers a wide range of

economic topics (e.g. economic policy, government finance, etc.), financial topics (e.g. commodity

markets, equity markets, forex, etc.), as well as corporate and political news (Appendix Figure A1).

The distribution of topics is similar in AE and in EM. 200 US-related articles were published each
 10
      Our results are orthogonal to the various EPU indexes constructed by Baker et al. (2016). See Section 4..




                                                          6
day, representing one fourth of our sample.11 The distribution of articles across non-US countries

is relatively balanced, averaging at 97,000 articles per country over the whole sample. For non-US

countries, 20 articles were published each day.


2.A.2.       News-Sentiment measures

To measure news sentiment, we use a ”bag-of-words” model, allowing us to reduce complex and

multi-dimensional text data into a single number.12 First, we combine existing lists of positive and

negative words found in financial texts by Loughran and Mcdonald (2011) and in texts related to

economic policy by Young and Soroka (2012). We then expand our lists by including the inflections

of each word: for example, the word “lose” belongs to the negative list, hence we also include the

words “losing”, “loser”, “lost”, “loss”, etc, leading to a final list of 7,217 negative words and 3,250

positive words. Table 1 shows the most frequent tonal words in our corpus.

       Next, we define the sentiment of an article j as:

                                               P             P
                                                 i wijP
                                                      pij  − i wij nij
                                        sj =                           ,
                                                         i wij tij


where pij is the number of occurrences of positive word i in article j, nij is the number of occurrences

of negative word i in article j, tij is the number of occurrences of word i in article j, and wij is the

weight associated with word i in article j. In our baseline estimates, we take wij = 1, allowing each

word to contribute to the sentiment measure proportionally to its frequency of occurrence. In a

robustness check, we let each word contribute to the sentiment measure proportionally to its “Term

Frequency–Inverse Document Frequency” (TF-IDF, Manning, Raghavan and Schütze (2008)) by

taking:

                                                                    
                                                                N
                                               wij = log                 ,
                                                                Ni

where N is the number of articles in the corpus and Ni is the number of articles in which word i is

present. Hence, this weighting smoothes out differences in word frequency naturally occurring in
  11
    Note that an article can be tagged with multiple locations and topics. See the next section for an example and
Appendix Figure A2 for details.
 12
    See Gentzkow et al. (2017) for more details on the analysis of text data in the social sciences.




                                                        7
                 Table 1. Most frequent positive (left) and negative (right) words

    Positive     Fraction of     Fraction of               Negative     Fraction of    Fraction of
                                               IDF                                                   IDF
     word       positive words     articles                 word      negative words     articles

   strong           0.107          0.118       2.135   crisis             0.088          0.069       2.675
   gains            0.099          0.104       2.265   losses             0.072          0.069       2.677
   well             0.082          0.103       2.271   deficit            0.071          0.044       3.132
   good             0.065          0.077       2.561   weak               0.070          0.070       2.656
   help             0.061          0.074       2.603   limited            0.063          0.062       2.774
   recovery         0.056          0.058       2.850   concerns           0.063          0.067       2.705
   highest          0.044          0.053       2.935   decline            0.050          0.052       2.960
   agreement        0.043          0.042       3.179   weaker             0.048          0.049       3.007
   assets           0.042          0.042       3.159   poor               0.047          0.049       3.017
   positive         0.041          0.051       2.973   unemployment       0.045          0.030       3.493
   better           0.041          0.053       2.932   lost               0.045          0.048       3.034
   gained           0.041          0.049       3.007   fears              0.041          0.045       3.109
   boost            0.040          0.054       2.914   dropped            0.040          0.045       3.095
   leading          0.039          0.052       2.957   slow               0.039          0.042       3.162
   confidence       0.036          0.039       3.255   negative           0.039          0.040       3.225
   gain             0.035          0.042       3.159   problems           0.037          0.039       3.233
   agreed           0.034          0.042       3.179   worries            0.037          0.040       3.210
   stronger         0.032          0.042       3.172   hard               0.036          0.039       3.234
   worth            0.032          0.039       3.239   recession          0.035          0.032       3.457
   opening          0.032          0.041       3.199   loss               0.033          0.032       3.441


Notes: This table presents the most frequent positive (negative) words in our corpus. For each panel, the
first column reports the number of occurrences of each positive (negative) words relative to all occurrences
of positive (negative) words, the second reports the fraction of articles in which the word appears, and the
third column reports its inverse document frequency (IDF), which is defined below.
Source: Words lists come from Loughran and Mcdonald (2011) and Young and Soroka (2012). News articles
come from Factiva.com.




                                                       8
the English language by giving more weight to words that appear more rarely across documents.13

       To illustrate our sentiment measure, we show the example of an article in which tonal words

are highlighted in bold14 , indicating that although our sentiment measure does not capture all of

the nuances in the text, it provides a good indication of its overall tone:


   Title: Argentina’s Peronists defend Menem’s labor reforms.

   Timestamp: 1996-09-02

   Text: BUENOS AIRES, Sept 2 (Reuters) — The Argentine government Monday tried to

   counter criticisms of President Carlos Menem’s proposals for more flexible labor laws,

   arguing that not just workers would contribute to new unemployment insurance. Menem

   angered trade unions, already in disagreement over his fiscal austerity programs, by

   announcing a labor reform package Friday including suspending collective wage deals and

   replacing redundancy payouts with unemployment insurance.

   Topics: Labor/Personnel Issues, Corporate/Industrial News, Economic/Monetary Policy,

   Economic News, Political/General News, Labor Issues, Domestic Politics

   Locations: Argentina, Latin America, South America


       Next, we compute a daily sentiment index for each country by taking the average sentiment

across articles that are tagged with the country’s name. Finally, we normalize each country senti-

ment index by computing its z-score.


2.B.       Asset prices and related variables

Daily equity returns are computed using each country’s main stock market index, and world equity

returns are computed using the Dow Jones World Index. Summary statistics of the dataset used to

compute equity returns are reported in the Appendix table A3. To proxy for market liquidity, we

also collect daily equity trading volumes reported by local stock exchanges. Following Campbell et
  13
     It is well established that the distribution of words in the English language follows a power law. For a broader
discussion on power laws in Economics, see Gabaix (2016).
  14
     This article contains the tags “Argentina” and “Economic News”.




                                                         9
al. (1993) and Tetlock (2007), we compute the de-trended daily log trading volume using a rolling

average of the past 60 days to define the trend. Next, we compute stock market volatility by (i)

de-meaning each daily stock return, (ii) taking the square of this residual, and (iii) subtracting the

past 60-day moving average of the squared residuals. Finally, we use (i) the S&P Goldman Sachs

Commodity index to measure daily percentage changes in commodity prices, and (ii) the CBOE

VIX to proxy for global volatility.


2.C.     Capital flows

Finally, we collected data on daily equity fund flows from EPFR Global, which contains information

on the asset allocation of a large number of international equity funds at high frequency.15 Because

of its extensive industry coverage and quality, EPFR Global has widely been used in recent academic

contributions on funds behavior (e.g., Raddatz and Schmukler (2012), Jotikasthira et al. (2012),

Fratzscher (2012), and other references therein).16 In policy circles, fund flows reported by EPFR

have increasingly been used as a high-frequency proxy for foreign capital inflows especially in EM.17

We focused on the “equity country flows” dataset, which reports the estimated daily amount of

equity funding in US dollars that entered or left each country due to international funds’ portfolio

reallocation. Our dataset of equity flows covers 16 EM between 2005 and 2015.18
  15
      As of 2013, EPFR contained information on more than 29,000 equity funds and 18,000 fixed-income funds,
representing US$20 trillion of assets invested in over 80 AE and EM.
   16
      The EPFR dataset has been found to be a reliable data source. Comparing TNAs (Total Net Assets) and
monthly returns of a subsample of EPFR funds to CRSP mutual fund data, Jotikasthira et al. (2012) found only
minor differences between the EPFR and the CRSP dataset.
   17
      Most funds followed by EPFR Global are (i) located in AE and (ii) account for a significant share of the external
funding received by EM. As a result, the country flows dataset has proved to be a good proxy of total gross inflows
in (or out) of EM. For instance, Pant and Miao (2012) showed that EPFR fund flows correlate well with BOP capital
flows into EM.
   18
      We focus on EM for two reasons. First, the EPFR coverage is generally much higher for EM than for AE, so the
correlation between EPFR equity flows and equity flows measured by the IMF Balance of Payments is higher for EM.
Using the fund’s domicile in the EPFR database to distinguish foreign vs. local funds is also more accurate when
focusing on EM. A high number of funds investing in AE are domiciled in regional tax heavens (e.g. Luxembourg
for European funds) which makes them technically foreign from the point of view of many AE, even though they are
local funds. This problem is much less prevalent for EM.




                                                          10
3.     News, Sentiment and Equity Returns

3.A.     Empirical Framework

Unless otherwise noted, we estimate the cumulative response of asset prices to daily sentiment

shocks using Jordà (2005)’s local projection method. This choice is motivated by the uncertainty

surrounding the timing, the strength, and the shape of the response of asset prices to news sentiment

shocks in our sample spanning AE and EM over more than 25 years. In this context, it is desirable

to use an estimation method that is more flexible and robust to misspecification than typical VARs.

More specifically, we estimate the following model:

                                             J
                                             X                     J
                                                                   X                                  J
                                                                                                      X
           CumRi,t,t+h = αh + µi,h +               θjh Ri,t−j +            βjh GoodN ewsi,t−j +             τjh Arti,t−j
                                             j=1                   j=1                                j=1
                                                                                                                                    (1)
                                   J
                                   X                         J
                                                             X                         J
                                                                                       X
                               +         γjh V   lmi,t−j +         δjh V   oli,t−j +         ρhj Globt−j   +    h
                                                                                                               Di,t   +   εti,h ,
                                   j=1                       j=1                       j=1


where CumRi,t,t+h is the cumulative equity return in country i between day t and t + h, µi,h is

the country fixed effect, Ri,t is the equity return, GoodN ewsi,t is the standardized news sentiment

index, Arti,t is the article count, V lmi,t is the de-trended log-trading volume, V oli,t is a proxy

for market volatility, Globt are global controls — daily world equity returns, the VIX, and daily

changes in key commodity prices — and Di,t is a set of outliers and day-of-the-week dummies.

We estimate equation (1) using ordinary least squares and we only report the main coefficient of

interest β1h (Figure 1) for simplicity.19

     Our model allows us to test whether news sentiment at time t can predict cumulative future

returns after controlling for known sources of predictability for up to j = 8 days. Lagged returns

control for market microstructure phenomena that can generate auto-correlation in observed daily

returns (e.g. bid-ask bounce, nonsynchronous trading, and transactions costs). Trading volumes

capture the effects of changes in market liquidity, and measures of market volatility account for the

influence of other market frictions affecting prices in the short run. Finally, a vector of dummies
   19
      Since the error term in the local projection framework follows a moving average of order h − 1, standard errors
are always corrected for serial auto-correlation and heteroskedasticity. In addition, since the local projections suffer
an efficiency loss that increases with the horizon h, we include the residual from the estimation at horizon h − 1 in
the regression at horizon h, as suggested by Jordà (2005) and Teulings and Zubanov (2014). Adding the residual
from the regression for horizon h − 1 also addresses a potential bias identified in Teulings and Zubanov (2014).




                                                               11
ensures that our results are not driven by outliers (e.g. crisis) or predictable spikes in returns,

which typically occur at the beginning or at the end of a week.20

    Our specification deviates from Tetlock (2007) in several ways. First, we control for the number

of articles published each day, allowing us to distinguish between the volume of news and their tone.

Second, we include global proxies — global returns or yields, VIX and change in commodity prices

— to capture global co-movements, ensuring that our sentiment index is not entirely capturing

shocks that are known to affect asset prices around the world.21 Third, we estimate the cumulative

response of returns up to 20 days ahead as opposed to 5 trading days for Tetlock (2007)).


3.B.     Results – Benchmark

To compare our results with the seminal work of Tetlock (2007), Figure 1.A reports regression results

for the US, using US news and US Dow Jones Industrial Index returns between 1991 and 2015.22

Our estimation is based on 6,260 observations against 4,000 in the original paper. Interestingly,

although our sample of news and our specification deviate from Tetlock (2007), we find very similar

results. Good (bad) news — measured by a one standard deviation increase in sentiment — generate

positive (negative) but transitory returns. The response peaks slightly below 10 basis points and

is not statistically different from zero after one calendar week.23

    Figure 1.B presents the results when we extend our estimation across countries. As specified

in equation (1), we control for global events using the World Dow Jones Index returns, the VIX,

and changes in commodity prices to control for global co-movements and typical shocks that affect

returns around the world. Our estimation is based on 101,170 observations in a panel covering 25

countries. Interestingly, we find that the panel results are close to the US benchmark: a positive

news sentiment shock leads to a positive and economically significant increase in equity returns with

a peak at 9 basis points, indicating that the effect of news sentiment on asset prices is a pervasive
   20
      We control for outliers by introducing dummy variables equal to one if the cumulative equity returns for a given
projection horizon is above (or below) six standard deviations away from the average for each country. We use outlier
dummies to make sure that our results are not entirely driven by a few extreme events. However, our results are
not sensitive to this assumption. In fact, all of our results are economically and statistically stronger when those
dummies are not included. These results are available upon request.
   21
      Similar to the use of outlier dummies, using global controls actually weakens our results. The size and statistical
significance of all of the effects we estimate improves when taking these controls out.
   22
      More specifically, we replicate Equation (1) in Tetlock (2007).
   23
      In Tetlock (2007), a one standard deviation increase in news pessimism generates a 8.1 basis points drop in Dow
Jones returns the next day. This effect is almost completely reversed by the end of the trading week.



                                                           12
                                                           Figure 1. Benchmark Results – Equity Returns




                                                                                                                    .15
                              .15
  Cumulative equity returns (%)




                                                                                        Cumulative equity returns (%)
                                                                                                                    .1
                              .1




                                                                                                                    .05
                              .05




                                                                                                                    0
                              0




                                                                                                                    -.05
                              -.05
                              -.1




                                                                                                                    -.1
                                     0            5                      10   15                                           0            5                      10   15
                                                      Horizon (h Days)                                                                      Horizon (h Days)


                                              Figure 1.A. US Only                                                              Figure 1.B. Panel Full Sample

Notes: The solid line shows the cumulative response of equity prices to a news sentiment shock h-days ahead
estimated using equation (1). The x axis denotes the number of days after the shock. The dark and light
shaded areas indicate the 90% and 95% confidence intervals, respectively. Standard errors are corrected for
serial correlation and heteroskedasticity using the Newey and West estimator with the truncation lag set to
equal the projection horizon h, as suggested by Jordà (2005) and Kilian and Kim (2011).

phenomenon that is not limited to the US. However, although the magnitude of the impact at the

peak is similar to that of the US, we do not observe a reversal anymore. We obtain a similar result

when we remove the US from the sample, indicating that the presence of the US in the sample is

not driving the results.


3.C.                                     Global vs. Local News Sentiment

Two types of articles constitute our corpus: local news and multi-country news. About 60% of

articles in our corpus (i.e. 2.5 million articles) consists of local news tagged with only one country

and conveying country-specific information. A typical local article is the one discussing labor

market laws in Argentina reported in section 2.24 By contrast, the remaining 40% of our corpus

contains articles discussing multiple countries. A typical multi-country article is one reported in the

Appendix entitled “Fears of Brazilian devaluation hit emerging markets”, which mentions multiple

countries and their interrelations.25 The presence of multi-country news mechanically increases the
  24
      Other recent headlines that would qualify as purely local news are the following: “Inflation in Philippines a Fault-
line for Duterte’s “Build, Build, Build” Ambition” (05/31/2018); Socialist chief Pedro Sanchez set to become Spain’s
Prime minister” (05/31/2018); “Slovenia central bank forecasts steady growth despite global risks (10/22/2018)”.
Their content can be consulted online.
   25
      Location tags include: Argentina, Asia, Brazil, Central America, Chile, Emerging Market Countries, Cen-
tral/Eastern Europe, Europe, Indonesia, Latin America, Russia, South America, Southeast Asia, United Kingdom,
CIS Countries, Western Europe.


                                                                                   13
co-movement between our country-specific sentiment indices, suggesting that our previous estimates

confound the impact of local and multi-country news.

      To distinguish the sentiment conveyed in local news from that of multi-country news, we first

re-compute the daily news sentiment index of each country by excluding any article mentioning any

other country. This highly restrictive filter removes 1.5 million articles across countries (Appendix

Figure A1), allowing us to only focus on genuinely local (country-specific) news. Second, we extract

a common factor (“global news sentiment”) from our initial sentiment series using a Kalman filter.

Formally, we estimate the following single (latent) factor model in the spirit of Stock and Watson

(2011):

                                      Si,t = Pi Ft + ui,t

                                          Ft = A1 Ft−1 + A2 Ft−2 + · · · + vt

                                      ui,t = C1 ui,t−1 + C2 ui,t−2 + · · · + ei,t ,


where Si,t refers to the news sentiment index in country i on day t, Ft is the (unobserved) global

news sentiment factor at time t, and Pi is the country-specific factor loading. In practice, we use

an AR(1) both for the factor and for the error term, and we estimate the model using Maximum

Likelihood. We then include the global sentiment index in our regressions, allowing us to contrast

the effect of local news from that of global news.26 More specifically, we estimate the following

model:

                                              J
                                              X                     J
                                                                    X                        J
                                                                                             X
            CumRi,t,t+h = αh + µi,h +               θjh Ri,t−j +           γjh V lmi,t−j +         δjh V oli,t−j
                                              j=1                    j=1                     j=1
                                    J
                                    X                                              J
                                                                                   X
                                           h                                              h
                                +         βg,j Global GoodN ewsi,t−j +                   βl,j Local GoodN ewsi,t−j   (2)
                                    j=1                                            j=1
                                    J
                                    X                        J
                                                             X
                                +         τjh Arti,t−j   +         ρhj Globt−j + Di,t
                                                                                  h
                                                                                      + εti,h .
                                    j=1                      j=1


      Figure 2 presents the results. Figure 2.A reports results for the full sample of countries, whereas

Figure 2.C and 2.D report results for AE and EM respectively. Figure 2.B reports results for all

countries excluding the years 2008 and 2009, ensuring that our results are not driven by the Global
 26
      Properties of the global news sentiment index are discussed in section 4.



                                                                   14
Financial Crisis (GFC). As expected, we find that controlling for the global sentiment affects the

size and the shape of the response to local news sentiment shocks, the cumulative response being

roughly twice smaller (5 basis points, as opposed to 10 in the previous estimates). More importantly,

while we did not see a full reversal after 20 days in the previous estimates, the gains now completely

vanish after a week. Quantitatively, sentiment shocks are still economically significant however.27

These results suggest that the tone of local news affects investors sentiment and equity prices

momentarily before returning to their fundamental values, consistent with the presence of noise or

liquidity traders (Long et al. (1990), Campbell et al. (1993)).

      In sharp contrast, we find that global news sentiment shocks have a larger and more sustained

impact on equity returns (Figure 2), peaking at about 25 basis points — about 5 times larger

than the response to local sentiment shocks — after 10 to 15 days. Importantly, this result is

only marginally affected by the exclusion of the GFC from our sample. The sustained impact

on world stock markets could indicate that global news contain genuinely new information about

fundamentals that is only slowly incorporated into stock prices around the world. However, an

alternative explanation is that sudden changes in global news sentiment are strong enough to cause

drifts in equity prices that do not reverse in the short run, even in the absence of new information

about fundamentals. We explore these two hypotheses further in the next section.
 27
      The median absolute deviation in our sample is about 70 basis points, both for AE and EM.




                                                        15
                                                 Figure 2. Global vs. Local Sentiment Shocks – Equity Returns
                    .4




                                                                                                          .4
     Cumulative equity returns (%)




                                                                                           Cumulative equity returns (%)
                                .3




                                                                                                                      .3
                       .2




                                                                                                             .2
             .1




                                                                                                   .1
     0




                                                                                           0
                    -.1




                                                                                                          -.1
                                     0          5            10          15   20                                           0        5            10          15   20
                                                      Horizon (h Days)                                                                    Horizon (h Days)


                                           Figure 2.A. Panel Full Sample                                                       Figure 2.B. Panel – excl. GFC
                .4




                                                                                                      .4
  Cumulative equity returns (%)




                                                                                        Cumulative equity returns (%)
                                                                                                                   .3
                             .3




                                                                                                          .2
                    .2




                                                                                                 .1
          .1




                                                                                        0
  0




                                                                                                      -.1
                -.1




                                     0          5           10           15   20                                           0        5           10           15   20
                                                     Horizon (h Days)                                                                    Horizon (h Days)


                                          Figure 2.C. Advanced Economies                                                       Figure 2.D. Emerging Markets

Notes: Each thick line shows the cumulative response of equity prices to a news sentiment shock h-days
ahead estimated using equation (2). The x axis denotes the number of days after the shock. The dotted
thick blue line reports the cumulative response of equity prices to local news sentiment shocks. The solid
thick green line reports the cumulative response to global news sentiment shocks. The thinner lines around
each thick line indicate the 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are corrected for serial correlation and
heteroskedasticity using the Newey and West estimator with the truncation lag set to equal the projection
horizon h, as suggested by Jordà (2005) and Kilian and Kim (2011).

3.D.                                     News Sentiment and Capital Flows

Next, we extend our empirical framework to capital flows data using daily equity flows from inter-

national mutual funds tracked by EPFR between 2005 and 2015 for 16 EM. More specifically, we

now estimate the following model:




                                                                                   16
                                        J
                                        X                     J
                                                              X                    J
                                                                                   X                       J
                                                                                                           X
       CumFi,t,t+h = αh + µi,h +              θjh Fi,t−j +          ηjh Ri,t−j +         γjh V lmi,t−j +         δjh V oli,t−j
                                        j=1                   j=1                  j=1                     j=1
                              J
                              X                                             J
                                                                            X
                                     h                                              h
                          +         βg,j Global GoodN ewsi,t−j +                   βl,j Local GoodN ewsi,t−j                     (3)
                              j=1                                           j=1
                              J
                              X                        J
                                                       X
                          +         τjh Arti,t−j   +         ρhj Globt−j + Di,t
                                                                            h
                                                                                + εti,h .
                              j=1                      j=1


CumFi,t,t+h is the cumulative equity flow in country i between day t and t+h (expressed in % of the

initial allocation of capital at time t − 1), µi,h is the country-fixed effect, Fi,t−j is the lagged equity

flow, Ri,t is the lagged equity return, Local GoodN ewsi,t (Global GoodN ewsi,t ) is the standardized

value of the local (global) news sentiment index, Arti,t is the article count, V lmi,t is the de-trended

log-trading volume, V oli,t is our proxy for market volatility, Globt are global controls – daily world

equity returns, the VIX, changes in commodity prices, and daily returns in the MSCI EM index –

and Di,t is a set of outliers and day-of-the-week dummies.

    Figure 3 reports our results. Overall, we find that the response of equity flows is strikingly

similar to that of stock prices. Although local news optimism attracts equity fund flows, it does so

only temporarily. We estimate a statistically significant cumulative increase peaking at 0.01%.28

We also cannot reject a full reversal after a week at the 5% significance level. Furthermore, optimism

in global news generate a larger and more sustained inflow in all EM in our sample, peaking at

about 0.1% after 2 weeks (Figure 3.A). This result is also robust to the exclusion of the GFC

(Figure 3.B).

    By distinguishing between flows coming from local and from foreign investors, we find that these

results are almost entirely driven by foreign investors, i.e. funds domiciled outside of the country

(Figure 3.C).29 By contrast, the response of local equity investors is not significantly different from

zero at 5% significance level, for all horizons and for both types of news sentiment shocks.30
  28
     Percentages are expressed as a ratio of Asset Under Management before the shock happens (at t − 1). So a 0.01%
increase in country c means that the equity fund industry tracked by EPFR, as a whole, increased its stock of equity
assets in country c by 0.01%. This magnitude is economically significant since the average mean deviation of daily
equity flows in our sample is around 0.01%.
  29
     For instance, we contrast the behavior of funds investing in Argentina and domiciled in Argentina, with the
behavior of funds investing in Argentina but domiciled abroad.
  30
     The amount of local funds in EM covered by EPFR significantly increased after 2010, allowing us to estimate
their response more precisely. Using data from 2010 onwards reinforces our results: the response of foreign investors



                                                                17
                                                     Figure 3. Global vs. Local Sentiment Shocks -– Equity Flows




                                                                                                                    .12
                        .12
      Cumulative equity (fund) flows (%)




                                                                                                  Cumulative equity (fund) flows (%)
                                                                                                                          .08
                             .08




                                                                                                           .04
              .04




                                                                                                                    0
                        0




                                           0           10                      20   30                                                 0             10                      20   30
                                                            Horizon (h Days)                                                                              Horizon (h Days)


                                                   Figure 3.A. All Funds                                                                   Figure 3.B. All Funds – excl. GFC
                  .15




                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                              Cumulative equity (fund) flows (%)
  Cumulative equity (fund) flows (%)




                                                                                                                       .2
                           .1




                                                                                                           0
        .05




                                                                                               -.2            -.4
                  0




                                           0           10                      20   30                                                 0             10                      20   30
                                                            Horizon (h Days)                                                                              Horizon (h Days)


                                               Figure 3.C. Foreign Investors                                                                  Figure 3.D. Local Investors

Notes: Each thick line shows the cumulative response of equity fund flows to a news sentiment shock h-days
ahead estimated using equation (3). The x axis denotes the number of days after the shock. The dotted
thick blue line shows the cumulative response of equity flows to local news sentiment shocks. The solid
thick red line reports the cumulative response to global news sentiment shocks. The thin lines around each
thick line represents the 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are corrected for serial correlation and
heteroskedasticity using the Newey and West estimator with the truncation lag set to equal the projec-
tion horizon h, as suggested by Jordà (2005) and Kilian and Kim (2011). Estimates are based on 23,720
observations.




                                                                                         18
4.     Investigating the Global News Sentiment Index

4.A.     Comparison with other metrics

Prompted by having estimated such a large effect of global news sentiment shocks on equity prices,

we now turn to investigating the properties of the global news sentiment index further. Figure

4.A compares variations in global news sentiment and in the VIX. Not surprisingly, the two are

negatively correlated (-0.35) and spikes in VIX are always matched by a significant and synchronized

drop in global news sentiment, suggesting that both indices capture episode of heightened market

stress. However, in many instances, movements in global sentiment are not matched by changes

in the VIX. Good news, in particular, are not well captured by the VIX, which is a better proxy

of global market turmoil than of global market optimism. Using equation (2), we also show that

global news sentiment shocks account for a larger fraction of the variance in equity returns than

VIX shocks at most horizons (Figure 4.B.).

     We also compare the global news sentiment to measures of uncertainty. First, we include the

US Economic Policy Uncertainty Index (EPU) from Baker et al. (2016) as an additional control

in equation (2). Appendix Figure A5 shows that our results remain unchanged, suggesting that

the effect we capture is not explained by the uncertainty about US policy reported in the news.

Second, we show that the global news sentiment does not reflect the uncertainty expressed in the

news more generally. To show this, we estimate a news uncertainty index by counting the fraction

of uncertainty related words in each article. We then include our country-specific news uncertainty

index in equation (2) as an additional control, finding that our results remain unchanged (Appendix

Figure A6).


4.B.     Global News Sentiment: Fundamentals or Sentiment?

Next, we aim to uncover the nature of global news sentiment shocks, exploring two competing

hypotheses. The first hypothesis (“fundamental hypothesis”) is that multi-country articles could

convey genuinely new information on the fundamentals of the economy that are slowly incorporated

into equity prices (Veldkamp (2011)). Alternatively, the “sentiment hypothesis” suggests that the

tone of news articles could induce swings in investors sentiment – or so-called “animal spirits” –

is unchanged, while the response of local investors becomes even flatter.


                                                         19
                                                                           Figure 4. Global News Sentiment vs. VIX




                                                 5
                   Global News Sentiment Index
                                                 0
                                                 -5
                                                 -10




                                                                   0                    20                    40                 60         80
                                                                                                           VIX

                                                                                            Figure 4.A. Correlation
                                                               1
                       Marginal Contribution to Adj. R-Squared
                           .2      .4        .6  0    .8




                                                                       1   2   3    4   5    6   7   8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                                                                                      Horizon (h Days)

                                                                                    Local Sentiment           Global Sentiment        VIX



                                                                                   Figure 4.B. Variance Decomposition

Notes: Panel A of this figure shows the global news sentiment index against the VIX; Panel B decomposes
the increase in adjusted R-squared at different horizons after the introduction of the local news sentiment,
the global news sentiment, and the VIX in equation (2) respectively. h denotes the number of days in the
projection horizon.




                                                                                                         20
leading to variations in asset prices, even though no new information on the state of the economy

has come up (Shiller (2015)).

   To test the “fundamental hypothesis”, we use the Citi Index of Economic Surprises, which

captures deviations between actual macroeconomic data releases and the Bloomberg survey median

in key countries. We regress our global news sentiment index on economic data surprises in the

US, the Euro Area, China, and the G10 countries, which are available at daily frequency since

2001. Although they are all positively correlated with the global news sentiment index – i.e. higher

sentiment implying data releases being better than expected – they only account for 20% of the

variance in the global news sentiment (Table 2). More importantly, Appendix Figure A7 shows that

our main results remain unaffected by introducing these economic surprise measures, indicating that

global news sentiment shocks do not simply capture new information on economic fundamentals.

                     Table 2. Global News Sentiment and Economic Surprises

                                            Global News Sentiment Index
          Variable          (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)
          CESI USD         0.006***                                                    0.011***
                          (0.001)                                                     (0.002)
          CESI EUR                        0.010***                                     0.017***
                                         (0.000)                                      (0.001)
          CESI CNY                                         0.007***                    0.005***
                                                          (0.000)                     (0.000)
          CESI G10                                                      0.017***       -0.026***
                                                                       (0.001)        (0.004)
          N                3,349          3,348           3,112         3,349          3,087
          R2                0.03           0.13            0.05          0.10           0.19


Notes: The Citigroup Economic Surprise Indices (CESI) are defined as the weighted historical standard
deviations of data surprises (actual releases vs. Bloomberg survey median). A positive reading implies that
economic releases have, on average, beaten the Bloomberg consensus. CESI USD, CESI EUR, CESI CNY,
CESI G10 refer to macroeconomic data surprises captured by the US, Europe, China and G10 indexes,
respectively. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1



   Next, we assess the “sentiment hypothesis” using two approaches. First, under this hypothesis,

one would expect the global news sentiment to have a disproportionate impact in periods during

which investors sentiment is more volatile (Garcia (2013). Hence, we compare the effect of global

news sentiment shocks on equity prices in global bull and in bear markets using equation (2). Bull

                                                     21
(bear) markets are defined as periods during which the global equity market – measured by the

Dow Jones World Index – is above (below) its trend.31 We find that the impact of global sentiment

shocks are roughly four times stronger in global bear markets (Figure 5.A), a magnitude very

similar to that in Garcia (2013).

       Second, one would also expect investors who are more sentiment-driven to overreact to global

news sentiment shocks relative to those driven by ”hard” information about fundamentals. Using

the heterogeneity in mutual funds, we compare ETFs to non-ETFs (or active Funds), as investors

in ETFs tend to be much less informed about the underlying fundamentals of the assets it contains

(Figure 5.A). We find that in response to a one standard deviation change in global news sentiment,

ETF funds increase their position in by 0.2% across countries on average. In contrast, the response

of active funds is between two and three times smaller. Taken together, these results strengthen the

“sentiment hypothesis”, global sentiment shocks capturing variations in investors sentiment that

are not arbitraged away in the short run.


4.C.       News Coverage

We close the paper by documenting some stylized facts about which type of article constitute the

global news sentiment. As expected, the global news sentiment is mainly driven by multi-country

news. Figure 6 shows that the share of multi-country news increases significantly when the global

news sentiment takes more extreme values. Interestingly, we also find that multi-country news are

different from local news: they tend to be longer, broader in scope, and more tonal than local news.

They are also about twice as long, covering twice as many topics and using twice as many tonal

words than their local counterparts. They also make use of more rare words than local news.32

       We also find that the distribution of news topics varies with the level of the global news sentiment

index. When the global news sentiment index is strongly positive, the corpus of news tilts towards

positive financial and corporate news in advanced AE, especially in the US – with the notable

exception of news focusing on Greece, which are over-represented in periods of low global news

sentiment. In contrast, the coverage strongly tilts towards economic and political news in EM
  31
     The trend is constructed using a two-sided HP filter with a smoothing parameter of 129,600, set using the Ravn
and Uhlig (2002) rule for monthly data. Appendix Figure A8 reports the actual period defined as global bear and
bull markets, respectively.
  32
     These effects hold after controlling for the length of each article. Regression results are available upon request.



                                                          22
                                                                      Figure 5. Fundamentals vs. Sentiment Hypothesis




     Figure 5.A. Global News Sentiment Impact                                                      Figure 5.B. Global News Sentiment Impact
                  (Equity Prices)                                                                              (Funds’ Allocation)

Notes: The left panel compares the cumulative effect of global news sentiment shocks on equity prices in
global bear vs. global bull markets. The effect is reported at its peak (i.e. after h = 20 days). The trend
is constructed using a two-sided HP filter with a smoothing parameter of 129,600, set using the Ravn and
Uhlig (2002) rule for monthly data. Results are based on equation (2). The right panel compares the impact
of a global news sentiment shocks on ETFs vs. Non-ETFs (or active) funds’ allocation at the peak of the
projection horizon (i.e. after h = 20 days). Percentages are expressed as a ratio of Asset Under Management
before the shock happens (i.e. at t − 1). Results are derived using equation (3). In both cases, dots indicate
the 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are corrected for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity using
the Newey and West estimator with the truncation lag set to equal the projection horizon h, as suggested
by Jordà (2005) and Kilian and Kim (2011).
                       Figure 6. Multi-Country News and Global News Sentiment
                                                                0.8
                    Change in the share of multi-country news (%)
                          0.2          0.4 0.0      0.6




                                                                              2                3                   4
                                                                                            Quartiles


Notes: This figure shows the change in the share of multi-country news as a function of the absolute value
of the global news sentiment (reported by quartile). The share of multi-country news increases when the
global news sentiment takes more extreme values.

                                                                                            23
when the global news sentiment index goes into negative territory (Figure 7).



5.       Additional Robustness Tests

Overall, our findings are robust to a variety of tests and extensions. First, they are stable over time

and across countries (AE and EM), suggesting that our estimates are not driven by a single episode

or by any distinct group of countries. Owing to the rapid rise in international financial integration,

recent research has pointed to a general increase in global financial synchronization over the past

two decades (e.g. Bruno and Shin (2014), Obstfeld (2015), Jordà, Schularick, Taylor and Ward

(2019)). Other important contributions have also emphasized the high sensitivity of EM to the

global financial cycle, at least compared to AE (e.g. Rey (2015), Cerutti et al. (2019)). Although

we find that global news sentiment has a stronger impact than local news sentiment, we do not

find evidence that the effect of global news is significantly stronger now than in the 90’s, or that it

affects more EM than AE (Appendix Figure A4).

      Our results are also not driven by extreme values or crisis – such as the GFC, or by key countries

– such as the US.33 They are also robust to an alternative specification on the news sentiment index

in which each word is weighted by its TF-IDF (Appendix Figure A3). Finally, all our key results

are robust to using different clustering techniques for the standard errors. To illustrate this, Figure

A9 re-estimates Figure 2.A and 2.B using both Driscoll and Kraay (1998) and double-clustered

standard errors (by country and time). Overall, our results are unchanged.



6.       Conclusion

Using a new dataset of news articles focusing on 25 countries, we explore the link between between

the news media, investors sentiment, and stock returns around the world between 1991 and 2015.

Taken together, our results show that news sentiment has a pervasive impact on short-term equity

prices and equity flows around the world. We uncover a novel key difference between the effect of

local news sentiment from that of global news sentiment. While local news sentiment have only a

small and transitory impact, global news have a larger and more protracted effect. We demonstrate

that the effect of global news sentiment is not driven by macroeconomic surprises. Our results also
 33
      Results are available upon request.


                                                   24
                                                                 Figure 7. Global News Sentiment and News Coverage




                                                           100
                       Change in the share of articles (%)
                           -50         0          50   -100




                                                                  US FR DE JP KR ID PL MY IT PH ES PT BR IE MX AR CL ZA PE TH TR RU CN GR IN

                                                                                                                                                                    AE                                                   EMDE


                                                                                                                       Figure 7.A. Locations
                 Change in the share of articles (%)
                                                   50
                                                   0
                                                   -50

                                                                  Commodity/Financial




                                                                                                                     Corporate/Industrial

                                                                                                                                            Derivative Securities




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Economic/Indicators

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Government Finance
                                                                                                                                                                    Trade/External




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Political/General




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Monetary Policy
                                                                                                                                                                                     Money/Forex
                                                                                                         Debt/Bond




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-Local

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Commodity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Economic
                                                                                        Equity

                                                                                                 Local




                                                                                                         Economic                                                                                  Financial                                                                    Other


                                                                                                                                     Figure 7.B. Topics

Notes: This figure compares the change in news coverage during periods of high global news sentiment
relative to periods of low global news sentiment. Panel A reports the change in each country’s share of
articles during periods of high global news sentiment relative to the country’s share of articles over the entire
sample. Panel B reports the change in each topic’s share of articles during periods of high global news
sentiment relative to the topic’s share of articles over the entire sample.


                                                                                                                                                                              25
cast light on the role of foreign investors in transmitting sentiment shocks, and in particular that

of passive uniformed investors (ETFs). The potentially large implications of our results for models

of international asset prices and international capital flows are left to further research.




                                                  26
References

Albuquerque, Rui, Gregory Bauer, and Martin Schneider, “International Equity Flows

  and Returns: A Quantitative Equilibrium Approach,” CEPR Discussion Papers 5159, C.E.P.R.

  Discussion Papers August 2005.

Baker, Malcolm and Jeffrey Wurgler, “Investor Sentiment in the Stock Market,” Journal of

  Economic Perspectives, June 2007, 21 (2), 129–152.

Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, “Measuring Economic Policy Un-

  certainty,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 07 2016, 131 (4), 1593–1636.

  ,   ,   , and Kyle J. Kost, “Policy News and Stock Market Volatility,” Working Paper 25720,

  National Bureau of Economic Research March 2019.

Broner, Fernando, Tatiana Didier, Aitor Erce, and Sergio L. Schmukler, “Gross capital

  flows: Dynamics and crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (1), 113 – 133. Carnegie-

  NYU-Rochester Conference.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, “Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity,” The

  Review of Economic Studies, 12 2014, 82 (2), 535–564.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Harry Mamaysky, “How news and its context drive risk and

  returns around the world,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2019, 133 (2), 299 – 336.

Campbell, John Y., Sanford J. Grossman, and Jiang Wang, “Trading Volume and Serial

  Correlation in Stock Returns,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 11 1993, 108 (4), 905–939.

Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Damien Puy, “Push factors and capital flows to

  emerging markets: why knowing your lender matters more than fundamentals,” Journal of In-

  ternational Economics, 2019, 119, 133 – 149.

Colacito, Ric, Mariano M. Croce, Federico Gavazzoni, and Robert Ready, “Currency

  Risk Factors in a Recursive Multicountry Economy,” The Journal of Finance, 2018, 73 (6),

  2719–2756.



                                                 27
Da, Zhi, Joseph Engelberg, and Pengjie Gao, “The Sum of All FEARS Investor Sentiment

  and Asset Prices,” The Review of Financial Studies, 10 2014, 28 (1), 1–32.

Driscoll, John C. and Aart C. Kraay, “Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with Spatially

  Dependent Panel Data,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1998, 80 (4), 549–560.

Forbes, Kristin J. and Francis E. Warnock, “Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight, and

  retrenchment,” Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (2), 235 – 251. NBER Global.

Fratzscher, Marcel, “Capital flows, push versus pull factors and the global financial crisis,”

  Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (2), 341 – 356. NBER Global.

Gabaix, Xavier, “Power Laws in Economics: An Introduction,” Journal of Economic Perspec-

  tives, February 2016, 30 (1), 185–206.

Garcia, Diego, “Sentiment during Recessions,” The Journal of Finance, 2013, 68 (3), 1267–1300.

Gentzkow, Matthew, Bryan T. Kelly, and Matt Taddy, “Text as Data,” NBER Working

  Papers 23276, National Bureau of Economic Research March 2017.

Ghosh, Atish R., Mahvash S. Qureshi, Jun Il Kim, and Juan Zalduendo, “Surges,”

  Journal of International Economics, 2014, 92 (2), 266 – 285.

Jordà, Òscar, “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,” American

  Economic Review, March 2005, 95 (1), 161–182.

  , Moritz Schularick, Alan Taylor, and Felix Ward, “Global Financial Cycles and Risk

  Premiums,” IMF Economic Review, 2019, 67 (1), 109–150.

Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Christian Lundblad, and Rarun Ramadorai, “Asset Fire Sales

  and Purchases and the International Transmission of Funding Shocks,” The Journal of Finance,

  2012, 67 (6), 2015–2050.

Kilian, Lutz and Yun Jung Kim, “How Reliable Are Local Projection Estimators of Impulse

  Responses?,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (4), 1460–1466.




                                               28
Long, J. Bradford De, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Wald-

  mann, “Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98 (4),

  703–738.

Loughran, Tim and Bill Mcdonald, “When Is a Liability Not a Liability? Textual Analysis,

  Dictionaries, and 10-Ks,” The Journal of Finance, 2011, 66 (1), 35–65.

Manela, Asaf and Alan Moreira, “News implied volatility and disaster concerns,” Journal of

  Financial Economics, 2017, 123 (1), 137 – 162.

Manning, Christopher D., Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze, Introduction to

  Information Retrieval, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2008.

Obstfeld, Maurice, “Trilemmas and trade-offs: living with financial globalisation,” BIS Working

  Papers 480, Bank for International Settlements January 2015.

Pant, Malika and Yanliang Miao, “Coincident Indicators of Capital Flows,” IMF Working

  Papers 12/55, International Monetary Fund February 2012.

Puy, Damien, “Mutual funds flows and the geography of contagion,” Journal of International

  Money and Finance, 2016, 60, 73 – 93.

Raddatz, Claudio and Sergio L. Schmukler, “On the international transmission of shocks:

  Micro-evidence from mutual fund portfolios,” Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (2),

  357 – 374. NBER Global.

Ravn, Morten O. and Harald Uhlig, “On Adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for the Fre-

  quency of Observations,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2002, 84 (2), 371–376.

Rey, Hélène, “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Inde-

  pendence,” NBER Working Papers 21162, National Bureau of Economic Research May 2015.

Shiller, Robert J., Irrational Exuberance: Revised and Expanded Third Edition, rev - revised, 3

  ed., Princeton University Press, 2015.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, “The Limits of Arbitrage,” The Journal of Finance,

  1997, 52 (1), 35–55.

                                               29
Stock, James and Mark Watson, Dynamic Factor Models, Oxford: Oxford University Press,

  2011.

Tetlock, Paul C., “Giving Content to Investor Sentiment: The Role of Media in the Stock

  Market,” The Journal of Finance, 2007, 62 (3), 1139–1168.

Teulings, Coen N. and Nikolay Zubanov, “Is Economic Recovery a Myth? Robust Estimation

  of Impulse Responses,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2014, 29 (3), 497–514.

Veldkamp, Laura L., Information Choice in Macroeconomics and Finance, Princeton University

  Press, 2011.

Williams, Tomas, Nathan Converse, and Eduardo Levy-Yeyati, “How ETFs Amplify the

  Global Financial Cycle in Emerging Markets,” Working Papers 2018-1, The George Washington

  University, Institute for International Economic Policy January 2018.

Young, Lori and Stuart Soroka, “Affective News: The Automated Coding of Sentiment in

  Political Texts,” Political Communication, 2012, 29 (2), 205–231.




                                               30
A     Appendix

AA.    Stylized Facts

                          Table A1. Country and Time Coverage

                                                                         Average
          Country         AE/EM   News Start   News End     # Articles   per day

          United States    AE     01/01/1991   12/31/2015   1,815,542    201.41
          France           AE     01/02/1991   12/31/2015    139,927     17.31
          Germany          AE     01/02/1991   12/31/2015    229,059     26.24
          Italy            AE     01/02/1991   12/30/2015    87,530      11.33
          Japan            AE     01/01/1991   12/30/2015    274,804     31.66
          Greece           AE     01/09/1991   12/31/2015    60,824       9.1
          Ireland          AE     01/07/1991   12/30/2015    28,194       4.76
          Portugal         AE     01/03/1991   12/29/2015    32,162       5.45
          Spain            AE     01/02/1991   12/30/2015    56,418       7.86

          Turkey           EM     01/02/1991   12/31/2015    46,728       6.58
          South Africa     EM     01/02/1991   12/31/2015    77,318      10.54
          Argentina        EM     01/02/1991   12/31/2015    51,287       7.12
          Brazil           EM     01/02/1991   12/31/2015    87,488      11.69
          Chile            EM     01/08/1991   12/28/2015    24,095        3.7
          Mexico           EM     01/02/1991   12/31/2015    69,558       9.26
          Peru             EM     01/03/1991   12/31/2015    17,348       2.97
          India            EM     01/02/1991   12/31/2015    356,683     40.34
          Indonesia        EM     01/02/1991   12/31/2015    87,550      10.98
          Korea            EM     01/03/1991   12/31/2015    100,153     11.91
          Malaysia         EM     01/02/1991   12/30/2015    99,394      12.26
          Philippines      EM     01/02/1991   12/30/2015    55,460       7.08
          Thailand         EM     01/02/1991   12/29/2015    82,555      10.44
          Russia           EM     12/30/1991   12/31/2015    111,540     14.81
          China            EM     01/02/1991   12/31/2015    245,913     27.69
          Poland           EM     01/01/1991   12/30/2015    64,998       9.29




                                          31
                                                                Figure A1. Main Topics covered – All countries



                                   4,000,000
        Total number of articles
                                   2,000,000
                                   0




                                                                           Commodity/Financial


                                                                                                 Corporate/Industrial


                                                                                                                        Derivative Securities




                                                                                                                                                                      Government Finance




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Monetary Policy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Political/General
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Money/Forex
                                                             Commodity
                                               All Topics




                                                                                                                                                Economic


                                                                                                                                                           Equity




                                                                                                                                                                                             Local

Notes: This figure reports the most frequent topics tagged in our corpus of news articles. A very similar
distribution of topics is observed across AE and EM. “Commodity/Financial Markets” news and “Economics
News” are used as primary tags, so they will automatically be used when one of their sub-tag is used (Table
A2 below). Note that tags do not represent a partition of our sample of articles since articles can be tagged
across several categories at the same time (see example in Section 2.).




                                                                         Table A2. Sub-tags under each primary tag

                           Commodity & Financial Markets News                                                                                                                              Economic News
                                                            Commodity markets                                                                                       Economic & Monetary Policy
                                                                  Equity Markets                                                                                                     Government Finance
                                                             Money and Forex                                                                                                Economic Performance
                                                            Derivative Securities                                                                                   Trade and External Payments




                                                                                                                                                32
                         Figure A2. Global News – An Example


Title: Fears of Brazilian devaluation hit emerging markets

Timestamp: 1998-09-11

Text: LONDON, Sept 11 (Reuters) – Emerging market currencies braced for further knocks

on Friday amid fears that Brazil might give in to devaluation pressure and unleash a fresh

onslaught around the globe. The rouble continued to gain ground in thin trade amid hopes

of an imminent end to Russia’s political deadlock. But the Hungarian forint and Polish zloty

slid on global bearishness after Thursday’s huge stock market falls in Latin America.

Most Asian currencies held steady, helped by the firmer yen as the dollar sagged on President

Bill Clinton’s political woes and speculation about an impending U.S. interest rate cut. The

Indonesian rupiah rebounded from Thursday’s sharp fall. With the market discounting the

near-certainty that Russia’s parliament would approve Yevgeny Primakov as prime minister

later on Friday, attention focused mainly on whether Brazilian markets would see another

hammering after Thursday’s collapse. ”It’s like a tidal wave waiting offshore, and everybody’s

hoping it’ll go in the other direction. If it hits Rio it’ll hit everywhere else,” said Nigel

Rendell, an emerging markets strategist at Santander Investment Bank in London. A huge

exodus of dollars on Thursday from Brazil’s foreign exchange markets, estimated at over

$2 billion, panicked the key Sao Paulo stock market into a plunge of nearly 16 percent, its

biggest one-day drop for nearly 11 years. The rout sparked similar slides across the region

and fed general fears of a world economic slowdown, prompting steep market falls in Japan

and Hong Kong early on Friday. Latin American currencies are little traded in London, and

analysts said the market was waiting for direction from Wall Street’s opening and the start

of New York currency trade. As an early indication of sentiment, the region’s most liquid

unit, the Mexican peso, lost further ground from New York’s closing levels. By 1215 GMT

it was 10.65 bid to the dollar, just off Thursday’s historic low of 10.685. Brazil, heavily

dependent on capital inflows to support a pronounced short- term debt burden, has come

under particular pressure from the flight investment capital from emerging markets. The




                                             33
central bank hiked its key interest rate overnight by 20 points to nearly 50 percent to try

to halt the massive outflows. Analysts say it is touch and go whether Brazil will devalue

the real before presidential elections on October 4, although officials have repeatedly denied

devaluation is on the cards. ”It does think it is likely. The only question is whether it will

come before or after the election,” said David Boren, an emerging market strategist at Daiwa

Europe in London. Analysts say Brazil still has enough reserves - now around $50 billion

– to continue propping up the real but delaying what many see as the inevitable may leave

the country financially depleted and less able to engineer an orderly devaluation in uncertain

global market conditions. If Brazil devalues, it will almost certainly spark a fresh wave of

pressure on emerging market currencies worldwide. Analysts said Argentina would be among

the first in line, although the country had sufficient reserves in relation to its money supply

to defend its currency board system. ”With market focus on possible devaluations in Latam,

China’s currency stance may again come under market scrutiny,” Standard Chartered Bank

said on Friday in a note to clients. China has vowed not to devalue, and news on Thursday

of a 23 percent rise in the country’s trade surplus in the first eight months of the year eased

selling pressure on the yuan to the extent that the central bank was spotted buying dollars.

Analysts said Hong Hong’s currency board would also come under more pressure if the real

fell. Other potential victims included South Africa and even the stronger Central European

countries such as Poland and Hungary, possibly forcing Budapest to widen its 4.5 percent

wide trading band for the forint. The forint was glued with to the bottom of its target band

on Friday. The zloty also swung sharply lower and was was quoted only 1.31/1.03 percent

above its target basket parity at 1215 GMT, compared with Thursday’s fixing of 3.97 percent

above parity. The rouble firmed to around 10.5 bid to the dollar from late Thursday levels

of 12.5, buoyed partly by hopes of some political stability. But volume remained very thin,

and analysts said the rally was unlikely to last as the new government looked set to print

money to clear wage and pension arrears.

FOREX MARKET SNAPSHOT. The following is a snapshot of emerging markets currency

rates. * ASIA AFX=) * Chinese yuan CNY=) at 8.279 vs 8.2798 on Thursday * New

Taiwanese dollar TWD=) 34.47 vs 34.4 * Indonesian rupiah IDR=) 11,600 vs 11,900 * Thai



                                              34
baht THB=TH) at 40.65 per dollar vs 40.7 * Philippine peso PHP=) 43.4 per dollar vs

43.6 * South Korean won KRW=) at 1,365 per dollar vs 1,367 * Indian rupee INR=) 42.41

per dollar vs 42.4 * EUROPE EUROPEFX= * Russian rouble RUB=) on MICEX Selt

electronic trading system at 10.51/13.15 per dollar vs average rate of 12.375 on Thursday.

EMTA indicative rate at 11.238. * Zloty 1.31 percent above target basket parity vs 3.97

percent at Thursday’s fixing. * Mark/Czech crown DEMCZK=) at 18.03 bid vs 17.838 *

Hungarian forint DEMHUF=) unchanged from Thursday at 2.25 percent below parity against

a target basket * Slovak crown DEMSKK=) fixed at 5.35 percent below target basket vs 5.80

percent on Thursday * Ukrainian hryvnia UAH=) unchanged at 3.10 per dollar * Romanian

leu ROL=) at 9,045 per dollar vs 9,025 * AFRICA AFRICAFX= & MIDEAST MEFX=)

* Israeli shekel ILS=) 3.8508 bid on dollar from Thursday’s 3.8568 * South African rand

ZAR=) 6.3 per dollar vs 6.2555 * Kenyan shilling KES=) at 59.8 per dollar vs 59.9 * LATIN

AMERICA LATAMFX= * Mexican peso MXN=) at 10.65 per dollar vs 10.48 * Brazil’s real

BRL=) at 1.1786 per dollar vs 1.1789 * Venezuela bolivar VEB=) unchanged at 586.9 per

dollar. (C) 1998.

Topics: Money/Forex Markets, Foreign Exchange News, Commodity/Financial Market News

Locations: Africa, Argentina, Asia, Brazil, Central America, China, Emerging Market Coun-

tries, Eastern Asia, European Union Countries, Central/Eastern Europe, Europe, Hong

Kong, Hungary, Indonesia, Japan, Latin America, Mexico, North America, Poland, Russia,

South Africa, South America, Southeast Asia, Southern Africa, United Kingdom, United

States, Arizona, CIS Countries, Western U.S., Western Europe




                                           35
                       Table A3. Asset Prices Coverage – Stock Indices

Country         Sample Start   Sample End                                                Index

Argentina       01/02/1991     12/31/2015                   ARGENTINA MERVAL - PRICE INDEX
Brazil          01/02/1991     12/31/2015                  BRAZIL BOVESPA - TOT RETURN IND
Chile           01/02/1997     12/30/2015   CHILE SANTIAGO SE GENERAL (IGPA) - PRICE INDEX
China           01/02/1991     12/31/2015              SHANGHAI SE COMPOSITE - PRICE INDEX
Germany         01/02/1997     12/31/2015                 DAX 30 PERFORMANCE - PRICE INDEX
Spain           01/02/1997     12/31/2015                               IBEX 35 - PRICE INDEX
France          01/01/1997     12/31/2015                       FRANCE CAC 40 - PRICE INDEX
Greece          01/02/1997     12/31/2015                    ATHEX COMPOSITE - PRICE INDEX
Indonesia       01/02/1991     12/31/2015                       IDX COMPOSITE - PRICE INDEX
Ireland         01/02/1997     12/30/2015            IRELAND SE OVERALL (ISEQ) - PRICE INDEX
India           01/02/1991     12/31/2015       S&P BSE (SENSEX) 30 SENSITIVE - PRICE INDEX
Italy           01/02/1997     12/30/2015                      FTSE MIB INDEX - PRICE INDEX
Japan           01/01/1991     12/31/2015            NIKKEI 225 STOCK AVERAGE - PRICE INDEX
Korea           01/03/1991     12/31/2015        KOREA SE COMPOSITE (KOSPI) - PRICE INDEX
Mexico          01/02/1991     12/31/2015                   MEXICO IPC (BOLSA) - PRICE INDEX
Malaysia        01/02/1991     12/31/2015            FTSE BURSA MALAYSIA KLCI - PRICE INDEX
Peru            01/02/1997     12/31/2015             S&P/BVL GENERAL(IGBVL) - PRICE INDEX
Philippines     01/02/1991     12/30/2015                  PHILIPPINE SE I(PSEi) - PRICE INDEX
Poland          01/01/1997     12/31/2015        WARSAW GENERAL INDEX - TOT RETURN IND
Portugal        01/02/1997     12/30/2015                      PORTUGAL PSI-20 - PRICE INDEX
Russia          12/30/1991     12/31/2015                     RUSSIA RTS INDEX - PRICE INDEX
Thailand        01/02/1991     12/30/2015                       BANGKOK S.E.T. - PRICE INDEX
Turkey          01/02/1991     12/31/2015                    BIST NATIONAL 100 - PRICE INDEX
United States   01/01/1991     12/31/2015              DOW JONES INDUSTRIALS - PRICE INDEX
South Africa    01/01/1997     12/31/2015                                          FTSE RAFI




                                                36
AB.     Robustness and Extensions

Figure A3 and A4 reports robustness checks and extensions derived using equation (2). Figure A3

plots the response of local asset prices to local and global news sentiment using TF–IDF measures

of news sentiment. Results are only provided for the full sample (mirroring Figure 2A) but are

unchanged when excluding the GFC or restricting attention to AE or EM. Figure A4 plots the

response across time and groups of countries using the standard measure of sentiment. Figure

A5, Figure A6, and Figure A7 re-estimates Figure 2.A while controlling for the US Economic

Policy Uncertainty (EPU) Index, our uncertainty index, and the Citi Index of Economic Surprises,

respectively. Figure A9 re-estimates Figure 2.A and 2.B under Driscoll and Kraay (1998) and

double-clustered standard errors.




                                                    Figure A3. Panel with TF–IDF sentiment
                              .3
                Cumulative equity returns (%)
                 0           .1
                              -.1          .2




                                                0          5              10          15     20
                                                                   Horizon (h Days)

Notes: Results are derived using Equation (2) and using the updated version of news sentiment based on
TF–IDF weights. Lines plot the cumulative response of equity prices to a news sentiment shock h-days ahead.
The x axis denotes the number of days after the shock. The blue thick-dotted line reports the cumulative
response of equity prices to local news sentiment shocks. The green thick-solid line reports the cumulative
response to global news sentiment shocks. The thinner lines around each impulse response report the 95%
confidence intervals. Standard errors are corrected for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity using the
Newey and West estimator with the truncation lag set to equal the projection horizon h, as suggested by
Jordà (2005) and Kilian and Kim (2011).



                                                                      37
                                                         Figure A4. Benchmark results – Country and Time Split




                                                                                                              .8
                        .8




                                                                                                                          .6
         Cumulative equity returns (%)




                                                                                              Cumulative equity returns (%)
                                    .6




                                                                                                                  .4
                            .4




                                                                                                         .2
                    .2




                                                                                                 0
            0           -.2




                                                                                                              -.2
                                            0        5             10          15   20                                           0        5           10          15   20
                                                            Horizon (h Days)                                                                   Horizon (h Days)


                                                Figure A4.A. AE (1991-1999)                                                          Figure A4.B. EM (1991-1999)
                        .5




                                                                                                              .5
                                       .4




                                                                                                                            .4
         Cumulative equity returns (%)




                                                                                              Cumulative equity returns (%)
                                .3




                                                                                                                     .3
                         .2




                                                                                                              .2
                   .1




                                                                                                        .1
            0




                                                                                                 0
                        -.1




                                                                                                              -.1
                        -.2




                                                                                                              -.2




                                            0        5             10          15   20                                           0        5           10          15   20
                                                            Horizon (h Days)                                                                   Horizon (h Days)


                                                Figure A4.C. AE (1999-2007)                                                          Figure A4.D. EM (1999-2007)
                                                                                                         .5
                    .5




                                                                                                                        .4
                                 .4
     Cumulative equity returns (%)




                                                                                          Cumulative equity returns (%)
                                                                                                                 .3
                            .3




                                                                                                          .2
                     .2




                                                                                                    .1
              .1




                                                                                             0
        0




                                                                                                         -.1
                    -.1
                    -.2




                                                                                                         -.2




                                            0        5             10          15   20                                           0        5           10          15   20
                                                            Horizon (h Days)                                                                   Horizon (h Days)


                                                Figure A4.E. AE (2007-2015)                                                          Figure A4.F. EM (2007-2015)

Notes: Results are derived using equation (2) for subsamples split by the income group of the countries
(AE or EM) and the time period covered (1991-1999, 1999-2007, and 2010-2015). Lines plot the cumulative
response of equity prices to a news sentiment shock h-days ahead. The x axis denotes the number of
days after the shock. The blue thick-dotted line reports the cumulative response of equity prices to local
news sentiment shocks. The green thick-solid line reports the cumulative response to global news sentiment
shocks. The thinner lines around each impulse response report the 95% confidence intervals. Standard
errors are corrected for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity using the Newey and West estimator with
the truncation lag set to equal the projection horizon h, as suggested by Jordà (2005) and Kilian and Kim
(2011).
                                                                                         38
                                                    Figure A5. Panel controlling for US EPU
                              .3
                Cumulative equity returns (%)
                0          .1 -.1       .2




                                                0          5              10          15      20
                                                                   Horizon (h Days)

Notes: Results are derived by introducing the US Economic Policy Uncertainty (EPU) Index from Baker
et al. (2016) into equation (2) as an additional control. Lines plot the cumulative response of equity prices
to a news sentiment shock h-days ahead. The x axis denotes the number of days after the shock. The
blue thick-dotted line reports the cumulative response of equity prices to local news sentiment shocks. The
green thick-solid line reports the cumulative response to global news sentiment shocks. The thinner lines
around each impulse response report the 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are corrected for serial
correlation and heteroskedasticity using the Newey and West estimator with the truncation lag set to equal
the projection horizon h, as suggested by Jordà (2005) and Kilian and Kim (2011).




                                                                       39
                                                    Figure A6. Panel controlling for uncertainty index
                              .3
                Cumulative equity returns (%)
                 0          .1-.1         .2




                                                0               5              10           15           20
                                                                        Horizon (h Days)

Notes: Results are derived by introducing a (country-specific) news uncertainty index into equation (2).
Mirroring the approach we use to measure news tone, we compute news uncertainty by computing the
fraction of uncertainty related words in each article every day. Lines plot the cumulative response of equity
prices to a news sentiment shock h-days ahead. The x axis denotes the number of days after the shock. The
blue thick-dotted line reports the cumulative response of equity prices to local news sentiment shocks. The
green thick-solid line reports the cumulative response to global news sentiment shocks. The thinner lines
around each impulse response report the 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are corrected for serial
correlation and heteroskedasticity using the Newey and West estimator with the truncation lag set to equal
the projection horizon h, as suggested by Jordà (2005) and Kilian and Kim (2011).




                                                                            40
              Figure A7. Panel controlling for the Citi Index of Economic Surprises
                              .6
                Cumulative equity returns (%)
                      .2      0        .4




                                                0   5          10          15             20
                                                        Horizon (h Days)

Notes: Results are derived by introducing the Citi Index of Economic Surprises for the US, the Euro Area,
China and the G10 countries into equation (2). The Citi Index of Economic Surprises, which are available in
daily frequency since 2001, captures deviations between the actual macro-data releases and the Bloomberg
survey median in key countries. Lines plot the cumulative response of equity prices to a news sentiment shock
h-days ahead. The x axis denotes the number of days after the shock. The blue thick-dotted line reports the
cumulative response of equity prices to local news sentiment shocks. The green thick-solid line reports the
cumulative response to global news sentiment shocks. The thinner lines around each impulse response report
the 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are corrected for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity using
the Newey and West estimator with the truncation lag set to equal the projection horizon h, as suggested
by Jordà (2005) and Kilian and Kim (2011).




                                                            41
                                                         Figure A8. Definition of Global Bull and Bear Markets
                                                     4
                Dow Jones World Index (HP-detrended)
                   -4      -2     -6 0        2




                                           1990m1                1995m1     2000m1     2005m1    2010m1     2015m1

Notes: Bull (Bear) markets are defined at the monthly frequency as periods during which the global equity
market – measured by the Dow Jones World Index – is above (below) its trend. The trend is constructed
using a two-sided HP filter with a smoothing parameter of 129,600, set using the Ravn and Uhlig (2002) rule
for monthly data.




                                                                                  42
                                             Figure A9. Figure 2.A and 2.B estimated under alternative standard errors
                       .4




                                                                                                          .4
         Cumulative equity returns (%)




                                                                                            Cumulative equity returns (%)
                                    .3




                                                                                                                       .3
                           .2




                                                                                                              .2
                 .1




                                                                                                    .1
         0




                                                                                            0
                       -.1




                                                                                                          -.1
                                         0           5           10          15   20                                        0          5           10          15   20
                                                          Horizon (h Days)                                                                  Horizon (h Days)

                                              Figure A9.A. Panel Full Sample                                                    Figure A9.B. Panel – excl. GFC
                                                (Driscoll and Kraay (1998))                                                       (Driscoll and Kraay (1998))
                   .4




                                                                                                      .4
     Cumulative equity returns (%)




                                                                                        Cumulative equity returns (%)
                                                                                                                   .3
                                .3




                                                                                                          .2
                       .2




                                                                                                 .1
             .1




                                                                                         0
     0




                                                                                                      -.1
                   -.1




                                         0          5           10           15   20                                        0         5           10           15   20
                                                         Horizon (h Days)                                                                  Horizon (h Days)

                                              Figure A9.C. Panel Full Sample                                                    Figure A9.D. Panel Full Sample
                                                    (Double-Clustered)                                                                (Double-Clustered)

Notes: This figure re-estimates Figure 2.A (left panel) and 2.B (right panel) under Driscoll and Kraay (1998)
(top panel) and double-clustered (bottom panel) standard errors. Results are derived using equation (2) for
the full sample of countries (left panel) and a subsample excluding the GFC (right panel). Lines plot the
cumulative response of equity prices to a news sentiment shock h-days ahead. The x axis denotes the number
of days after the shock. The blue thick-dotted line reports the cumulative response of equity prices to local
news sentiment shocks. The green thick-solid line reports the cumulative response to global news sentiment
shocks. The thinner lines around each impulse response report the 95% confidence intervals. The Driscoll
and Kraay (1998) standard errors (top panel) are robust to general forms of cross-sectional and temporal
dependence; the autocorrelation structure under this specification has been set to have a truncation lag equal
the projection horizon h, as suggested by Jordà (2005) and Kilian and Kim (2011). Double-cluster robust
standard errors (bottom panel) are clustered by country and time.




                                                                                       43
