                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    AN ANALYSIS OF PENSION BENEFIT FORI1ULAS,
                   PENSION WEALTH AND INCENTIVES FROM PENSIONS




                                Alan L. Gustman

                              Thomas L. Steinmeler




                             Working Paper No, 2535




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 1988




The research reported in tnis paper was funded by Order Number 89P52726, U.S.
Department of Labor, Office of Planning, Policy and Research, Pension and Welfare
Benefit Programs. This research is a part of the Programs in Labor Studies and
in Aging of the National Bureau of Economic Research.  Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not of the National Bureau of Economic Research or
of the Department of Labor. We would like to thank Cohn Campbell, John Turner
and participants in the NBERs Labor Studies seminars for their
                                                                helpful comnents.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2535
                                               March 1988




                  An Analysis of Pension Benefit Formulas,
                 Pension Wealth and Incentives from Pensions




                                  ABSTRACT




       This paper investigates empirical issues related to pensions. It
uses the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), a data set with detailed
information both on workers and on their pensions.   The paper presents new
estimates of pension values for various groups.    It compares pension values
based on relatively complete SCF data with estimates based on incomplete
data of the type found in other data sets. It also examines incentives that
pensions create for retirement and job mobility, and relates these
incentives to plan characteristics. Some findings appear inconsistent with
standard explanations for the existence and nature of pensions.


Alan L. Gustxsan                                  Thomas L. Steinmeier
Loren M. Berry Professor                          Professor of Economics
of Economics                                      Texas Tech University
Dartmouth College                                 Lubbock, Texas 79409
Hanover, New Hampshire 03755
                                    I.   Introduction.



       This paper is   a   study of pensions. Pensions are complex and
multifaceted contractual arrangements which serve a variety of purposes.

They are partly a means for tax-deferred caving, partly a way to solve
adverse selection problems in the provision of old age annuities, partly a
method   of   providing    complex incentives regarding job mobility and

retirement, and perhaps even partly a vehicle for intergenerational

transfers.

       Until recently,     studies of this important fringe benefit have been

hampered by a lack of high quality data linking the pensions themselves and
the people who are covered by them.           This problem has been substantially

alleviated by the availability of the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances

(SCF), a nationally representative survey of households.            The household

survey solicits basic information         about wages, employment   history, and

demographic     characteristics. It also asks respondents about pension

coverage,     and if covered, it asks them to describe certain aspects of their

pensions and to indicate the employer who is providing the pension.            In

turn, requests are made from the employer for very detailed information

about eligibility for benefits and the manner in which benefits are

calculated. By  linking the information provided by the workers with that
provided by the firms, these data provide a unique opportunity to measure
and   analyze pension plans.
       This   paper takes advantage of    that opportunity to examine pensions in a
variety   of different lights.      The first of these is simply to ascertain the

value   of pensions to workers     who   are covered by them. After a brief
description of the relation of pension formulas to pension wealth in          Section

II,   the paper turns in Sections III and IV       to a   detailed analysis of pension

wealth by various measures.        Section III considers the value of the pension

if the worker stays until retirement. We find that a worker with a typical

defined benefit or combination plan will enjoy $135,000 in pension benefits


                                          1
(in 1983 dollars> if the worker stays with the firm until qualifying for

normal retirement benefits.      This amounts to over   l43%   of the present value

of the workers earnings over the life of the job.         In Section IV, the paper

addresses the issue of the currant (as of 1983) value of pensions.

Unfortunately, there is no consenns as      to   how to allocate the ultimate

amount of the pension between the value already earned and the value

attributable to work in future years.     As   a   result, estimates of current

pension assets for a worker with a typical defined benefit or combination

plan range from $20,000 to $47,000, depending on the method used.
    The second broad issue to be examined is the degree to which estimates

of pension wealth are degraded by the use of incomplete or specialized data,

as is required when most existing data sets are used.        For example, most

longitudinal and cross-section data sets based on household or individual

responses contain at best oniy sketchy information on pensions, and heroic

assumptions are required to translate this information into pension values.
At the other extreme, surveys such as the Bankers Trust Survey and The
Level of Benefits Survey contain detailed information on the pensions but

give no information on the wage levels or dates of hire for the individuals
covered by them.      For both cases, the SCF provides an opportunity to see how

well pension values calculated from the incomplete information available in

other surveys compare with analogous values calculated from the more
complete information in the SCF. These comparisons are taken up in Section
V of the paper.

    A   third broad   issue, addressed in Section VI, is the nature of the

incentives provided by pensions.      In considering whether or not to retire,

for instance, an individual considers not only the wage but also the

increase in the value of the pension if he works one more year.        This value

typically rises at an increasing rate up to the age when the individual is

eligible for retirement benefits.     Further, there are frequently substantial

discrete jumps in pension value at the early and/or normal retirement ages.

The timing and magnitude of these incentives varies considerably among

                                      2
plans, and within any particular plan, among those workers hired at
different ages.       These incentives appear to be partially related to a number

of plan characteristics,among which the most important are the requirements

for normal retirement.       Similar points arise if instead of retirement,           the

question is whether or not to move to anottor job.             For this question,

however,      the relevant amount is the increase in pay in the new job needed to

make    up   for the pension in the current job.

        The last empirical issue, taken up in Section VII, is the relation of

pensions to union status, gender and race.         With regard to unions, our
results support Freeman's (1985) claim that although unions raise pension

coverage,     they do not affect pension values except indirectly as          a
consequence of the union wage effect.        Females   arid   blacks   have both lower

pension coverage and, conditional on coverage,         lower pension values than do

males and nonblacks.       However,   after standardizing for other individual and
firm    characteristics,   blacks covered by pensions do not appear to have a

lower ratio of pension wealth to earnings wealth than do nonblacks, and

females appear to have if anything higher ratios than do males.

       The final section of the paper considers the implications of these

empirical findings for various theories regarding the existence and nature
of pensions. It notes that several of these findings are               difficult to
interpret     in light of some of the more popular explanations for pensions.

Nevertheless,     it is important that we reach a better understanding than we

presently have of the behavioral processes which generate pensions. There
are currently several proposals to modify or regulate pensions or to require

firms    not currently offering pensions to do so, and a valid behavioral model
of   pensions is necessary in order to predict the ultimate effects of these

proposals.      It is to provide a more solid empirical basis for evaluating

such models that this paper is directed.




                                         3
       TI,   Relation of Pension Formulas to Measures of Pension Wealth:
                                    The   Analytical Framework
      This section   discusses the relation of pension formulas to the various

measures of pension wealth and pension accrual that will be calculated from

  the SCF data. A rnrrther of the basic relations discussed here have been
                                                                 Kotlikoff
 analyzed by Barnow and Ehrenberg (1979), Bulow (1981, 1982) and
                                    and Wise (1985, 1987)

    For purposes of analyzing the pension wealth measures, we use a simple

final average salary, defined benefit planl. Benefits are calculated from

the formula aWfS,      where a            is the generosity parameter of the plan,               Wf

is the final wage, and          S    is the number of years of service at retirement.2

                                                    in period 0 at   a   rate of   g,    and years
Wages are assumed to grow from Wo

of service are measured as the difference between the date of separation k

and the date of hire       j.        Assume for simplicity that there is certain life

expectancy to date     D    and that benefits are vested from the first day of

                      R    denote the date of normal retirement.                   R    may be
employment3. Let
determined in the plan as the date when the individual reaches                     a    particular

                                      of service or some combination of age
age, or it may be the date when years

and service reaches a specified level,                Early retirement benefits may be

availahle, but in this example they are assumed to be actuarially fair.
    Under these assumptions, the present value of pension benefits to which

the individual is entitled as of year                 k   is given by:

                                      B
(1)                   •P(k)           5    a woekg   (k-i) er(t'k)       jt
                                      R


                                              a w0ekg (kj)     er(Rk) (l_er(D"R))/r

for k < R,      The last term in the expression discounts the benefits back to

year k.      For   k > R,       benefits commence upon retirement, and the lower

limit of the integral in the above expression becomes                     k   instead of     A.



                                                4
As long as the benefit formula is otherwise the same, the present value of

the pension as of year           k    is



 (2)                     P(k)    = a w0ekg (k—i)          (l_er(D—k)]/r


which     is similar   to the previous formula except that               k   has replaced    R
wherever R       appeared in     equation    (1)

        Crediting work beyond the normal retirement age is required under
current regulations. However, it was not required in 1983, which was the

year of the SCF survey.          At that time, many firms did not             give credit for
work beyond the normal retirement age.               Further, they froze the final wage

used in the formula at the level as of the normal retirement date R.

Provisions     such   as these   cause the profile of pension values to decline

sharply at the       age of normal retirement and          the increment in pension value
from continued work to be negative.

        Following Bulow (1982) and differentiatingequation                   (1)   with respect to
k      indicates the path of the marginal increment to pension wealth with
additional service:4



(3)                       dP(k)/dk = P(k)          [g +   r+   lI(k—j)1


for    any time k      preceding the year of eligibility for normal retirement.

During this time, the second derivative of the pension value with respect to
k     is positive.     Therefore,     the relation between the present value of the

pension and time of separation will be convex to the time axis, indicating
that pension benefits are            backloaded   under a simple defined benefit plan.
Because the value of the pension rises with the sum                 of    the growth rate    in
earnings,    the discount rate, and the proportionate increase in experience,

the ratio of the present value of the pension to the wage will be increasing

with tenure on the job.          (For a comparable derivation for the ratio of




                                             5
pension accrual to the wage, see Kotlikoff and Wise, 1985, 1987.)
      For the case where the individual works past normal retirement age, and

credit is given for such work, the pension accrual rate is given by



(4)           dP(k)/dk =   9(k)   {g +   r   +   l/(k—j)    —   r/(l_e—r(D—k)3}


In this expression,   the last term in the brackets reflects the fact that in

this case, benefits are foregone when retirement is postponed. If this loss

is sufficiently large, the value of the pension may begin to decline as soon

as the normal retirement age is reached.                In any case, the relative

importance of this loss increases with             k,      This implies that eventually

the value of the pension must begin to decline, and once it starts to

decline it will do so at an accelerating rate.

      At the points where the individual qualifies for normal retirement

benefits, there is a sharp discontinuity in the accrual profile where
                                                                    with
equations (3) and (4) are joined. If early retirement is available
                                                                      at the
actuarially favorable reductions, there will be another discontinuity

age of eligibility for early retirement.  Further, as will be seen below,

many defined benefit pension plans base benefits on two or three formulas.
One formula may pertain to benefits for those who leave the firm before
                                                                         and
qualifying for early retirement (i.e., for terminated-vestedemployees),
another to those who qualify for normal retirement, with various treatments

for work past normal retirement date.             There may also be another formula, or

perhaps on1y a simple adjustment factor applied to the formula for normal
retirement benefits, to determine benefits for those who qualify for early

retirement.    At the dates when the individual switches from one formula to

another,   there may be a discrete jump in pension value, creating                a   sharp

spike in the accrual profile. Such spikes are examined empirically below.




                                             6
For a defined contribution plan,                the value        of the pension as of year         k    is


                                                k
 (5)                             PdC(k)    =   5    c   woegt    er(kt)
                                                j


for an individual          still employed at that time,             where    c   is the contribution

rate.         For   g =   r,     the value is the sum of the real value of

contributions. The slope of the profile represented by equation                             (5)   is

positive,      and   the   second derivative depends on whether the rate of growth of

wages exceeds or falls below the interest rate.



       III.    Formula Based Measures of Expected Pension Wealth For Currently

                                             Covered Workers.

        Estimates of pension wealth from working until the indicated tine of

separation      are presented in the first row of Table 1 for private—sector

employees who are covered by defined benefit or combination plans.5 These

pension values are             obtained by   applying the pension formulas reported by
firms    in   the SCF, using the wage and               tenure   of the workers wherever

appropriate in the formulas.               Wages are       projected   forward and   backward      in
tine    by applying the tenure and experience parameters of an estimated wage

equation to the actual wage reported by each individual.                         In other words,
the height of the wage profile specified in the estimated equation is

adjusted so that the profile goes through each worker's observed wage point.

Economy wide wage growth is set equal to the average rate in the previous

thirty years, which is assumed equal to the interest rate.                         The

computations,        including adjustments for inflation,                 are described in more
detail the Appendix.

       Each column        of   Table 1   represents      a different assumption about the time

of separation from the firm.               Column 1 assumes separation at age            55.      Thus
the average present value of the pension (pension wealth) from                        the    current

,j. would be $87,000 in 1983 dollars if the individual were to separate from



                                                 7
that job at age 55.   If, as in column 3, separation were at age 65, the

                                                            Columns 6 and 7
average present value of the pension would be $134,000.
                                                                     or
apply if the worker remains with the firm until qualifying for early
normal retirement benefits under the plan. In the sample of workers covered

by defined benefit or combination plans, the average age of eligibility for

early retirement benefits is 55, and the average age for normal retirement
benefits is 61.4.

    The distribution of pension wealth is truncated on the left at zero and

has a long tail on the right hand side.    Consequently,   the mean is

considerably above the median, which is reported in row     4.   The median may

be the preferred statistic to use, since it is not as subject to the

influence of outliers as the mean.   Row 2 reports the standard deviation of
                                                                        For
pension values, and rows 3 and 5 report the first and third quartiles.
                                                of net wage earnings from
comparison, row 6 reports the wealth equivalent

date of employment at the firm to the indicated date of separation.

    Average values of the ratio of expected pension wealth to expected
earnings wealth are reported in row 7, followed by the standard deviations
in row 8.   If the current group of covered workers remain with their firms

until the age of normal retirement specified in their plan, expected pension

wealth would, on average, amount to 14.3% of wealth equivalent of expected

earnings.   If they remain only until age 55, pension wealth would still

amount to 10.9% of wealth from earnings.    The comparable figures for the

median ratio of pension wealth to earnings wealth are 13.8% and 9.9%.

     The relevant statistics for defined contribution plans are reported in

the lower part of the table.   It is apparent that pension wealth is

considerably lower for those covered by defined contribution plans,

amounting to between 7 and 7.5 percent of earnings wealth for those working

to ages 55 and 65 respectively.   For those retiring in this age range, the

                                           a defined contribution plan
average pension wealth of those covered by
amounts to 50% to 55% of the pension wealth held by those covered by defined

benefit plans.   In contrast, the average wealth from earnings of those

                                     8
 oovered by defined contribution plans is 83 to 87% of the comparable fiqure

 for those covered by defined benefit plans.



Relation Between Pension Wealth From Work Until Retirement And The Wealth

Equivalent Of Earnings.
        Behavioral     models   on both the supply and demand sides of the market

suggest that wages and pensions are jointly determined.                  Therefore any

effort to relate one to another can best be viewed as a descriptive

exercise.        One such an exercise is the regression of log pension wealth on

log earnings wealth for those in the            sample   who are   covered       by defined
beuefit     or combination      plans.    The regression of pension wealth              P

(omputed at age of normal retirement)            on earnings wealth          B     is

        ln P =   —    2.17 + 1.006 ln B              R2 = 0.513,
                     (3.76) (23.59)                  N     530



ehere absolute t—statistics are in parentheses. The elasticity of pension

iolth with respect to wealth from earnings at the point of means is
stimated to be virtually           equal to unity.    When pension and earnings wealth
are computed at the age of early retirement, the elasticity rises to 1.10.
These findings suggest that, conditional on plan type, wealth from
                                                                   wages
will,     on average, result in a proportionate understatement of total

compensation for individuals at various earnings levels.
        The R2 on the pension wealth—earnings wealth
                                                     regression indicates that
almost    half   of the variation in ln pension wealth is not correlated with the

wage.  Lines 9 through 11 of Table 1 provide an indication of the scope of

the problem. For example, assuming retirees leave the work force at the
                                                                         age
of normal retirement specified in the plan, pension wealth varies from 9.0%

of wealth from earnings at the first quartIle to             l8.l    of wealth from
earnings at the third quartile.




                                            9
Pensigp Weeltb Adjutte          F   Turnoveg.

         In Table   2,   the first row indicates the expected value of pension wealth

computed on assumptions of turnover rates of 0, 2 and 4 percent per year

until the normal retirement date. For workers in the sample who are covered

by   pension, the five year separation rate computed from the self- reported
     a
                                                             In the first
employment histories is about 7.9%, or about 1.5% per year.
                                                                   is
column, the figure of $134,000 for pension wealth at zero turnover

computed for retirement at the current age (in 1983) or the age of normal

retirement as specified in the plan, whichever is later.          It differs

slightly from the corresponding figure in Table 1, which is always
calculated on the assumption of retirement at the normal retirement age.

The figures reported in the second and third columns suggest that a 2%

turnover rate would reduce expected pension wealth by 20% and a 4% turnover

rate would reduce it by 34%.



pecteension              Wealth Form Work To Normal Retirement Compared To Social



         The value of social security wealth among individuals in the sample who

are covered by a defined benefit or combination pension is about S100,000.

This figure reflects the individual's own earnings only, excludes any spouse
                                                       on some job offering
benefit, and assumes work to the normal retirement age

the same wage path as the job held in 1983. The social security

calculations use an average monthly wage over the period from the beginning
                                                                €0 but not
of the current job until retirement, with wages indexed to age
                                                     formula currently in
thereafter. Benefit amounts are calculated from the
                               with no turnover, pension wealth from the
place. Notice in Table 2 that
                                                               from a
current job would substantially exceed social security wealth
                                                                 or
lifetime of work, at least for individuals with defined benefit
                                                                the expected
combination plans. At an annual turnover rate of 4%, however,
                                    falls below social security wealth.
pension wealth from the current job



                                            10
IV.   Issues In Allocating Pension Wealth To Each Year Of Work.

      There has been controversy about whether pension values (liabilities)

should be measured on the assumption that work continues into the future

(the implicit contract view) or on the assumption that the current period of

employment is the last (the legal view>.         among the protagonists in this

controversy are Bulow (1982), Ippolito (1985), and Kotlikoff and Wise
(1985).     This controversy is also relevant to current accounting practice,

which, under Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement 87, incorporates

elements of each approach.

      When the individual or firm is engaged in a short term employment

decision which requires the calculation of the value of one more period of

work, the legal method is    a   natural approach to use.    However, when the

period of attachment is long term and a number of years of attachment

remain, the question is how to allocate the pension paid at the end of the

employment period to each year of work within the period of attachment.
There is no unique answer to this question.         Conceptually,   the problem is

similar to the issue of how to depreciate the value of a long term asset

over its years of usefulness.        There is no single correct answer to this

allocation decision,    and any decision will be to some extent arbitrary.

      Despitethe basic conceptual problem, a number of different approaches
have been taken to obtain an accrual profile. The first approach is the
legal view of Bulow (1982). The firms' liabilities to covered workers are
calculated as though each period of employment is the last, which is

analogous to calculating the depreciation of an asset strictly on the basis

of the asset's resale value.        Under current law, this is the way that, in

the event of plan termination, pension liabilities are calculated.          Thus,    in
accordance with equation     (3),   it   is possible to integrate along the path

from date of hire to obtain the value of the firm's liability to the worker.

      A   second approach is to amortize the benefits accrued by the end of the

employment period, allocating principal and interest to each year of

employment on the basis of some explicit depreciation scheme.          There are

                                         U
elements of this approach in both Freeman       (1985)   and Lazear and Moore

(1985)    6   Because economic considerationsdo not lead      to   a compelling case

for any particular amortization scheme, however, there is no unique method

for calculating the profile on this basis.

      A   third approach,   developed by ippolito (1985), computes pension accrual
under an implicit contract from an equation for the pension benefit. At any

point in the contract,      a pension value is calculated on the basis of

"projected" benefits. These projected benefits are computed from the
benefit formula using current years of service but the final salary at the

end of the implicit contract.       A pension wealth figure is then calculated as

the discounted value of the projected benefits.          This approach is roughly

analogous to depreciating the value of an asset expected to last a given
number of hours according to the number of hours used each year.

      All of these approaches produce the same figure for the present value of

the pension paid from date of hire to date of retirement.           Each of the

measures has some appealing property.        Nevertheless,   for a contract of known

duration,     the exact path of pension accrual does not appear to be identified

without the imposition of further restrictions.7



Current Pension Wealth: Legal Vs. Prorated Values.

      Column 5 of Table 1 presents current pension wealth figures according to

the   legal   method,   The average pension wealth calculated for current

employees accordin to the legal view suggests that their pension wealth
from work to date is $20,000.       This is less than one year's average

earnings,     which for this sample is $25,542 in 1983.      It is also only 14.8%

of the discounted pension wealth that the individual can expect if he works

until normal retirement.       For comparison, the average individual in the
                                                                   that he
sample has already received 35.1% of the total discounted earnings
will receive if he works on the job until normal retirement.

      The second row of Table 2 represents the results of prorating pensions

between past and future work.       More specifically,    the figures are calculated

                                        22
by prorating the final pension wealth values in proportion to the worker's

wage earnings each year.       For a zero turnover rate, this procedure amounts

simply to multiplying the pension wealth at retirement by the ratio of

earnings to date to expected earnings in the job.       This yields an average

amount of $47,000, which is 135% greater than the $20,000 figure for pension

wealth calculated by the legal method.       At positive turnover rates, less

weight is given to the large pension values at retirement and more weight to
the relatively lower pension values should separation occur prior to

retirement.    With   a   turnover rate of 4 percent, the pension value is

$39,000,   which is 17% lower than with no turnover and only 95% greater than

the wealth calculated by the legal method.       Higher turnover rates in general

reduce the pension wealth calculated by the prorating method.       In the

extreme,   a 100%   turnover   rate would yield a value exactly equal to that

obtained by the legal method, since the legal method calculates pension

wealth as though separation occurs immediately.



Pension Wealth by Current Ace and Tenure.

    Table 3 reports ratios of pension wealth to earnings wealth

disaggregated by the age and tenure of the covered worker in 1983.       For the

top figure in each pair, both the pension wealth and the earnings wealth are
calculated assuming 1983 is the last year of employment,      as reflects the

legal view.    In these figures, a portion of the increase with age and tenure

in the value of pension wealth reflects the backloading of defined benefit

plans discussed in Section II.       The bottom number in each pair is the ratio

of pension wealth to earnings wealth assuming work to normal retirement.

Looking across the bottom row and down the last column, the numbers in each

pair of ratios come closer to one another.       This is as expected and reflects

the backloading of many pensions.



    V.     Issues In Measuring Pension Wealth From Incomplete Information.

    Most studies do not have available all of the information required for

                                        13
estimating pension wealth for the currently employed.         The Survey of

Consumer Finances does provide relatively complete information, and this

permits us to compare pension values as calculated with this information to
the values which would be calculated for the same individuals and plans but

with incomplete or specialized data.        Researchers   using incomplete or

specialized data must typically make strong assumptions in order to obtain

estimates of pension values, and it is important in assessing the value of

their results to determine the degree to which estimated pension values may

be degraded by the particular assumptions which have typically been made.



The Effect Of Using Hypothetical Wages With Observations On Actual

Pension Plans.

    The Survey of Consumer Finances provides information on pension formulas

together with matching information on the wage of covered workers.         For most

studies which use pension formulas, no accompanying wage data is available

for the workers actually covered by the plans.        Hypothetical wage data or

industry and occupational averages are used instead.         It is useful to

determine the extent of distortions,       if any, from the use of hypothetical

data, and to ascertain the procedures which would least distort pension

wealth estimates when wage informationon covered workers is missing.

    Three representative examples illustrate procedures typically followed

in earlier studies which had informationon plan characteristics,         but not on

wages or demographic information.      Hatch (1982) and her co-workers used

pension formulas from the Level of Benefits study.         They calculated the
value of pensions for   a   group of hypothetical individuals who retired with
final earnings of either $10,000 or $20,000.        Lazear (1982, 1983) used data

on pension plan formulas from the Bankers Trust surveys.         He simulated

profiles for a set of hypothetical employees with salaries at retirement of
either $9,000, $15,000, $25,000 or $50,000.       Most recently, Kotlikoff and

Wise (1985, 1987), using the pension formulas in the Level of Benefits

Survey, simulated accrual profiles for hypothetical individuals with wages


                                      14
equal to the average wage in the industry as obtained from a separate data

set.

        The second through       sixth      columns of Table 4 indicate the ratios of

pension wealth to earnings wealth which result when various assumed wages
are used. For reference purposes, the first column indicates the
corresponding ratio when the actual 1983 wages for each individual are used.
These findings suggest that the ratio of pension wealth to earnings wealth
isnot seriously distorted when pension calculations are based on mean
wages, even when all wages in the sample are constrained to a single value.
However, when the hypothetical wage used is far from the mean there is
Jistortion, probably as a result of the minimum and maximum values in the
pension formulas, social security offsets and dollar amounts specified in
pattern plans. Thus as can be seen, the ratio of pension wealth to earnings
wealth is understated when too high a wage is used, and it is substantially

verstated when too low a wage is                    used.

       Although the use of average wages rather than actual wages does not
affect the mean or median of the ratio of pension wealth to earnings wealth,

there remains the possibility that the ratio using actual wages is not well

correlated with the ratio using average wages.                          To investigate this

possibility further, we examine a number of correlations,                          one for each

possible year of retirement between ages 55 and 70,                           These coirelations are

between the ratio using actual wages and the ratio using the geometric mean

wage in the same two-digit industry.                     Depending on       the assumed age   of

retirement,        the correlations ranged from 0.884 to 0.931, with the highest at

a retirement age of 55          and   the lowest at a retirement age of 65.

Alternatively, if        the    age is specified as the normal retirement in each

plan,    the   correlation is 0.909.

       A similar     exercise    relates      the    values      of   the ratios of the   increment   in
pension    wealth from am additional year of work to the wage in that year.

Here    the correlations range             from 0.888       at   age 62   to 0.991 at age   58. For
both    exercises,     similar results are obtained when the                   hypothetical   wage used

                                                    15
was   the   gcn°ri nran for       the sanr cc o whrl.       : crrral,       then, we
conclude    oho tin oe f avrao woj'_
characteristics       does cot serious-i disnort the    rai   rf   penicO    wealth   to
earnings    wealth.




       It a other of data sets which have been used for analyzing retirement

behavior,     such   as the Retirement History Survey and the National
                                                                       that
Longitudinal Survey, self—reported information on pension plans is all
is available. The 5FF provides an opportunity to judge the accuracy of some
                                                                        of
of the self—reported information about pensions, in particular the ages

eligibility for   early and normal benefits and the plan typn, and the implied
pension wealth values.
     The first part of Table S considers the ages of eligibilitl fcc early
and. normal retirement for those individuals in the sample who rnpcrted
                                                                         both

ages and who were covered by defined benefit or combination plans.8
                                                                       The
                                                                                       while
 self-reported ages      are taken directly from the individuals'        responses,

                                                             information as
 the firm-reported ages are calculated from the pension plan
                                             artual ages and dates of hire.
 provided by the firm using the individuals'
 For boTh the early and normal retirement ages, the median age reported by

 the   individuals     is the   aame   as the median calculated from    tie ertual   plans.
 These ages    are 55 for early retirement eligibility and         62   for normal
 retirement    eligibility. The quartile values (not reported here) are also

 very   close.   However, for both the early and normal retirement ages, the

 mean age reported by the individuals is three to five years below the age
                                                                 indrvduala
 calculated from the plans. Since the medians suggest that most
                                                                      in the
 are fairly accurate about their ages of eligibility, the discrepancy

 means indicates that a few individuals are considerably overoptimistic.
     The middie part of Table S tells a similar story with respect to pension
 wealth, The self—reported figures are calculated from resprnses to
                                                          bnndiit and
 questions asking about each individual's expected annual
                                              16
expected retirement date.      The reported benefit is taken to be in nominal

terms as of the expected retirement date.       If the expected retirement date

is prior to the date when the individual expects eligibility for full

benefits,     the reported benefits are presumed to be reduced from full

benefits according to the reduction factors as reported in Hatch et al.

(1982).       Given the level of full benefits and applying the reduction factor

for early retirement benefits,      the value of the pension at the reported

normal and early retirement dates is the discounted sum of payments from

those date on, with allowance for partial inflation-related increases over

tlme.

     From the table, it is evident that the median pension wealth as

calculated from the individuals'      perceptions is close to the median wealth

as calculated from the actual plan formula.         Although not reported here, the
first and third quartile values are not too far apart, suggesting that many

individuals have fairly accurate assessments of their pensions.        Again,

however,    the mean values indicate that there is a relatively small

percentage of individuals who are considerably overoptimistic regarding the
values of their pensions.      This is consistent with the results in the top

part of the table, since a sharp underestimate of the age of eligibility for
a pension will result in a sharp overestimate of the value of the pension in

calculations such as these.

     The bottom part of the table assesses the effect of a weakness in the

self-reported data,      Specifically,   the survey question asked the respondent

to estimate the expected pension benefit at the date of retirement and

allowed the response to be expressed either as a dollar amount or as a

percentage of pay.      For the responses in dollar amounts, it is impossible to

be sure whether the amounts are in current dollars, in dollars as of the

date of retirement,     or something else.    In order to eliminate this source of

ambignity,     the bottom part of   the table considers self-reported and

firm—reported amounts only     for that part of the sample whose self—reported
amounts     are expressed as a percentage of pay.    The pension values of   this
                                         17
group  are snr"wna' above the valve f r b'- sac, x-     whle, bat toe banjo
pattern of medicos as, means        s
                                repea ad the 'ouc- f '-he self— raoorted
vs. finn—reported values are    r 7 C'-s'-,    ' he ',r r' the
self-reported values are very high r'-latrve tr he fLrn-reporteo values,

again indicating that a few individuals are -mosderably overoptimistic
about    the value of thenr pensions.

       Table 6 reports on the distributions of plans by plan type, as reported

both   by   the individuals and the firms. figures in the body of the table
                                                    The
are percentages of column totals, These results suggest a subotantial
degree    of confusion regarding plan type.           Partly, this confusion may be the

result of reel ambiguity.         For    example,   many plans which are basirally
defined benefit call for explicit contributions from workers and make

provisions for the return of these contributions plus accumulated interest
if the worker separates before retirement.                Such plans have been labeled

here as defined benefit, but the potential for confusion is clear.                Keeping

this caveat in mind, the table indicates that although the individuals are

more likely to report the correct plan type than any other single plan type,

incorrect     reports are   corrunon.   Even removing the effects of the don't knows,

the coverage by a defined benefit plan is substantially understated in the

self—reported data, falling well below the 88.1 percent of plans reported by
the firms in the sample.        In the case of coverage by defined contribution

plans and by combination plans, the individual covered by such a plan is
more likely to label the plan type wrong than right.

       In sum, these fndlngs should lead any user of self—reported pension

data to exercise a great deal of caution,                 In particular, the researcher

should be aware that although most individuals appear to have a fairly good

idea of the value of their pensions, a small minority are considerably

overoptimistic. This suggests that in dealing with self—reported data, it

might be wise to give more weight to measures,               such as the median and

quartile values, which are not as sensitive to outliers as the mean.



                                             18
Pension Wealth of Currently        ployed     Workers Vs. Retirees.

      Another approach to calculating pension wealth in the literature uses

information on pension receipt by current retirees (Allen and Clark, 1986),

Table 7 presents such information for those retired pension recipients who

are within the SCF sample.         The mean pension wealth figure for current

retirees is slightly over half of the figure reported in Table 1 for current

pension—covered workers if they were to work to the normal retirement age,
and over 80% of the figure if the current workers were to retire at the

early retirement age.         The lower pension wealth figures,   of course, reflect

at least to some extent the fact that the current retirees are members of

earlier cohorts with lower lifetime earnings.           Thus, with regard to the

ratio of pension wealth to earnings wealth, the mean ratio among current

retirees is 13.7%, which is greater than the projected ratio for current

workers if they retire at the early retirement age but slightly less if they

retire at the normal retirement age.

      The median ratio of pension wealth to earnings wealth among current

retirees is noticeably below the mean, moreso than among current workers if

they work until the normal or early retirement age.           This implies that the

distribution of the ratios among the current retirees is more skewed than

the projected distribution for current workers.           It is possible that this

finding reflects the fact that pension plans are currently required to

distribute their benefits more evenly across workers than was the case when

current beneficiaries were working.



Using Plan CharacteristicsTo Infer The Value Of Pension Wealth.

      The partial effects of plan characteristics on expected pension values

may be deduced analytically for each plan formula.           For example, consider

the effect of reducing the age of eligibility for normal retirement

benefits.         If the plan is of the simple defined benefit type as described in

Section II, this effect can be calculated simply by differentiating equation

(1)   or   (2),   as appropriate, with respect to the date of normal retirement

                                         19
2,    For equation        whsch     ap lins iF chF mci dci            has not already
reached normal   retirFrent age,           l yi'Cci:
(6)                 dP(k/dR =         r 2(k)      (1 +   l/l_er'Dm)))

      As would be   expected,    this expression is negative.          The scorer the

individual begins collecting unreduced benefits, the nore valuanle the

pension.   For an individual who is already eligible to collect normal

retirenent benefits,     equation    (2)    is applicable.    Since    F   does not appear

in this equation, the differential is zero, as would be expected.

      It is unlikely that a regression of pension values on typically observed

plan characteristics such as        F      in the above example will yield unbiased

estimates of the partial effects.           This is because these effecis nay well be

correlated with other characteristfcswhich are typically not observed.                  For

example, although many data sets dealing with pensions will inquire about
the normal retirement age, few will inquire about the magnitude of the

generosity parameter     a      in the benefit formula.       If plans with relatively

low retirement ages offset this by using a lower generosity parameter, a

regression of pension values on retirement ages but excluding the generosity

parameter will tend to underestimate the partial effect of the retirement

age on pension values.
      Even though such a regression is not expected to yield accurate

estimates of partial effects, it may nonetheless be of interest if it is

useful in imputing pension values in cases where only a set of pension

characteristics is observed.         Table 8 presents the results of regressions of

the ratio of pension wealth to earnings wealth, computed at four different

ages of retirement,     on a number of key plan characteristics.9 The

calculations use the actual dates of birth and hire and the actual wages of

the covered workers. Therefore,            the estimated parameters in Table 8 reflect

not only the direct effects of the included plan characteristics but also

the effects of omitted plan and/or individual characteristics                which happen


                                             20
to be correlated with the included characteristics.        The results suggest

that certain plan characteristics are significantly       and importantly related

to the ratio of pension wealth to earnings wealth, conditional on retirement

date.     However, these characteristics of pension formulas do not explain
more than a fifth of the variance in the ratio.

     In the     table, the last six variables are defined only   for defined
benefit   and   combination plans and take on a value of zero for defined

contribution plans.      This implicitly means that the reference defined

benefit or combination plan is a pattern plan without social security

offsets, maximum service years, or required contributions, and with a normal

retirement age of at least 62 years regardless of service,        In comparison

with the reference defined benefit or combination plan, workers with defined

contribution plans who retire at age 60 or older have ratios of pension

wealth to earnings wealth that are 2.0 to 2.5 percentage points lower.

Because most of the plan characteristics specific to defined benefit and

ccmbination plans tend to raise the ratio of pension wealth to earnings

wealth above the levels for the reference defined benefit plan, the

coefficients in the second row understate the overall difference between

defined   benefit   and defined contribution plans.   In the first row, we note
that among all plans, those in multiemployer plans have ratios of pension

wealth to earnings wealth that are 1.5 percentage points higher.

    Among defined benefit and combination plans, it is apparent that as the

findings from our earlier analysis suggested,      the requirements for normal

retirement are key characteristics.        Plans which condition normal retirement
at least partly on years of service (42.7% of the plans) and plans which

condition only on age but with a normal retirement age below 62 (7.7%) tend

to be more generous,    especially for retirement at age 55 or 60.    In that age

range, these plans have ratios of pension wealth to earnings wealth which

are 5 to 9 percentage points higher than the ratios for the rest of the

covered workers, representing increases of 40 to 75 percent over the average

value of the ratio.     Two other plan characteristics are also associated with

                                      21
more generous    pensions, Social secur'ty cffses         arc   so'-sted with a 2 to
3 percentage point increase in the ratio             pensor zPa1'h to   earnings
wealth, and direct required contributions (as opposed           to indirect
contributions via a reduced wage) have similar effects.             On   the other hand,
the presence    of   a maximum on service years iS associated with a          .5   to 3

percentage point      reduction   in the ratio of pension        to earnings
                                                            wealth
wealth, with the reduction as        expected being greater at later retIrement
ages.


                          VI. Incentives From Pension Plans.

        To facilitate the analysis of incentives for mobility and retirement,

pension profiles are calculated both for the actual sample individuals using
the actual date of hire and the actual pension plan characteristics over

time,    and for a set hypothetical indivIduals corresponding to the actual

individuals.     The hypothetical individuals have the same wage residuals

around the earnings equation as do the actual workers, and they are covered

by the same plans. As before, nominal parameters in the plans are still
assumed to grow with general wage growth, but other features of the plans

are assumed    to be   those in place as of 1983 in order to focus better on the

incentives actually provided by current plans.           The main   difference,
however, is that the hypothetical individuals are assumed to have been hired
at different ages than were the actual individuals in the sample.lO

AdditIonal details on construction of the pension values for these

individuals are presented in the Appendix.



Retirement Incentives.

        The analysis of equation     (4)   suggests that because a pension payment is

forgone,    eventually work past normal retirement will reduce pension wealth,

even if such work is credited in the standard way by the formula.                  Of

course,    if little or no credit is given for additional work or for the wage

gains associated with continued employment, or if there is no actuarial
adjustment of any type, then the increment in pension wealth from postponing
retirement will be further reduced.

       Table 9 reports on the fraction of individuals who would qualify for

early and normal retirement benefits at various ages,         conditional   on age of

hire.     The importance of provisions conditioning normal retirement on years

of service is obvious from these     data.    One quarter of the workers could

qualify for normal retirement benefits before the age of 60 if they were
hired by age 25.      Only 11% of this same group would qualify for normal
retirement benefits before age 60 if they were hired at age 35, and

virtually none would qualify if hired at age        45.   These figures also

highlight the importance of ages 60, 62 and 65 as the key ages for

qualifying for normal retirement.
       Table 10 reports, for various ages between 55 and 70, the mean ratios of

pension wealth to earnings wealth     (PIE)   and the mean ratios of the increment

in pension wealth to the wage (AP/AE) from working one more year.           ReadIng
down  the first, third, and fifth columns, one can see that with continued
work, pension wealth relative to earnings wealth rises in the early years
 ,nd then declines in later years. Further, the peak ratio is at a later age
the later the individual joins the firm. These patterns are also evident in
the disaggregated results in Kotlikoff and Wise (1985, 1987), and Barnow and
Ehrenberg (1979) offer a related discussion.

       Comparing the ratios of incremental pension wealth to the wage in the

second,   fourth, and sixth columns of Table 10, it is apparent that plans

generally provide lower incentives for older long—tenure workers to remain
with the firm than for workers of the same age but less tenure.11           The

negative incremental pension wealth after qualifying for normal retirement

benefits, as reflected in equation     (4) above,   is readily apparent In Table

10.    For those hired at age 25, the negative increments commence at age 62,

while for those hired at age 35 or 45, the negative increments begin at age

65.    Moreover,   the earlier the individual joined the firm, the bigger the

marginal pension penalty from postponing retirement.         For an individual who

                                      23
joined the firm at age 25, the pensicn penalty from w rking at age 65 may be
almost 25% of the wage.  That is, instead di the pnson adding 10% or more

to compensation, as it does for work oefore norma: retirement age, once the

normal retirement age is reached, the pensirn subtracts amost a rparoer of

the wage from total compensation.lr In future work, it will be of interest
to determine how much of this effect is due to lack of crediting of work

past normal retirement age, a practice triat is now qcestionable 'oder recent
EEOC rulings.

    Bulow and Kotlikoff and Wise have noted the sharp spikes in the net

pension   reward   at ages of early and normal retirement     These are somewhat

obscured   in Table   10 because the ages of early and normal retirement differ

among plans.     To highlight the spikes created by the pension forrilas,     in

Table 11 the ratios of incremental pension wealth Sc       the wage ar   aggregomod
in a somewnat different way.      The first column reports the average of the

ratio in the fourth through second years preceding eligibility for normal

or, if available,     early retirement.    The next three columns refer to plans
for which the individual is offered an effective early retlrement option.

The second column indicates,     for these plans, the average ratio of

incremental pension wealth to the wage in the year irmediately preceding the
early retirement age, and the fourth column reports on the corresponding
average ratio in the year irmediatelypreceding the normal retirement age.
The third column reports the average        ratio in the remaining years (if any)

between the early and normal retirement ages.        The fifth column pertains to

the   year irnediately preceding the      normal retirement age for those plans not

providing an effective early retirement option, and the final column refers
to the mean ratio in the three years immediately following the normal
retirement age. The table also provides figures separately for those plans
with and without service recuirenents for normal retirement.
     The top part of the table refers to the set of hypothetical individuals
with three alternative hire ages,         Most noteworthy here is the sharp spike

from   working   the year associated with early retirement for the 84% of the
                                          24
covered workers in plans that offer an effective early retirement option.

For individuals hired at age 25, the increment in pension wealth associated

with the year irrmediately preceding eligibility for early retirement amounts

for over 75% of the wage earned in that year. This spike dominates the

accrual path for these plans and greatly exceeds the spike at normal

retirement for those plans which have early retirement provisions.        When an

effective early retirement option is not available,      there is an enormous

spike from working the year associated with normal retirement.       All of these

spikes appear to be considerably sharper for individuals with plans having
service requirements for normal retirement.

       The bottom part of the table examines the spikes for actual workers,

using their observed ages of hire.       These results are not very different

from those found in the top part of the table for hypothetical workers hired

at age 25, which is not very surprising given that the mean age of hire for

the sample is 28.3     years.l3   The bottom part of the table also reports the

quartile values.      These figures support the emphasis of Kotlikoff and Wise
not only on the average magnitude of the spikes but also of the variation

among plans in the marginal incentives for continued work.      The variation in

incentives as indicated in these results suggests that information on plan

type   and   dites of early and normal retirement specified in a plan are

inadequate for determining the net reward from continued work very

accurately.



Plan Characteristics And Retiremant     Incentives.

       Retirement incentives may be sensitive to certain plan features.      This

sensitivity is illustrated in Table 12, which presents the results of
several regressions. The dependent variable in these regressions      is the

ratio of the increment in pension wealth to the wage, and the explanatory

variables are key plan characteristics. The dependent variable ratios are

calculated at four different ages, one for each regression,     and they refer
to the actual workers with their observed ages of hire.      The reader is

                                       25
reminded that these estimates do not indicate the marginal incentive effect

of each plan feature.      Rather,   they indicate the differences in incentives

among individuals covered by plans with different features, plans which may
also differ in ways that are not measured by the explanatory variables in

the regression.       As in Table 8, the last six characteristicspertain only to

defined benefit and combination plans, and the reference defined benefit

plan is   a   pattern plan without social security offsets, maximum service

years, or required contributions, and with a normal retirement age of at

least 62 years, regardless of service.

      Notice first from the bottom row of the table that the ratio of the

incremental pension wealth to incremental earnings wealth is, as suggested

above, positive at ages 55 and positive but substantially lower at age 60.
At 65 and at 70, the ratio of the increments is strongly negative. Compared

to defined contribution plans, reference defined benefit and combination

plans provide a higher relative reward to continued work at 55 and 60 and a
lower   one   at 65   and 70. The   key plan feature affecting the   relative reward
for   continued work is the eligibility requirement for normal retirement

benefits. For plans without service requirements and with a normal

retirement age less than 62 (7,7% of the sample), the increment in pension

wealth is lower by about 20% of the wage for work at age 60 and beyond. For
plans with service requirements for normal retirement (42% of the sample),

pension penalties reduce compensation by 12.4% of the wage for work at age
60,   3.4% at 65, and 9% at 70.      Plans with social security offsets and plans

with required contributions have larger pension increments for work at ages

55 and 60, while offering smaller        relative   rewards at 65 or 70.   As

expected, for those covered by plans which impose maximum values on the
number of years of service which may be credited, relative increments are

significantly less, especially for work at age 65.



Icntiys For Mobility.
      In analyzing the incentives that         pensions create for mobility,    it is


                                          26
necessary to consider the loss in pension value from leaving the current

job.     The total loss is simply the sum of the incremental pension values

that the individual would gain in the current job until retirement if he

were to stay in that job.           To understand the mobility decision, the loss

must be weighed against the potential wage gains in the next best

alternative job relative to the current job.l4

       Table 13 reports the increments in pension wealth, relative to the wage,

from remaining one more year on the job.           These figures are presented at

five-year intervals for three different hypothetical ages of hire and are

disaggregated according to requirements for normal retirement.15           A   rough
idea of the increase that would be required in compensation in a new job

relative to the wage in the current job in order to offset the pension loss

can be obtained by averaging the figures in the table between the current

age and the expected separation date.l6 For example, an individual who
started at age 25 in a pension job with service requirements for normal

retirement,      who is currently    45,   and who expects retirement in the mid 50's

would require around a 20 to 25 percent increase in compensation in a new

job over the current job wage in order to make up for the lost pension.             If

the    seine   individual expected to stay in the current job until 60, however,

the required increase in compensation would be lower, at roughly 15 to 20

percent.
       In general, plans appear to provide the strongest incentives against

mobility if the normal retirement age in the plan matches the age the
individual would like to leave the firm.           xnong plans without service

requirements, those with an age requirement below 62 provide much stronger
incentives against mobility if the individual wishes to retire earlier

rather than later, with just the opposite for those plans with an age

requirement at or above       62.    Plans with service requirements lie somewhere

in between but closer to those with age requirements below 62.

       For an individual who intends to retire at age 60, the top part of Table

14 provides more precise measures of the increase in compensation in the new


                                            27
job which would be required to make up for the pension loss.                 As expected

from the discussion In the last paragraph, pension plans with service

requirements or with normal retirement ages less than 62 generally provide

stronger incentives against mobility than do plans which have a required age
of 62 or more, at least for an individual who wants to retire at the

relatively early age of 60.        The exception is for longer service workers who

are 55 and who may already be eligible for relatively favorable early or

even normal retirement benefits, For these individuals, the current

eligibility for favorable benefits means that the increments in pension

values between 55 and 60 are small.

       The bottom part of Table 14 is presented to indicate the sensitivity of

the calculations to an important assumption in the analysis,                namely, the

level of the inflation and discount rates.                The figures here are calculated

for inflation and discount rates which are five percentage points higher

than those used in the rest of the paper.                As might be expected, the fact

that pension benefits are only partially indexed once they are started
reduces the maguitude of pension values and increments at higher inflation

and discount rates.     However,    the pattern of benefits is much the same under

either set of assumptions.      Though not reported here, the figures in Table
13 respond in similar fashion to higher inflation and discount rates.



The         Frn..TnininA    Pin e1y.
       Ippolito (1986) suggests that pension characteristicswill affect not

only the cost of terminating employment, but also the net reward for joining
a   firm at a particular age.      Accordingly, it is of interest to calculate the

variation in the pension with date of hire.                Consider,   for example, the

effect of joining a plan early for a person who will leave before the date

of normal retirement.     Differentiating equation            (1)   with respect to j, we

have



(7)                        dP(k)/dj     =     —   P(k)    / (k—j)


                                         28
Pension increases from joining the firm earlier reflect the effects of the

proportionate increase in tenure, but do not also reflect the effect of wage

growth.    Thus for a person who will leave before normal retirement age, the

proportionate effect on the pension from joining the firm one year earlier
is less than the proportionate effect of leaving one year later.

     Table 15 considers the gains in pension wealth from joining a plan

earlier.   The first, second, fourth and sixth columns report the mean ratio

of pension wealth to earnings wealth for individuals who are hired at

various ages.   The remaining columns report the mean ratio of the gains in

pension wealth from joining the firm five years earlier relative to the

wages that would be earned in that time.        For example,   for   a   worker retiring
at age 50, the mean difference in pension values from joining the firm at 25

rather than 30 is 8.9% of the wage that would be earned between 25 and 30.

For workers retiring at 50, there are only modest marginal gains from

joining the firm five years earlier. For a worker retiring at age               55,   these

gains are sharpest from joining at age 25 rather than 30, with the mean
difference in pension values being 15.7% of the wages over the period.                 For
workers retiring at later ages, the gains from joining early decline, with

the gains for these individuals being greatest for joining at age 35 rather

than 40.

    The top part of Table 15 reports the ratios for all plans, and the

bottom part reports the ratios only for those plans with service

requirements for normal retirement.        The pattern of the results in the two

parts of the table are similar, although the percentages for plans with

service requirements are generally a point or two higher.            The most

noticeable difference is that if a worker covered by a pension with service

requirements is planning to retire at age 55, it is extremely valuable to

begin work by age 25.   Conditional on leaving at age 55, the marginal gain
from starting at age 25 rather than 30 is to raise pension wealth by 22.5%

of the value of the wages over that five year period.




                                      29
   VII.     The Relation of Pension Values To Union Status, Gender and Race.

    This section analyzes disaggregated results on pension wealth and

incentives created by pensions.     The categories considered are union status,

gender and race.     These have been the subject of previous research, and are

of interest for both behavioral and distributional reasons.



Pension Differences by Union Status.

    Previous research suggests that unions may introduce a unique set of

motivations for pensions, Such as the goal of redistributingunion monopoly

rents among generations. Available empirical work provides mixed evidence

as to the impact of union on pension values.     Freeman (1985) suggests that

unions raise pension values by increasingpension coverage, but that

conditional on pension coverage, unions affect firm contributions only to

the extent that they raise wages, and higher wages are accompanied by higher

pensions.    Allen and Clark (1986, p. 512) find that retired union workers

receive higher pensions than do nonunion workers, with most of the
difference due to differences in years of service, salary history and post

retirement adjustments.     Gustxnan and Steinmeier (1986c) find that plan

characteristics differ systematicallybetween union and nonunion workers.

These differences in plan characteristicscould be associated with

systematic differences in pension values, or with differences in marginal
increments in pension wealth.17

     In Table 16, the first two columns report that conditional on retirement

at age 65 or at the normal retirement age of each plan, mean pension wealth

for union workers with defined benefit plans is below that for nonunion

workers, and the same is true for mean earnings wealth.     The lower wealth

levels among union workers may arise because the group of nonunion workers

is more likely to include individuals toward the high end of the wage

distribution among all nonunion workers.     The lower wealth levels of union

workers with pensions is not attributable to a few extreme cases among the

nonunion group, however, since the median figures (not reported in the

                                      3D
table) tell much the same story.          The average ratio of pension wealth to

earnings wealth is also somewhat lower, by about two percentage points, for
union workers than for nonunion workers.18

      Table 17 reports the results of three regressions,         one for each of three

potential retirement ages, of the ratio of pension wealth to earnings wealth
on a set of individual and firm characteristics. The second row reports the

partial effect of union coverage and suggests that unions have an

insignificant, negative effect.          Notice also that the coefficient of the

union variable becomes more negative as the age of retirement is extended.

Regressions using other dates of hire and termination produce similar
results. These results, taken together with those from our earlier studies,

support Freeman's finding emphasizing that the union impact on pension
values operates mainly by increasing coverageJ9

         Table 18 reports on a similar set of regressions,      one for each year over

a 15 year age range, using the ratio of the incremental pension to the wage

as the dependent variable.          The second column focuses on the differences

unions make to benefit accruals.2° In this age range, union pensions accrue

significantly more slowly relative to earnings than do nonunion pensions.
As   a   result, union pensions encourage earlier retirement.       Wbile the

regressions in Table 18 are confined to defined benefit and combination

plans, similar results are obtained with only         a   slightly smaller effect of

unions when the same relations are fit to a sample which includes all plans.



Pension Differences by Gender.

         In the Survey   of   Consumer Finances, the pension coverage rate for

employed women is 41%, while for men it is 64%,21            In regressions with

occupation,     industry and individual characteristics included as explanatory

variables,     women are 12.5% less likely than men to be covered by a pension,

and conditional on having a pension, women are 1.2% more likely than men to

have a defined benefit plan (Gustman and Steinmeier, l986b).           From Table 16,

the male-female gap in pension wealth for those covered by a defined benefit

                                           31
plan is less than 5 percent,22 Since the         corresponding   gap in real earnings
is 18 to 20 percent, the ratio of pension wealth to        earnings wealth      for
females averages 1.7     to   1.9 percentage points above the comparable ratios

for males.     In comparison, Mccarthy and Turner (1983), using data for

retired workers, find the share of pensions in compensation for pension

covered workers to be one third greater for women than men.           From Table 17,

the gap as estimated in a multivariate analysis is slightly below these

figures for retirement at age       65.   For retirement at age 55 or 60, the

male—female difference in the ratio of pension wealth to earnings wealth is

not statistically significant.

     As can be seen in Table 18, the defined benefit pension plans covering
women provide significantly larger marginal rewards for continued work in

the 55 to 70 age range than do the defined benefit plans covering men. Thus
on balance pensions encourage women to defer retirement more strongly than

they do men,    Consistent with this result, cur earlier work suggests that

plans covering women are 5.7% less likely to base normal retirement on years
of service.



penaincDifernqee By       Race.

    Of those currently employed in our SCF sample, 59.3% of blacks and 52.21

of nonblacks are covered by a pension.         In an earlier multivariate analysis,
we found that black—nonblack differences in the probability of pension

coverage are associated with differences in individual,          industry and
occupational characteristics,      but not with race per ce (Gustman and

Steinmeier, 1986b)   .   Table 16 here    reports that allowing for differential

life expectancy by race, pension wealth for blacks who are covered by

defined benefit plans is 28% to 34% below the comparable figure for

nonblacks. This gap is somewhat smaller than that in Lazear and Rosen

(1997),   The earnings differentials are slightly less than the pension

wealth differentials by race, so that the ratios of pension wealth to

earnings wealth for blacks are 0.5 to 1.3 percentage points below those for
noriblacks.   From Table 17, in regressions explaining pension wealth ratios

among those covered by defined benefit plans, a dummy variable indicating
race is not statistically significant. Nor is the indicator of race

significant in the regressions in Table 18 explaining ratios of increments
in pension wealth to increments in earnings wealth for continued work at

each age from 55 to 70.



                      VIII.   Implications and Conclusions.
    This study has presented new estimates of pension wealth and of the

incentives created by pensions.    The SCF has been crucial to this effort,

unignely combining information on the labor market experience of each
individual with firm-provided data on pensions.     Using this data set, we

have also tried to assess the validity of previous efforts to estimate

pension values from incomplete data of the kind typically found in other
data sets.

    With regard to this last point, we find some encouraging results for

users of previously available data sets.     For example, reasonable measures

of pension wealth can be calculated from samples of pension formulas as long

as the wage used is representative for the covered workers. Also, pension

wealth can be roughly inferred from self-reported data as long as measures

such as the median are used and care is taken to eliminate the influence of

potential outliers on the results. Finally, our findings support Freeman's

conclusion,   based on data from firm contributions to pension plans, that the

union impact on pension wealth occurs mainly through the union effect on

coverage and the feedback from the union monopoly effect on the wage.
     Our findings also have important implications for theories trying to

explain the existence of pensions and the forms they take.    Any such theory

or combination of theories must confront a multitude of differences in the

incentives provided by different plans to different individuals.     From Table

13, for example, incremental pension values for an individual at age 60 with

35 years of service range from a supplement equal to 12.8% of the wage to a

                                      33
penalty equal to 0.6% of the wage, depending on the requirements for normal
retirement,      among those covered by plans with service requirements,     an

individual w1th 30 years of service reoeives a supplement of 12.2%        of   the

wage if he joined the fins at age 25 but a penalty of 16,9% of the wage if
he joined at 35.      Similarly,   a 60 year old covered by such a plan receives a

supplement of 15.9% if he joined at 45 but a penalty of 0.6% if he joined at
25.   Consideration of variances means that there are even more differences

among the incentives provided by different plans to different individuals
than the above numbers imply.

      There are several productivity—relatedexplanations for pensions,         all Ci

which turn on the inability of employers to reduce wages to induce

retirement at an optimal time.        The simplest is that pensions induce optimal

retirement given the demands of jobs (Parsons, 1983);         We know that

retirement occurs earlier from more as opposed to less physically difficult

jobs (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1986a), which could explain differences in
incentives across employers.        However,   if firms induce workers to retire

simply because of declining productivity,        why are individuals of the same

age sometimes treated so differently according to their age of hire?           This

leads to    a   second explanation for pensions, that they are arranged to permit

specific human capital investment by providing the workers with sufficient

incentives against mobility to allow the expense of the investment to be

recovered.      If this were true, however, why would the incentives to retire

be so much stronger for an individual with 30 years of service hired at age

25 than for one hired at 35?        It would seem that the individual hired

earlier would have a longer work horizon until any kind of age-related

motive to retire, and this would provide incentives for investment in

longer-duration specific human capital.         This would lead one to expect that

a younger individual with 30 years of service should be given more, not

fewer, incentives to remain with the firm than would an older individual

with the same level of service.

      A   third productivity-relatedexplanation for pensions is that they

                                         34
induce individuals not to °shirk' in their jobs.         This explanation fails to

explain the age patterns presented above, however, and additionally it has
some problems of its own with observed patterns.         In Table 14, it is

observed that the pension loss from retiring at      a   given age rather than age

60 is a relatively constant proportion of the cumulative earnings over the

interval.   This implies that the magnitude of the loss, which is a measure

of the incentives against shirking, is likely to be declining in the years

immediately before retirement.     It is not at all clear why firms reguire

fewer incentives against shirking for individuals near retirement than they

do for individuals in the middle of their careers.         This is especially true

because although firms may not have realistic options for terminating

workers guilty of minor shirking, they can shunt the worker onto tracks with

fewer promotion possibilities and lower raises,       This will be more costly to

the worker the earlier it happens, and it means that the firms already have

potent threats against shirking by middle age workers, but less potent

threats against the same behavior by older workers.

    Development of some plausible behavioral rationale for the existence of

pensions and for the forms they take would enhance our understanding of the

long term employment relation    arid   night provide further justification for

one or another of the approaches for evaluating pensions.         Further, if

reasonable behavioral models can be established, the effects on

productivity,   employment and compensation of the sweeping regulatory changes

regarding pensions can be better understood.        Examples of these are the

abolition of mandatory retirement, EEOC rulings reguiring crediting of work
past the age of 65 in computing pension benefits, changes in the social
security benefit structure to    make it actuarially more fair, proposals to

increase pension portability by reducing pension backloading, and proposals

to extend pension coverage further,

     To date, these changes in pension policy have probably not had a severe

impact on retirement behavior.     The continued fall in the age of retirement

suggests that in many cases, the constraints created by these regulations

                                         35
have not been binding. However, the redundancyof mandatory retirement,

pension and social security policies has been eliminated,      4oreover, the
combination of demographic trends and the prescription of limitations which

are further from market solutions should make the constraints more likely to

bind, at least for some workers.     Given recent changes in the law, pensions

are the only tool now available,     short of mandatory competency testing,    for

firms to influence retirement behavior.      In this scenario, only after the

behavior of firms   and workers   are better understood will we be in a position

to evaluate the labor market effects of many of the recent and proposed

changes in pension policies.




                                      36
                                   Footnotes


1.    A pattern plan, also called a flat benefit plan, is another type of
      defined benefit plan. Under a pattern plan, yearly benefits are set
      equal to some dollar figure multiplied by years of servJre. The
      analysis will be applicable to pattern plans as long as the dollar
      amounts in the plans are revised in accordance with the growth in the
      wage over time. Kotilkoff and Wise (1987) assume, consistent with the
      assumption nade in this analysis, that the dollar amounts are revised;
      on the other hand Fields and Mitchell (1984) and Lazear and Moore
      (1985), calculate pension profiles as if the dollar figures remain
      fixed.  When the dollar amounts are fixed, the effect of postponing exit
      from the firm is to cause the value of the plans to decline relative to
      the value of a final average salary plan.

2.    Barnow and Ehrenberg (1979) analyze the effects on pension costs of
      using different formulas to calculate average salary.
3.    It is straight forward to modify the results by including life tables.
      For example, see Barnow and Ehrenberg (1979). Life tables are included
      in our empirical analysis below.

4.    If there is cliff vesting, the value of the pension will be zero during
      the vesting period and will equal the value indicated in equation (1)
      thereafter up to the date of normal retirement eligibility. This will
      create a spike at vesting in the profile represented by equation (3).
      For further discussion, see Kotlikoff and Wise (1985)

5.    In previous work, we found a coverage rate of 54.4% for the full SCF
      sample.  Descriptive statistics and a multivariate analysis of
      determinants of the coverage rate are presented in Gustman and
      Steinmeier (1986b)

6.    Lazear and Moore (1985) emphasize that work in a particular period may
      be a condition for eligibility for a benefit at the end of work in some
      subsequent period. If there is a sharp jump in the reward for work in a
      subsequent year, for instance at early and normal retirement age, the
      value to the worker of employment in an earlier year, or the cost to the
      finn, nay exceed the value indicated by equation (3). Lazear and Moore
      call this the option value of the pension.

7.    Tests of some possible restrictions nay be found in Kotlikoff and Wise
      (1985) and Ippolito (1985).

8.    The figures pertaining to early retirement in the upper two parts of
      Table 5 are based on 155 observations. Those for normal retirement are
      based on 154 observations. The figures in the bottom part of the table
      are based on 27 observations.

9.    For an analysis of the relation of each of these plan characteristics to
      worker and firm characteristics, including union status, see Gustman and
      Steirjrneier (198Gb).

10.   The hypothetical individuals are all assumed to have been born in 1958.
      However, since the plan characteristics (except nominal amounts) for
      these individuals are treated as constant over time, changing the date
      of birth while holding the age of hire constant will have the effect
      primarily of shifting all of the nominal values up or down
      proportionately, with little effect on the ratios reported in the
      tables.


                                    37
11.   The ratios of incremental pension wealth to the wage in this table and
      in subsequent tables are adjusted to  remove the portion of the growth in
      pension wealth due to the interest on the stock of pension wealth
      accumulated through the previous period.   That is, the reported growth
      rate of the pension does not reflect the impact of the interest rate
      term in equation (3). In addition, the ratios are adjusted to remove
      the effect of longer life expectancy from having survived an additfonal
      year.  For a perceptive discussion of the determinants of pension
      accrual, see Bulow (1982).
12.   Kotlikoff and Wise (1987) emphasize that early retirement provisions
      impose less than actuarially fair benefit reductions. They find that
      for plans which specify different ages for early and normal retirement,
      the decline in the rate of pension accrual at the age of early
      retirement is considerably less than at the age of normal retirement.
      Bulow (1981) has carefully analyzed the effects of such incentives on
      the rate of cumulation of pension benefIts, emphasizing that early
      retirement provisions which are less than actuarially fair will raise
      the accrual rate substantially for work in the earlier years, and reduce
      substantially the reward for work once the early retirement age has been
      reached,  Bulow's example, created for a defined benefit plan with
      normal retirement at age 65, indicates how sharply benefits to work past
      early retirement age may be reduced by the availability of early
      retirement benefits.

13,   To expand the analysis of the impact of missing data, we also calculated
      these spikes (using the actual date of hire) with the geometric mean of
      the sample wage or the average wage in the two-digit industry as the
      base period wage for each observation. The numbers obtained are very
      close to those reported in Table 11.

14.   In Gustinan and Steinmeier (1987) the SCF data are used to estimate the
      incentives for mobility and the effects of these incentives on actual
      mobility behavior.   That Study indicates that the effect of pension
      incentives on mobility, and especially the effect of backloading of
      pensions, is minor compared to the effect of the wage premium received
      by those on pension covered jobs over the wage in the next best
      alternative job.

15.   The normal retirement date is specified as the earliest date at which
      the normal retirement formula gives positive numbers, taking into
      account the explicit age and service requirements associated with each
      subformula. In a particular plan, positive benefits may be realized
      before age 62 for an early hire, but not for a late hire, e.g., if there
      is a substantial social security offset.  In such a case, the plan is
      classified as having a normal retirement age below 62 when the
      individual is hired early, but not later. This accounts for the changes
      in the number of cases observed with changing age of hire in columns 1
      and 2.

16.   For simplicity, our discussion assumes that the individual can always
      stay until normal retirement.  For a more general discussion of pension
      costs under circumstance where turnover is uncertain, see Lazear and
      Moore (1985)

17.   In particular, unions increase the fractions of plans which are defined
      benefit and which have service requirements for normal retirement, and
      they reduce the fractions of plans which have social security offsets
      and which use final average salary in determining benefits. The results
      presented in Table 8 above suggest that all four of these
      characteristics are associated directly with higher ratios of pension
      wealth to earnings wealth. As a result, the impact of unions on this
      ratio is indeterminate on the basis of these plan characteristics alone.
      Analogously with regard to Table 12, direct analysis is required to
      determine whether unions systematically affect the marginal reward from
      pensions among covered workers.
18.   These estimates assume that union and nonunion workers will experience
      the same post-retirement benefit adjustment, an assumption that probably
      understates the union—nonunion difference in pension values.

19.   We also ran equations which employ a specification analogous to
      Freeman's, with pension wealth on the left hand side and earnings wealth
      on the right. The coefficient on the union variable is negative but
      insignificant in each of the equations. Similar results are obtained
      whether the regressions are run for defined benefit and combination
      plans only, or for all plans. One further result from these regressions
      should be noted. The significant, positive coefficient on the indicator
      that years of schooling exceeds 16 suggests that the rate of return to
      schooling is underestimated when pensions are ignored. In addition,
      there is the positive, significant impact of years of schooling on the
      probability of pension coverage (Gustman and Steinmeier, l986b), which
      will increase the size of the underestimate.

20.   As before, the numerator of the dependent variable in Table 18 nets out
      pension increments which are due simply to longevity.
21.   These coverage rates are higher than those found by Lazear and Rosen
      (1987) for males and somewhat lower for females.  Our findings pertain
      to full-time workers who are either a head of household or the spouse of
      the head. Lazear and Rosen's results pertain to all workers.

22.   The gap in pension wealth is much smaller than in Lazear and Rosen
      (1987), perhaps due to the differences in sample composition noted
      above.  In the calculation of annuitizing factors for plans specifying
      actuarial reductions, and consistent with the law at the time of the
      survey, differences in life expectancy between males and females are
      taken into account.




                                   39
                                          Table 1
              Wealth from Penaona and Net Wealth from Earnings
             Aaauming Work to the Indioated Time of Saparationa

                                Time of Separation
                           Age     Age    Age    Age                   Plan Retirement Aga
                             55     60     65      70          1983     Early Normal
CR & Combination Plans
  Pension Wealth
    Mean                     87    115          134    115       20       87    135
    Standard Deviation     137     181          245    252       58      133    243

    First Quartile           26     40           55     50        0       3D     54
   Median                   62      91          100     81        1       68    103
    Third Quartile         119     144          158    126       17      113    159

  Earnings Wealth
    Mean                   728     887      1050       1212     287      719     933

  Penaion-Earnings Ratio
    Mean                   10.9%   12.4%    12.5%      9,1%     3.8%    12.0%   14.3%
    Standard Deviation      8.0     7.9      6.8       5.7      6.4      8.3     7.8

    First Quartile          5.4     7,4      8.1        5.6     0        6.8     9.0
    Median                  9.9    11.6     11.7        8.1     0.8     10.6    13.8
    Third Quartile         14.8    16.0     15.8       10.9     4.7     15.1    18.1

  Number of Observations 528        S30         530     530     530      530     530

Defined Contribution Plans
  Penaion Wealth
    Mean                     45      58          73      85      19
    Standard Deviation       51      64          81      92      17

    First Quartile           12      18         25       29       0
    Median                   35      43          52     65        3
    Third Quartile           56      73          89    104        9

  Earnings Wealth
    Mean                    607     751         915    1082     160

  Pension-Earnings Ratio
    Mean                    7.0%    7.1%        7.5%    7.5%    3.5%
    Standard Deviation      4.7     4.8         4.9     4.9     4.4

    First Quartile          3.6     3.5         3.8     3.9     0
    Median                  6.0     6.2         6.6     6.6     2.0
    Third Quartile          9.4     9.5         9.7     9.8     5.6

  Number of Observations     48      49          49      49      49



aWealth figures are in thousands of 1983 dollars. Raounts are estimated using
        plan formulas reported by the firm and the covered workerTs actual
        date of birth and date of hire.




                                           40
                                       Table 2
                           Pension Wealth from Current Job
                    Under Alternative Assumptions About Turnovera



                                                     Turnover Pate
                                              0%          2%          4%

Total Pension Wealth Assuming
  Work to Normal Retirement                  134         108          89

Prorated Pension Wealth from
  Work to Date                                47          42



aWeal-h figures are in thousands of 1983      dollars,




                                      Table 3
                     an Patios of Pension Wealth to Earnrngs
               Wealth for Defined Benefit and Combination Plansa


                                         Tenure
   Age        0—10           11—20        21—30           >30           All
 25—34        0.6%                                                     0.8%
             14,1                                                     14.0

 35—44        0.5             3.4%                                     2.2
             14.4            13.6                                     14.0

 45—54        1.5            8.9            10.4%                      7.5
             13.6           18.1            15.8                      15.6

 55—64        4,4b          ll.4b           ll.6b        12.8%b       10.2
             13.3b          l6.5b           l4.lb        l3.7b        14.5

 65—74                       94b                                       9,4b
                            l2.3b                                     12.3

 All          0.8            5.4             9.8         12.1          3.8
             14.0           14.6            15.2         13.6         14.3




aThe top figure in each pair assumes   exit in1983.      The bottom figure assumes
        retirement at the normal retirement age.

bFewer than 25 obseations.


                                       41
                                  table 4
       Patios of Pension Wealth to Earnings Wealth Cr Vario:s abge
    Asstrrptions, torditional : Retirenent at the Mortal Retiremen Age


                      Base wage Used    In   The    Pension Formula
                                                                                  Mean   of
                                                                       Mean       Log wage
                                                                      of Log      for the
    Measure of       Aotual                                           wage for    IMo Digit
 Pension—Earnings    Wage     $10,000        $25,000     $50,000      the SCF     Industry
     Ratio

    Mean              143%      16.0%          13.5%       12.8%        14.3%       14,2%

    First Quartile     9.0      10.8            7.5         5.3          9.1         9.1
    Median         13.8         15.6           13.3        12.5         13.8        13.8
    Third Quartile 18.1         19.9           18.1        18.1         17.9        18.0




                                    Table 5
                 Self-Reported Vs. Firm—Reported Pension Data
                     On Retirement Ages and Pension Values


                                             Self—Reported                    Firm-Reported
                                             Mean        Median            Mean       Mediar

   Early Retirement Age                      52.0          55              55.0
   Normal Retirement Age                     56.4          62              61.5

   Value of Pensiona
                                        All Individuals With Self—Reported Pension:
     At Early Retirement Age               136         66             88                      C
     At Normal Retirement Age              176        100            131        101

                                        Individuals With Self-Reported Pensions
                                             Expressed As Perrentage of Pay
     At Early Retirement Age               208        105            118        111
     At Normal Retirement Age               301       115            177        131


am thousands of 1983 dollars.




                                          42
                                      Table 6
                    Individual Vs. Firm Responses on Plan           Type

                                              Firm Response            Al].    Plans
                               Defined Defined Combina-
                               Benefit Contrib.  tion
Individual's Response

  Defined Benefit                62.7%        28.6%    35.0%               58.9%
  Defined  Contribution           4.5         36.7     10.0                 7.4
  Combination                    17.1         10.2     40.0                17.3
  Don't Know                     15.7         24.5     15.0                16.4

Number of Observations            510           49       20                   579
   Percent of Observations       88.1%         8.5      3.5                   100




                                     Table 7
                     Pension Wealth for Current SCF Retireesa


                          Pension Wealth
                               Mean                            71
                               Standard Deviation              63

                               First Quartile                  27
                               Median                          48
                               Third Quartile                 103

                          Pension-Earnings     Ratio
                               Mean                       13.7%
                               Median                      9.8

                          Number of Observations              158


  awealth figures are in thousands of 1983 dollars,




                                         43
                                       Table 8
                 Relation of   Plan Characteristics to the Ratio of
           Pension Wealth to   Earnings Wealth, Using Actual Age of Hirea

                                                       Age of Retirement
                               Mean            55         60        65       70
Plan Characteristics
                                              0.003     0.015     0.013     0.013
 r4ultieinployer Plan           .227
                                              (0.43)    (2.20)    (2.15)    (2.63)

 Defined Benefit or             .916       —0.003       0.021     0.025     0.020
  Combination Plan                         (—0.23)      (1,58)    (2.08)    (1.96)

                                .426          0.050     0.051     0.024     0.018
 Service Requirements
   for Normal Retirement                      (7.64)    (7.86)    (4.12)    (3.69)

                                .077           0.091     0.069    0.024     0.008
 Age Requirement Only,
   Required Age < 62                          (7.81)    (5.87)    (2.29)    (0.92)

 Final Average Pay              .754          0.011     —0.004    0.010     0.002
   Plan                                       (1.24)    (0.46)    (1.27)    (0.26)
 Social Security                .420          0.020      0.030    0.028      0,016
   Offset Plan                                (2.91)    (4.45)    (4.52)    (3.14)

 Plan with Maximirn             .660       —0.013       —0.016   —0.015    —0,031
   on Service Years                           (1.87)    (2.27)    (2.54)    (5.93)

 Plan with Required             .166           0.024     0.034     0.027    0.021
   Contributions                              (2.92)    (4.28)    (3.80)    (3.46)

Constant                                       0.068     0.065     0.070    0.069
                                              (6.64)    (6.43)    (7.68)    (9.02)

                                              0.207      0.216     0.171     0.145

Number of Observations                         573       579       579       579

Mean Pension—Earnings Ratio                    0.107     0.120     0.121     0.090




aAlJ.   variables are binary variables with a value of one if the designated
           characteristic is present in the plan and zero otherwise. Absolute
           t— statistics are in parentheses.




                                         44
                               Table 9
                Percent Eligible for Normal Retirement
               in Defined Benefit and Combination Plans

                                                      Age of Hire
                                           25                35                45
         Age of Retirement
                 55                     22.3%               9.4%           0.2%
                 56                     22.5               10.5            0,2
                 57                     22.5               10.5            0,2
                 58                     24.9               11.0            0.2
                 59                     26.0               11.0            0.2
                 60                     36.3               25.0            9.7
                 61                     37.1               25.8           11.3
                 62                     55,1               49.7           33.3
                 63                     55.7               51.8           34.4
                 64                     55.8               51,8           34.8
                 65                     100                100            100




                                Table 10
         Mean Ratios of Pension Wealth to Earnings Wealth and
            Ratios of Increments in Pension Wealth to Wages
                in Defined Benefit And Combination Plans

                                     Age of Hire
                      25                      35                          45
  Age of       P/E         P/E      P/E         P/AE               P/E     P/E
Retirement
   55         12,1%        12,3%    10,7%          16.7%           8.4%        17.1%
   56         12.2         11.1     11.2           16.1            9.3         13,4
  57          12.3         11.1     11.6           17 1             9.8        14.1
  58          12,4          8.8     12.0           15.5            10.3        15.1
   59         12,4         13.1     12,3           24.2            10.8        29.3
   60         12.6          4.8     13.0           11,3            12.3        15.1
   61         12,6         10.1     13.1           16.9            12,7         20.6
   62         12.7         —1.4     13.5            6.8            13.4         11.8
   63         12.5         —3.1     13.5             3.3           13.6         11.2
   64         12,2           2.4    13.3             7,4           13.7         14.0
   65         12.2         —24,0    13,3           —16.8           14.0         —8.6
   66         11,5         —24.2    12.5           —16.7           13.0         —8.7
   67         10.8         —24,5    11.7           —16.9           12.2         —9.0
   68         10.1         —25.4    11.0           —17.8           11.4        —10.0
   69          9.5         —25,7    10.3           —18.0           10.7        —10,1
   '70         8.9         —28.0        9.7        —20.2           10,0        —12,3

                                   45
                                          Table 11
                Ratio   of Increment in Pension Wealth to the Wage
              Associated with Early and Normal Retirement Provisions

                                               Plans with            Plans    without Early
                                           Early    Retirement               Retirement

                    Pre-           ER          Early           NP.             HR          Normal
                  retirement       Spike      Retirement       Spike          Spike     Retirement

                         A.    Using Hypothetical Alternative Ages of Hire
Age   of Hire
                                                           All Plans
       25            15.6%         75.1%           16.4%      26.2%            193.5%       —126%

       35            14.5          53.9            14.9        26.4             92.4         —7.3
       45             9.1          71.5            14.2        24.0             46.8         —4.3

                    Plans with Service Requirements for Notmal Retirement
       25            16.2      118.6      18.5       38.9     210.9                          —9.7
       35            15.2       76.5      16.1       38.1     126.9                          —4.4
       45            10.6          87.4            15.4        34.5             51.8         —1,1

                    Plans without Service          Requirements for Normal Retirement
       25            15.1       45.1                15.0     17.4       118.0      —15.1
       35             13.9      34.6                14.0     16.5        53.8       —9.9
       45              7.9      59.2                13.2     15.8        39.0       —7.2


                         B.    Using   Actual Hire     Dates
Measure
                                                           All Plans
      Mean              15.5        74.2            15.4        24.4           171.3         —10.6

 1st Quartile            7.1        14.8             6.8         3.2            46.3         —17.5
      Median            12.6        32.6            14.6        11.9           151.2          —7.2
 3rd Quartile           19.8       106.9            21.7        26.1           267.1          —0.8

                    Plans with Service        Requirements     for Normal Retirement
      Mean            15.7      111.8               17.4        35.3           220.6          —7.6

 1st Quartile            8.0        23.3             7.9          4.0          128.2         —14.2
   Median               12.6        67.3            17.1        15.9           211.7          —5.6
 3rd Quartile           18.1       170.5            24.5        33.6           303.1          —0.1

                    Plans   without Service        Requirements      for   Normal Retirement
       Mean             15.3       45.0             13.9        15.9            75.7      —13.3

 1st    Quartile         6.6           10.2          6.5          2.6           32.4         —20.1
      Median            12.7           22.8         12.7        10.7            47.2          —8.6
 3rd Quartile           20,8           46.8         20.4        22.8            71.6          —1.8




                                              46
                                Table 12
           Relation of Plan Characteristics to the Ratio of
              the Increment in Pension Wealth to the Wage
                        Using Actual Age of Hire

                                                       Age
                                       55        60             65         70
   Plan Characteristics

     Multiemployer Plan              0.011    0.019           0.026     0.029
                                    (0.56)    (1.19)         (1.44)     (1.70)

     Defined Benefit and             0.045    0054           —0.049    —0.113
        Combination Plan            (1.21)    (1.76)         (1.44)     (3.43)

     Service Requirements            0.022   —0.124          —0.034    —0.090
       for Normal Retirement        (1.22)    (8.21)         (2.03)     (5.52)


     Age Requirements Only,         —0.040   —0.219          —0.235    —0.194
      Required Age < 62             (1.22)    (8.14)         (7.84)     (6.70)


     Final Average Pay              —0.014    0.017          —0.066    —0.017
      Plan                          (0.56)    (0.84)         (2.82)    (0.75)

     Social Security                 0.083    0.057          —0.054    —0.045
        Offset Plan                 (4.37)    (3.64)         (3.07)    (2.65)


     Plan with Maximum              —0.017   —0.038          —0.128    —0.057
      on Service Years              (0.91)   (2.42)          (7.28)    (3.37)


     Plan with Required              0.058    0.028          —0.028    —0.047
        Contributions               (2.59)   (1.50)          (1.38)    (2.38)


Constant                            0.062     0.060          0.033    —0.013
                                    (2.19)   (2.55)          (1.28)   (—0.50)


                                    0.076    0.199           0.313     0.257


Number of Observations              573      579             579       579

Average   .P/E                      0.135    0.061       —0.200       —0.240




                               47
                                 Table 13
               Ratio of One—Year Increment in Pension
                 Wealth to the Wage, by Age at Hire


                                Requirements for Normal Retirement
                           Age Only,         Age Only,         Service
                           Age < 62          Age > 62        Requirement
    Age                                     Hired at Age 25
     35                        7.8%               6.1%            5.5%
     40                       12.0                5.6             7.0
     45                       17.9                8.0            11.3
     50                       27.0               11.3            22,1
     55                        8.9               13.1            12.2
     60                       —6.6               12.8            —0.6
     65                      —39.9              —19.6           —25.1
     70                      —36.8              —21.9           —32.1

Number of Observations         48                235              246


    Age                                     Hired at Age 35
     45                       14.3%              10.7%            9.5%
      50                      22.0               10.2            12.4
      55                      10.3               13.4            20.9
      60                       0.2               14.6             9.7
      65                     —30.9              —14.5           —16.9
      70                     —27,4              —16.4           —22.9

Number of   Observations       38                245              246


    Age                                     Hired at Age 45
      55                      16.0%              17.8%           16.3%
      60                       6.1               14.7            15.9
      65                      —0.6               —9.4            —8,0
      70                     —11.2              —10.6           —14.3

Number of Observations          10               273              246




                                      48
                                    Table 14
Mean Ratio of Loss in Pension Wealth to Loss in Earnings Wealth
 from Separation at Indicated Age Instead of Remaining to Age 60


                             Requirements for Normal Retirement
                       Age Only,           Age Only,          Service
                       Age < 62            Age > 62        Requirement
Age
                A.     At Historical Inflation      and Discount Rates
                                          Hired at Age 25
35                        16.6%               10.2%             15.9%
40                        18.4                11.4              18.2
45                        19.8                13.0              21.6
50                        19.5                15.0              24.3
55                         5.2                13.5               9.9

                                          Hired at Age 35
45                        17.5                12.3              18.1
50                        18.0                14.1              21.6
55                         7.6                14.5              22.0

                                          Hired at Age 45
55                        18.3                14.6              20.5

           B.        At   5% Higher Inflation    and Discount Rates
                                          Hired at Age 25
35                        11.2%                6.3%              10.0%
40                        12.9                 7.4               11.8
45                        14.6                 8.9              14.6
50                        14.4                10.9              17.4
55                         5.3                 9.7               8.4

                                       Hired at Age 35
45                        12.6                 7.8              11.7
50                        14.2                 9.7              14.7
55                         6.5                 9.8              15.6

                                       Hired at Age 45
55                        12.6                 9.3              13.6




                                     49
                                     Table 15
      Ratios of Pension Wealth to Earnings Wealth and Ratios of Differences
             n  Pension Wealth to Wages for Alternative Ages of Hire
                    for Defined Benefit and Combination Plans


              Hired        Hired   25—30    Hired   30—35    Hired                               35—40
              at 25        at 30 Difference at 35 Difference at 40                             Difference
Retire at
                                                 All Plans
 50              7.4%        7.3%     8.9%          6.9%            8.7%           5.7%          8.8%
 55            12.1        11.2      15.7          10.7            12.5            9.9          13,3
 60            12.6        13.1      10.0          13.0            12.5           12.9          13.0
 65            12.2        12.8       7.9          13.3             9.4           13.7          10.9
 70              8.9        9.3       5.5             9.7           6.8            9.9           7,8

                       Plans with Service Requirements for Normal Retirement
 50              8.3%        8.2%    10.5%            7.5%         10.6%           6.6%         11.2%
 55            14.9         13.0     22.5            12.1          15.6           11.2          15.4
 60            14.9        15.4      11.6            15.2          15.2           15.0          15.1
 65            13.6        14.2       9.0            14.7          10.5           15.3          11.6
 70            10.0        10.4       6.1            10.8           7.5           11.2           8.2




                                      Table 16
                 DisaggregatedPension Wealth and Earnings Wealth,
                     Using Covered Workers Actual Date of Hire


                                   Union Nonunion           Male      Female        Black Nonblack

                                               Retirement at Normal Retirement Age
DR & Combination Plans
    Mean Pension Wealth     92                164           137            131            92       139
    Mean Earnings Wealth   746               1063           996            817           695       957
    Pension-EarningsRatio 13.1               15.1           13.7          15.4       13.1         14.4

All Plans
    Pension-EarningsRatio          13.0%     14,1%          13.3%         14.3%      12.6%        13.8%


                                               Retirement at Age 65
DR & Combination Plans
    Mean Pension Wealth     90                165            135           133            99       138
    Mean Earnings Wealth   859               1183           1128           908           795      1076
    Pension—EarningsRatio 11.0%              13.5%          11.8%         13.7%      12.0%        12.5%

All Plans
     Pension—EarningsRatio 10.9              12.7           11.6          12.8       11.5         12.1
                 Regression Results with Ratio of Pension Wealth
                     to Earnings Wealth as Dependent Variable
                         for Individuals Hired at Age 25

                                Mean of
                               Explanatory                 Age of Retirement
                                 Variablea            55           60            65

       Mean   Ratio                                  0.122        0.127         0.123


       Regression Variables:
        Constant                                     0.084        0.095         0.101
                                                    (3.97)       (5.21)        (6.37)

         Union                       0.410          —0.003       —0.008        —0.010
                                     (0.30)         (1.10)        (1.48)

         Female                      0. 350          0.005        0.009         0.016
                                     (0.61)         (1.25)        (2.48)

         Black                       0.089          —0.001       —0.003        —0.001
                                     (0.08)         (0,28)        (0.06)

         Manufacturing                0. 474        —0.028       —0.030        —0.035
                                     (0.89)         (1.10)        (1.45)

         Large Firm                  0. 932          0.025        0.020         0.008
                                     (1.37)         (1.31)        (0.58)

         Manufacturing *              0.456         0.023         0.024         0.032
           Large Firm                               (0.71)       (0.86)        (1.29)

         White Collar                0.374          0.017         0.014         0.007
           Occupation                               (1.63)       (1.55)        (0.88)

         Management                  0.163           0.019        0.018        0.014
                                                    (1.39)       (1.52)        (1.41)

         <12 Years Education         0.149          —0.010       —0.007        —0.004
                                                    (0. 87)      (0.07)        (0.49)

         13—15 Years                 0.229           0.008        0.010        0.011
           Education                                (0.83)       (1.17)        (1.42)

         16+ Years Education         0.221           0.014        0.021         0.028
                                                    (1.24)       (2.15)        (3.32)

         Multiemployer               0.219           0.012        0.010         0.010
           Plan                                     (1.26)       (1.16)        (1.45)

                                                     0.051        0.082         0.104

       uinber    of   Observations                   529          529           529



.1   variables are     dummy   variables. Absolute t—St&tlStiCS ifi        parentheses

                                               51
                                   Table 18
                of Union Status, Gender and Race on the Ratio of the
            Impact
     Increment in Pension Wealth to the Wage for Workers Hired at Age 25
                   in Defined Benefit and Combination Plans

                          Coefficients of Binary Variables for:a
                      AP/AE           Union       Female        Black
       Age

       55             0.125          —0.052       0.036        —0.035
                                     (3.23)       (2.27)       (1.44)

       56             0.113          —0.050       0.047        -0.036
                                     (3.39)       (3.27)       (1.63)
       57             0.113          —0.045       0.049        -0.049
                                     (2.35)       (2.59)       (1.68)
       58             0.091          -0.049       0.059        —0.033
                                     (3.19)       (3. 94)      (1.44)
       59             0.131              0.000    0.052        -0.003
                                     (0.01)       (1.31)       (0.05)
       60             0,048          —0.063       0.051         0.009
                                     (3.55)       (2.93)       (0.33)
       61             0.101              0.050    0.037       —0.090
                                     (0.90)       (.067)       (1.07)
       62            —0.013          —0.063       0.099         0.027
                                     (3.   93)    (6.27)       (1.12)
       63            —0.030          —0.058       0.100         0.026
                                     (3.48)       (6.06)       (1.03)
       64             0.032          —0.032       0.180       —0.042
                                     (0.69)       (3.92)       (0.59)

       65            —0.245          —0.027       0.066        0.022
                                     (1.35)       (3.32)       (0. 70)

       66            —0.246          —0.034        0.067        0.021
                                     (1.79)       (3.54)       (0.74)

       67            —0.249          —0.044       0.066        0.012
                                     (2.22)       (3.59)       (0. 42)

       68            —0.258          —0.049       0.057        0.014
                                     (2.59)       (3.05)       (0.49)

       69            —0.261          —0.055       0.057        0.010
                                     (3.00)       (3.14)       (0. 37)

       70            —0.284          —0.048       0.056         0.025
                                     (2.50)       (2.95)       (0.85)

a.bsolute t-statistics in parentheses.
                                           References

Allen G. Steven and Clark L. Robert. "Unions, Pension Wealth and Age-
       Compensation Profiles." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 39
          (July 1986)   :   502—517.

Allen, Steven G., Clark, Robert L. and            Sumner,    Dan.   "Post-Retirement
          Adjustments of Pension Benefits." Journal of Human Resources 21
          (Winter 1986)  118 — 137.

Barnow,    Burt S. and Ehrenberg, Ronald G. "The Costs Of Defined Benefit
          Pension Plans and Firm Adjustments." Quarterly Journal Of Economics
          93 (November 1979): 523—540.

Bulow, Jeremy    I. "Early Retirement Pension Benefits." National Bureau of
          Economic Research, Working Paper 654. Cambridge: April 1981.

Bulow, Jeremy I. "What are Corporate Pension Liabilities." Ouarterly
       Journal of Economics 97 (August 1982); 435—452.

Fields,    Gary S. and Mitchell, Olivia. Retirement. Pensions and Social
          Security. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1984.

Freeman,    Richard B. "Unions, Pensions and Union Pension Funds," in
          David A. Wise, editor, Pensions. Labor, and Individual Choice.
          Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1985.

Gustraan,   Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L. "A Disaggregated Structural
          Analysis of Retirement By Race, Difficulty of Work and Health."
          Review of Economics and Statistics 67 (August, l986a) : 509—513.

Gustnan,    Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L. "Pensions and Unions." Report
          to the U.S. Department of Labor, Office of The Assistant Secretary
          for Policy. Hanover: May l986b.

Gustman,    Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L. "Pensions, Unions and Implicit
          Contracts." National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.
          2036.  Cambridge: October l986c.

Gustrnan, Alan L. and Steinmeier,   Thomas L. "Pensions, Efficiency Wages and
          Job Mobility." National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
          No. 2426.  Cambridge: October 1987.

Hatch, Sarah et al.           Financial   Retirement Incentives in Private Pension
                  Report submitted to the        U.S. Department of Labor.
          Washington,       D.C.: Urban Institute,   1982.

Ippolito,    Richard A. "The Labor Contract and True Economic Pension
          Liabilities." American Economic Review 75 (December 1985): 1031-
          1043.

Ippolito,    Richard A. Pensions. Economics and Public Policy.              Homewood,
          Illinois; Dow Jones—Irwin, 1986.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Wise, David A. "The Incentive Effects of Private
      Pension Plans," in Zvi Bodle, John B. Shoven and David A. wise,
      editors, Issues In Pension Economics. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press, 1987.




                                             53
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Wise, David A. "Labor Compensation and The
      Structure of Private Pension Plans: Evidence For Contractual vs.
      Spot Labor Markets," in David A. Wise, editor, Pensions. Labor, and
      Individual Choice. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1985.
Lazear, Edward P. "Severence Pay, Pensions, and Efficient Mobility."
       National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 854. Cambridge:
       February 1982.

Lazear, Edward P. "Pensfons as Severence Pay," in Zvi Bodie and John B.
       Shoven, editors, Financial Asoects of the United States Pension
       System,  Chicago:  The University of Chicago Press, 1983.

Lazear, Edward P. and Moore, Robert L.   "Pensions and   Mobility."
       Unpublished. Chicago: 1985.

Lazear, Edward P. and Rosen, Sherwin.   "Pension Inequality," in Zvi Bodie,
       John B. Shoven and David A. Wise, editors, Issues In Pension
       Economics,  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press, 1987.

McCarthy, David and Turner, John A. "Earnings Comparisons and Race/Gender
       Differences in Private Pension Benefits." Unpublished. Washington,
       D.C.:   December,   1983.

Parsons, Donald.    "The industrial Demand for Older Workers." Unpublished.
       Columbus:   1983.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Employee Benefits in
      Medium And Large Size Firms, 1985." Bulletin 2262. Washington,
      D.C.: July, 1986.




                                    54
                                          Appendix

          Using The Survey of Consumer Finances To Calculate Pension Values



      The    1983 Survey   of Consumer Finances      is a two—part survey that is
particularly     suited for questions related to pensions.       The first part is a

national random sample      of   4262 households.    For each household, the respondent
and the spouse were asked a variety of questions, including questions
pertaining to current labor force behavior and to pension coverage.
Households that indicated pension coverage were asked to name the pension

provider, and the second part of the survey contains information from

documents gathered from these pension providers.           The pension provider records

indicate the specific formulas used in calculating normal retirement benefits,

early retirement benefits, and deferred vested benefits, the manner in which

such variables as service years, average salary amounts, and Social Security

offsets are calculated, and detailed descriptions of the requirements that the

individual must have met in order to be eligible for the various classes of

benefits.

      The estimates in the paper are based on individuals in the Survey of

Consumer Finances who were employed at the time of the survey and who

indicated that they either were eligible for a pension in their current job or

would be eligible if they remained in the job, and for whom information on the

pension is available in the pension provider part of the survey.           The sample

is further restricted to require that the individuals be private sector

employees who usually worked more than 30 hours per week and who were not

self—employed.     The sample excludes the      special high income group of the

survey.

      Pension benefit      amounts   are calculated from sections specifying   normal

retirement benefits, early retirement benefits, and deferred vested benefits

in defined benefit plans, and from the Section specifying benefits in defined

contribution plans.     If the plan had both defined benefit and defined

contribution benefits, both kinds of benefits are calculated.           Further, if the


                                           55
individual was covered by more than one plan in the current job, the results

refer to the swn of all the benefits for which the individual might be

eligible,     For plans that specified required contributions, the amount of

these contributions is subtracted from wages to give the net wage figures in

the paper.   The value     of death and disability benefits is omitted from the

calculations.       Also omitted are benefits arising from voluntary contributions

and from profit sharing contributions.       There is almost no basis on which to

                                                                           be.
judge what the amounts of benefits from profit sharing contributions might

      The calculations begin with a wage equation estimated for individuals In

the SCF with pensions.        The dependent variable is log wage, and explanatory

variables include experience, experience squared, tenure, tenure squared,
education, education squared, a tenure-education interaction, an

experience-education       interaction, tenure and experience interactedwith union

status,   durruny   variables for marital status, health status, union membership,

industry categories       (8), geographical regions   (4),   and SMSA residence.   The

coefficients from the wage equation are then used to construct a wage profile

through each individual's observed 1983 wage level.            These are wages in 1983

dollars, and current dollar wages are obtained by assuming general wage growth

of 5.44% per year, which is the compound rate by which wages grew in the 30

year period prior to 1983.
                                                                           is
      Using the wage profile so obtained, the pension provider informatIon

used to calculate the benefits that would be available if the individual were

to retire at alternate ages.        At each age, amounts are calculated for any

normal retirement, early retirement, or deferred vested benefits for which the

individual may be eligible, and the actual benefit is presumed to be the

largest such amount.        If a part of the plan (usually the deferred vested

benefit section) allows the individual to choose the dote he or she begins

collecting benefits, the date which maximizes the present value of the

benefits is used.        In these calculations, it Is assumed that any nominal

quantities in the pension plans grow at the same rate as general wage growth.

Also, it is assumed that once an individual begins to collect benefits, the
benefits are increased by 38% of the increase in the price level, conforming

to results presented in Allen, Clark, and Sumner (1986).               The price inflation

rate is taken to be 4.64%, the compound inflation rate of the C?I in the 30

year period ending in 1983, and no distinction is made between the post
retirement       adjustments for union and nonunion workers. Using survival tables
reflecting       gender and race (but not pension status), all benefits are then
multiplied by the conditional probability of living until the age in question,

given survival until the retirement date, and           discounted back to the year of
retirement using        a discount factor equal to the rate of general wage growth

Finally, the benefits are summed to yield a value for pension wealth as of the

retirement year which is converted back to 1983 dollars using the same

discount factor.

         Two    sets   of calculations use   hypothetical hire dates   and wages.   For the

case using hypothetical hire dates, the alternative ages of hire are taken to

be 25,    35,    and 45.    In this case, the plan features are assumed to be those in

place in 1983, and the question is how the incentives provided by the plans

would be different if the individuals in the sample had been hired at

different ages.         As before, nominal amounts in the plans are presumed to
increase with general wage growth.            The operational meaning of "plan features

in place in 1983" is that variables which are defined over limited calendar

periods are assumed to be defined over all periods if the limited period

includes 1983 and to be zero if the limited period does not include 1983.                 For

                                                              1.5%   * ASY1 * FAP1 + 1.75%
example, many plans contain expressions similar to
* A312 * FAP2,         where ASY1 and FAP1 are service years and average salary

before,    say, 1975, and ASY2 and FAP2        are the corresponding quantities after

1975.     In this case, such a formula would be treated as           1.75% * ASY * FAP,

where ASY and FAP are applicable over all years, since ASY2             and FAP2 encompass
1983.     Other variables which involve restrictions on dates of applicability

are treated similarly.

         For the case involving hypothetical wages, the calculations are much the

same as in the base case,         except that gross wages   (i.e.,   before mandatory


                                              57
contributions sre deducted) in every year are multipliedby the ratio of some

set amcunt ($10,000, $25,000, or $50,000) to the gross wage observed in 1983,

adjusted to the wage at zero tenure and zero experience.      This has the effect

of shifting the entire wage profile proportionately up or down so that it

begins (in reel terms) at the set amount.    Dollar amounts in the pension plans

are    multiplied by    the same factor of proportionality.    However, the dollar

amounts are still assumed to increase with increases in the general wage

level, the same as is done in the other cases.

      The benefit calculations rely a large number of individual pieces of

information from each record in the data set, but unfortunately in many

records at least one piece of information is either missing or is suspicious.

In some of these records, either there seems to be an obvious correction to a

miscoded varsble, or possible alternative assumptions about a miscoded
variable appear to have only minor effects on the calculations.      In other

records, however, the missing or suspicious information is critical enough to

the calculations that the observation is deleted.

      In this latter category, most of the lost observations occur for one of
the following three reasons: (i) 14.7% of the potential observations lack

sufficient information to construct the gross wage in 1983.      This creates

problems because if an incorrect imputed wage is used, either the level of the

present value of benefits    (in salary-based plans) or the ratio of the present

value of benefits to wages (in pattern plans) is likely to be seriously

misstated.   (ii)   Another 8.8% of the potential observations involve plans for
which either early retirement or deferred vested benefits involve a reduction

factor that is unspecified in the data set.    Conversations with Richard Curtin

at the Survey Research Center indicate that for the most part, these reduction

factors are unspecified in the documentation sent by the firms to the Survey

Research Center.     There are such a variety reduction factors in observed

plans, ranging from approximately actuarially fair to quite actuarially

unfair, and the incentives provided by the plans are so sensitive to the

actuarial fairness of the reduction factors, that we feel it best to refrain


                                       58
from any attempt to impute these variables.            (iii)   5.7% of the potential

observations are deleted even with no missing or suspicious information

because they yield a calculated present value of zero for the pension if the
individual retires at age 65.        For the most part, these plans involve either

variables    (e.g.,   service years or final average pay) or eligibility

requirements     restricted to calendar    time periods such that the individual
could    never   collect benefits under the plan.      In a relatively small number of

cases,    the zero benefits arise because of very       large Social Security offset

provisions in the plan.

            the problems which do not result in the deletion of observations,
        Among
the major one is that about 9% of the plans involve mandatory contributions
whose    level is unspecified.     Fortunately, the level of such contributions has

only a relatively minor effect on incentives provided by the pians, and since
these contributions range from fairly token amounts to several percentage

points of salary, rendering imputations arbitrary, they are omitted from the
calculations      (i.e.,   not subtracted from gross   wages).    About 3% of the plans

involve unspecified firm contributions other than profit sharing; these are
treated in the same manner as are profit sharing amounts and are omitted.

About 1% of the plans involve inconsistencies in the specification of
variables and/or equations as monthly vs. annual amounts. For example, a
benefit amount specified as monthly might be given by the equation 1.5% *

FAP1 * ASYl, where all other equations and variables in the plan are

specified as monthly but where FAP1 is specified as an average annual amount,
thus producing unreasonably large benefit amounts. Case by case examination
of these inconsistencies suggest coding errors in almost all (but not all)
cases, and these are corrected where necessary. Similarly, another 5% of the
plans produced benefit streams that seem unreasonable in one way or another,

and for which the cause can be tracked down to one of a wide variety of

apparent miscodings whose corrections appear relatively straightforward.




                                           59
