                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          SELECTION INTO ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SELF-EMPLOYMENT

                                        Ross Levine
                                       Yona Rubinstein

                                     Working Paper 25350
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25350


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2018




We thank Josh Angrist, Steve Davis, David De Meza, Paul Gertler, Itzhak Gilboa, Florian Heider,
Erik Hurst, Chinhui Juhn, Ed Lazear, Annamaria Lusardi, Ramana Nanda, Alex Popov, Jim
Poterba, John van Reenen, David Robinson, Fan Wang, Noam Yuchtman, and seminar
participants at Australian National University, the European Central Bank, Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City, the IDC, London School of Economics, MIT, the NBER Summer Institute on
Entrepreneurship, National University of Singapore, University of California-Berkeley, and
University of Houston. We thank the Institute for Business Innovation at the Haas School of
Business at the University of California, Berkeley. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Ross Levine and Yona Rubinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Selection into Entrepreneurship and Self-Employment
Ross Levine and Yona Rubinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 25350
December 2018
JEL No. E32,J24,L26

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the effects of ability and liquidity constraints on entrepreneurship. We develop a three
sector Roy model that differentiates between entrepreneurs and other self-employed to address
puzzling gaps that have emerged between theory and evidence on entry into entrepreneurship.
The model predicts—and the data confirm—that entrepreneurs are positively selected on highly-
remunerated human capital, but other self-employed are negatively selected on those same
abilities; entrepreneurs are positively selected on collateral, but other self-employed are not; and
entrepreneurship is procyclical, but self-employment is countercyclical.


Ross Levine
Haas School of Business
University of California at Berkeley
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu

Yona Rubinstein
Department of Management
London School of Economics
London
United Kingdom
y.rubinstein@lse.ac.uk
                                                                                                     1

I. INTRODUCTION
       Entrepreneurship plays a central role in influential theories of economic growth and

business cycles. For example, Smith (1776), Schumpeter (1911), and Aghion and Howitt (1992)

emphasize that entrepreneurs facilitate economic growth by bring new goods, services, and

technologies to the economy. Lucas (1978), Baumol (1990), Murphy et al (1991), and Gennaioli

et al (2013) stress that the allocation of entrepreneurial talent influences the productivity of firms
and the growth rates of economies. On business cycles, Veblen (1904), Fisher (1933), Keynes

(1936), Shleifer (1986), Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Caballero and Hammour (1994) and others

explain that the response of entrepreneurs to aggregate shocks shapes how those shocks

propagate through the economy. Unsurprisingly, therefore, a rich body of research explores

selection into entrepreneurship.

       Research, however, highlights three puzzling gaps between theory and evidence

regarding the human capital, earnings, and liquidity constraints of entrepreneurs. Several leading

theories emphasize that (1) entrepreneurs have unique human capital traits—including creativity,

analytical skills, risk taking, self-confidence, education, and managerial acumen (Schumpeter

1911, Lucas 1978, Kihlstrom and Laffont 1979, Evans and Jovanovic 1979, Baumol 1990,

Murphy et al 1991, and Gennaioli et al 2013); (2) entrepreneurs are highly remunerated for these

scarce skills and for the additional risks associated with entrepreneurial endeavors (Lucas 1978

and Kihlstrom and Laffont 1979); and (3) liquidity constraints limit entry into entrepreneurship

(Knight 1921, Bernanke and Gertler 1989, Evans and Jovanovic 1989, Kiyotaki and Moore 1997,

and Cagetti and De Nardi 2006). Yet, some influential empirical studies find that (1) the typical

self-employed person does not have better skills or more education than salaried employees

(Fairlie 2002); (2) the typical self-employed person does not earn more than a salaried

counterpart (Borjas and Bronars 1989, Evans and Leighton 1989, Hamilton 2000, and

Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen 2002); and (3) liquidity constraints restrict only a small

proportion of wealthy individuals from becoming self-employed (Hurst and Lusardi 2004).
                                                                                                                 2


        Researchers have addressed each of these puzzles independently. On the human capital

puzzle, while researchers find no evidence for positive selection into self-employment on

cognitive skills, several researchers point to selection on noncognitive traits including the degree

of risk aversion, break-the-rules mentality, etc. (Fairlie 1999, 2002, Fairlie and Robb 2007a,b,

Fairlie and Woodruff 2010, Hartog, van Praag, and van der Sluis 2010, and Nanda and Sørensen

2010). On earnings, some argue that “overly confident” business owners (Bernardo and Welch

2001, De Meza and Southey 1996, and Dawson et al. 2014), the non-pecuniary benefits of self-

employment (Hurst and Pugsley 2011), attribution bias (Manso 2016), and underreported income

(Hurst, Li, and Pugsley 2014) help explain the “earnings puzzle.” On liquidity constraints—and

without necessarily rejecting the Hurst and Lusardi (2004) finding that liquidity constraints bind

for few, considerable research shows that (1) entrepreneurial wealth in general shapes entry into
self-employment (Evans and Jovanovic 1989, Evans and Leighton 1989, Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian,

and Rosen 1994a, and Fairlie 1999) and (2) housing wealth in particular influences both

selection into self-employment (Black, De Meza, and Jeffreys 1996, and Fairlie and Krashinsky

2012, Fort et al. 2013, Corradin and Popov 2015, and Schmalz, Sraer, and Thesmar 2017) and

employment in start-up firms (Adelino, Schoar, and Severino 2015). 1

        Levine and Rubinstein (2017) address the human capital and earnings puzzles by

focusing on the incorporated self-employed as a better proxy for entrepreneurship than the
aggregate group of self-employed. They document that entrepreneurs possess a unique mixture

of cognitive and non-cognitive traits and earn more than the typical salaried worker. Yet, most of

the self-employed are not incorporated and these other self-employed have very different traits

and earnings. What Levine and Rubinstein (2017) and others do not provide is a theory that (a)


1
  There is large literature on housing collateral and credit constraints. A growing body of work finds that housing
prices influence corporate investments (Gan 2007a and Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar 2012), bank lending (Gan
2007b), and household access to credit (Gan 2010 and Mian, Rao, and Sufi 2013), though see Kerr, Kerr, and Nanda
(2015) for a contrasting view on the importance of housing wealth for entrepreneurship. On collateral, corporate
investment, and corporate finance more generally, see, for example, Fazzari, et al. 1988, Hoshi, Kashyap, and
Scharfstein (1991), Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen 1994b, Blanchflower and Oswald (1998), Hubbard and
Kashyap (1992), Gertler and Gilchrist (1994), Benmelech and Bergman (2008), and Benmelech, Garmaise, and
Moskowitz (2005).
                                                                                                     3


explains why aggregating these different types of self-employed is conceptually inappropriate

and empirically misleading and (b) simultaneously accounts for the human capital, earnings, and

liquidity puzzles. Specifically: (1) Why is there positive selection into entrepreneurship on key

human capital traits but negative selection into other forms of self-employment? (2) Why do the

incorporated tend to earn more than salaried workers, while the other self-employed earn less

than their salaried counterparts? (3) Why do liquidity constraints limit so few from becoming

business owners, and do liquidity constraints bind differently for entrepreneurs and other self-

employed?

       In this paper, we offer a unified treatment of entrepreneurship and self-employment that

addresses these puzzles. In particular, we first develop a theoretical model of how human capital,

preferences, and liquidity constraints shape selection into entrepreneurship, other forms of self-
employment, and salaried employment. We then, use our framework to analyze empirically the

roles of cognitive and noncognitive traits, labor market skills, and credit constraints in shaping

selection into the different employment types. Our theoretical and empirical analyses offer a

resolution to the human capital, earnings, and liquidity “puzzles.” Furthermore, we use our

framework to address a different and enduring debate about the cyclicality of entrepreneurship,

where we allow for pro- and counter-cyclical forces to differentially influence entry into

entrepreneurship and other self-employment.
       A key starting point in building our model is the growing body of evidence that self-

employment is a problematic proxy for entrepreneurship because it fails to distinguish between

entrepreneurs and other self-employed individuals. Evans and Leighton (1989), Schoar (2010),

Hurst and Pugsley (2011), La Porta and Shleifer (2014), Levine and Rubinstein (2017), and

others indicate that some of the self-employed undertake highly-productive ventures that create

jobs and introduce new goods and services to the market, i.e., “entrepreneurs.” Most of the self-

employed, however, are one-person, low-productivity “other self-employed” individuals, who

were often unsuccessful salaried workers, perform routine, manuals tasks, and have few

ambitions to grow their businesses. Thus, bundling together these two different types of self-
                                                                                                     4


employment—conceptually and empirically—might yield misleading perspectives and

inferences about entrepreneurs.

       We first develop a three-sector Roy model that distinguishes between entrepreneurs,

salaried employees, and other self-employed. Our model differs from Evans and Jovanovic’s

(1979) (henceforth EJ) influential model of entrepreneurship in two key respects. While EJ

aggregate business owners into one category of self-employment, we distinguish between (i)

entrepreneurship—which demands entrepreneurial ability, physical capital, and liquidity—and

(ii) other forms of self-employment that demand none (or little) of these inputs and is driven

primarily by the non-pecuniary benefits of self-employment, such as being one's own boss, with

“… little desire to grow big or to innovate in any observable way” (e.g., Hurst and Pugsley 2011).

Our model also differs from EJ in that we relax their assumption that entrepreneurial ability is
not valuable in salaried employment. Similar to EJ, our model includes complementarities

between human and physical capital that give rise to a Knightian (1921) connection between the

entrepreneur and capitalist. That is, the optimal capital stock is increasing in entrepreneurial

ability, which means that liquidity constraints are more costly to higher-ability entrepreneurs.

       The model yields unique predictions with respect to human capital, earnings, and

liquidity constraints. First, entrepreneurs are positively selected on entrepreneurial ability and

salaried wages when entrepreneurial ability is also useful in salaried employment, but the other
self-employed are negatively selected on both. Thus, the model highlights the conceptual

problems with aggregating (i) high-ability entrepreneurs, who earn high-wages when they work

as salaried employees, with (ii) low-ability other self-employed, who earn low-wages when they

work as salaried employees. The model’s second prediction is that entrepreneurs are positively

selected on collateral and access to capital, but the other self-employed are not. Thus, combining

these two types of self-employment may yield an aggregate group in which only a small

proportion is liquidity constrained and only a few enter and exit self-employment in response to

liquidity shocks.
                                                                                                    5


       Our framework also provides distinctive predictions about the cyclicality of

entrepreneurship and other self-employment. Several business cycle theories stress that the

procyclicality of entrepreneurship amplifies aggregate shocks (e.g., Shleifer 1986, Bernanke and

Gertler 1989, Kiyotaki and Moore 1997, Francois and Lloyd-Ellis 2003, and Barlevy 2007).

Other models, however, highlight countercyclical forces, emphasizing that the opportunity costs

of investment are lower in recessions (Caballero and Hammour 1994) and weak demand for

labor in recessions pushes workers temporarily into self-employment (e.g., Kihlstrom and

Laffont 1979, and Banerjee and Newman 1993). Empirical assessments of the cyclicality of

entrepreneurship—using the aggregate group of self-employed to proxy for entrepreneurship—

have not resolved this debate (Evans and Leighton 1989, Parker 2009, Koellinger and Thurik

2012, and Yu, Orazem, and Jolly 2014).
       Our model highlights the conceptual problems with using the aggregate group of self-

employed to analyze the cyclicality of entrepreneurship. Following the literature, recessions

involve both a drop in the demand for salaried workers (reducing the opportunity costs of self-

employment) and a tightening of liquidity conditions (increasing the cost of capital). In the

model, the drop in demand for salaried workers increases the flow of people into both types of

self-employment, i.e., this labor demand effect is countercyclical for both entrepreneurs and

other self-employed. The tightening of liquidity conditions, however, impedes people from
entering entrepreneurship (liquidity constraint effect) but has a negligible effect on entry into

other self-employment, which demands no (or little) capital. As a result, the model predicts that

other self-employment is countercyclical, but entrepreneurship will be procyclical if the liquidity

constraint effect is strong enough. Thus, examining the aggregate group of self-employed can

hide the distinct cyclical patterns of entrepreneurship and other self-employment.

       In turning to the data, we follow Levine and Rubinstein (2017) and use the incorporated

as a proxy for “entrepreneurs” and the unincorporated as a proxy for the model’s “other self-

employed.” Conceptually, the corporation’s defining legal characteristics—limited liability and a

separate legal identity—are most useful for undertaking large, risky investments that require
                                                                                                     6


external financing. Thus, when people establish smaller businesses that do not require much

external finance, they will choose the simpler unincorporated legal form; and, when they start

larger, risky—more “entrepreneurial”—ventures, they will incorporate. Empirically, Levine and

Rubinstein (2017) show that the incorporated and their businesses engage in activities that

demand strong nonroutine analytical skills, such as creativity, complex problem-solving, and

persuading, motivating, and managing others. In contrast, the unincorporated and their

businesses perform activities that demand strong manual skills. To the extent that stronger

cognitive skills are more closely aligned with core conceptions of entrepreneurship than strong

eye-hand coordination, these results advertise the value of using incorporation is a proxy for

entrepreneurship. Furthermore, Levine and Rubinstein (2017) provide evidence that the choice of

the business’s legal form reflects the ex ante nature of the underlying endeavor—not selection on
the ex post success of the business. That is, very few people start with unincorporated business

then incorporate if the endeavor is successful. Although using the incorporated and

unincorporated as proxies for entrepreneurs and other self-employed respectively is admittedly

crude, there are conceptual and empirical reasons for preferring this demarcation to using the

aggregate group of self-employed.

       Using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youths 1979, we document that the

incorporated and unincorporated are notably different with respect to human capital and starting
capital. As teenagers, incorporated business owners have stronger analytical skills, greater self-

esteem, and a stronger sense of controlling their futures than those who become unincorporated

self-employed. Furthermore, when comparing the salaried wages of people when they were in

their 20s (early career salaried wages), those who become incorporated self-employed tend to

have higher early career salaried wages than those who either remained salaried workers or

switched into unincorporated self-employment. There are also notable differences in starting

capital. The typical incorporated business starts with almost ten-times as much capital as the

typical unincorporated business, and 21% of the unincorporated report needing no capital to start

their businesses.
                                                                                                      7


       We begin by evaluating the model’s predictions concerning the differential selection of

individuals into incorporated and unincorporated self-employment on entrepreneurial traits, early

career salaried wages, and collateral. We first discover that entrepreneurs—as proxied by the

incorporated self-employed—are positively selected on a mixture of cognitive and non-cognitive

traits and early career salaried wages, while the unincorporated are negatively selected on these

same features Second, we find that entrepreneurs are positively selected on collateral—as

measured by home wealth, while the unincorporated are not. Besides being consistent with the

model’s predictions, these results offer a resolution of the human capital, earnings, and liquidity

puzzles: When researchers combine entrepreneurs with the other self-employed, this aggregates

away the unique human capital traits and high earnings of entrepreneurs and obfuscates the

connection between entrepreneurship and liquidity constraints.
       Next, we exploit natural variation in home equity values across regions and time and the

cross-sectional variation in home ownership to identify the impact of collateral, and hence

liquidity constraints, on entry into entrepreneurship and other self-employment. Thus, we follow

a long literature that stresses that an individual’s housing wealth shapes credit constraints and the

ability to start and grow a business (e.g., Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar 2012, Adelino, Schoar, and

Severino 2015, Corradin and Popov 2015, Schmalz, Sraer, and Thesmar 2017). We discover

economically large and statistically significant effects of collateral on entry into entrepreneurship,
but no effect on entry into other forms of self-employment. Therefore, aggregating entrepreneurs

and other self-employed into one homogeneous business category dilutes the estimated impact of

liquidity constraints on entrepreneurship. This helps explain the liquidity puzzle.

       We then turn to the cyclicality of entrepreneurship and other forms of self-employment.

We use cross-year variation in state unemployment rates to assess the cyclicality of

entrepreneurship and the other self-employed. Consistent with our model’s predictions,

incorporated self-employment is procyclical, unincorporated self-employment is countercyclical,

and aggregate self-employment is countercyclical. During periods of high unemployment,

entrepreneurship falls, but there is a sharp increase in unincorporated self-employment that
                                                                                                     8


reverses when the economy recovers. This suggests that some people use unincorporated self-

employment as a temporary cushion against adverse labor market shocks (e.g., Farber 1999).

Since cyclical fluctuations in unincorporated self-employment are larger than those in

incorporated self-employment, our findings (a) confirm and account for past findings that

aggregate self-employment is countercyclical and (b) uncover the procyclicality of

entrepreneurship.

       Finally, we extend the model and the empirical analyses to consider risk aversion. The

model predicts that the optimal capital stock reflects the interaction between entrepreneurial

skills and risk aversion. Thus, effective entrepreneurial ability is a mixture of narrowly defined

entrepreneurial skills and noncognitive traits that allow individuals to effectuate those skills.

Selection into entrepreneurship, therefore, is determined by the joint distribution of
entrepreneurial skills and risk aversion. Accordingly, some people with exceptional

entrepreneurial abilities might choose to work as salaried employees if they are comparatively

averse to the risk (or lack other features associated with entrepreneurship). Consistent with this

prediction, we find that among smart, able people—whether measured by cognitive test scores or

early career wages—only those who are more likely to engage in risky behaviors, as measured

by their tendency to engage in illicit activities as teenagers, select into entrepreneurship.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II documents the human
capital and liquidity puzzles. Section III presents the theoretical model. Section IV develops the

statistical model, so that we can move from the theory to estimable equations. Section V

provides the empirical evaluation of the model’s predictions and Section VI concludes.
                                                                                                     9

                         II. THE HUMAN CAPITAL AND LIQUIDITY PUZZLES

           In this section, we document puzzles concerning the human capital and liquidity

constraints of entrepreneurs. We first show that salaried employees and the self-employed have

similar human capital traits despite an abundance of theoretical models emphasizing the distinct

features of entrepreneurs. Second, we show that most businesses start with less than $3,500 of

capital. This is consistent with the findings in Hurst and Lusardi (2004), who stress that liquidity
constraints bind for very few. To illustrate these puzzles—and foreshadow our strategy for

resolving them, we use data from the NLSY79. We do not document the earnings puzzle here

since many researchers, e.g., Hamilton (2000), show that the median self-employed and salaried

worker earn about the same per hour despite models emphasizing the unique talents and risk-

taking attributes of successful entrepreneurs.

II.A. Data 2
           The NLSY79 is a representative survey of 12,686 individuals who were 15-22 years old
when they were first surveyed in 1979. Individuals were surveyed annually through 1994 and
biennially since then. Thus, we use year t-2 when referring to a lagged value. We examine
individuals who are 30 years of age or older for whom the NLSY79 has information on assets,
standard demographic information, and the human capital traits described below.
           The NLSY79 reports information on human capital. It provides basic demographics, such
as age, gender, race, and state of residence. It provides information on educational attainment,
including the number of years of education and whether the person graduated from college.
           The NLSY79 also contains measures of cognitive ability, illicit activities, and personality
traits. From the 1980 survey, AFQT (Armed Forces Qualifications Test) measures the aptitude
and trainability of each individual and is often used as an indicator of cognitive skills. The AFQT
indicates the individual’s percentile within the entire sample and has a median of 50.
Furthermore, we construct the index Illicit that measures the aggressive, risk-taking, disruptive,
“break-the-rules” behaviors of individuals before they reach prime working-age. Illicit is based
on 20 survey questions from the 1980 NLSY79 that cover actions associated with damaging

2
    Appendix Table I provides detailed variable definitions and sources.
                                                                                                     10


property, fighting, shoplifting, robbery, assault, drug use and dealing, etc., and whether the
individual was stopped by the police, charged with an illegal activity, or convicted of non-minor
traffic violations. We construct this index to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one.
In addition, we construct Smart & Illicit, which equals one for an individual if (a) AFQT is 50 or
above and (b) Illicit is zero or above. Otherwise, Smart & Illicit equals zero. With respect to
personality traits, the Self-Esteem index measures the degree of approval or disapproval of one’s
self and is based on ten questions in the 1980 survey. Locus of Control is from the 1979 survey
and measures the degree to which individuals believe they have internal control of their lives
through self-determination relative to the degree that external factors, such as chance, fate, and
luck, shape their lives. Smaller values indicate a greater sense of self-determination. Both
Rosenberg Self-esteem and Locus of control are standardized across all individuals in the survey,
so that each has a mean of zero and standard deviation of one.
       The NLSY79 also contains information on wealth, earnings, and the amounts used to
start businesses. We compute Home Wealth as the market value of the individual’s home minus
any mortgages on it and Wealth as the value of all assets minus all liabilities. To compute real
earnings, the NLSY79 provides nominal earnings, and we use the Consumer Price Index to
convert these values into 2010 dollars. Furthermore, we construct Wages (25-29), which equals
an individual’s average real log hourly earnings as a salaried employee during the ages of 25
through 29 if the person is 31 years of age or older and equals the individual’s average real log
hourly earnings as a salaried employee in t-2 if the person is between the ages of 27 and 30.
When people are less than 27 year old, we set Wages (25-29) equal to missing. Wages (25-29) is
available for almost all individuals, since people typically start their working lives as salaried
workers. Starting with the 2010 survey, the NLSY79 began asking businesses about the amount
of capital used to start the business (Starting Capital) and the number of employees (Employees).
       With respect to employment types, the NLSY79 classifies all workers in each year as
either salaried or self-employed, and among the self-employed, indicates whether individuals are
incorporated or unincorporated. Specifically, individuals are asked about the employment class
for their main job: “Were you employed by a government, by a private company, a nonprofit
organization, or were you self-employed (or working in a family business)?” Those responding
                                                                                                                   11


that they are self-employed are further asked, “Is this business incorporated?” While
incorporation offers the benefits of limited liability and a separate legal identity, there are direct
costs of incorporation, such as annual fees and the preparation of more elaborate financial
statements, and indirect costs associated with the separation of ownership and control.
         We use the incorporated as a proxy for entrepreneurs and the unincorporated as a proxy
for the other self-employed in our model. Levine and Rubinstein (2017) show that the
incorporated and their businesses engage in activities that demand a relatively high degree of
creativity, complex problem-solving, and communication skills, including the ability to persuade,
motivate, and manage others. In contrast, the unincorporated perform activities that require
relatively low levels of these analytical skills but instead require strong manual skills. Under the
assumption that stronger cognitive skills are more closely aligned with core conceptions of
entrepreneurship than manual dexterity, these observations motivate our use of incorporation as a
better proxy for entrepreneurship than aggregate self-employment.

II.B. Patterns: Human capital
         Table I provides summary statistics on individuals and their businesses. Focusing on

those who work full-time, full year, the table differentiates individuals by whether they are

salaried employees (Employed) or self-employed. For the self-employed, the table provides

summary statistics on all self-employed (Total) and also by the legal form of the business

(Unincorporated or Incorporated). The data are from the business ownership part of the 2010 and

2012 NLSY79 surveys. 3 For the business ownership part of the surveys, the observation is at the

person-business level. Specifically, individuals are classified as business owners based on the

2010-2012 waves. Individuals who are not business owners enter the sample only once.

Individuals who are business owners have an entry per business reported. If a person reports one

business – she enters once. If a person reports two businesses, she enters twice. Accordingly,

data on starting capital and the legal form of the business are per entry.

3
 There are some differences between the responses that individuals give regarding employment type in the business
ownership and employment parts of the NLSY79. In Table 1, we classify an individual as incorporated or
unincorporated only if the individual provides consistent responses in both parts of the survey. The results, however,
are very similar if we classify employment type based either the business ownership or employment part.
                                                                                                   12


        Table I shows that the human capital traits of employees and the self-employed are

similar. On average, employees and the self-employed in 2010 and 2012 have virtually the same

(a) number of years of education (13.8 v. 13.7), (b) proportion of college graduates (29% v.

28%), (c) salaried earnings when they were 25-29 years old (2.35 for employees and 2.39 for the

self-employed). We also compare measures of the cognitive abilities and personality traits of

individuals before they entered the prime age workforce. We find that the differences between

employees and the self-employed are small, though the self-employed have slightly higher

AFQT scores and self-esteem values, and slightly lower values of the Locus of control indicator.

For example, there is only a 2.2 percentile point difference in average AFQT scores between

employees (49.2) and the self-employed (51.4). Thus, although influential models of

entrepreneurship emphasize the unique human capital of entrepreneurs, the self-employed and
salaried employees have remarkably similar attributes.

       Table I also hints at an explanation of this human capital puzzle: There are two distinct

types of self-employed, those who tend to engage in entrepreneurial activities (Incorporated) and

those who do not (Unincorporated). These two types of self-employed have very distinct human

capital characteristics. The incorporated have, on average, more years of education, a much

greater likelihood of graduating from college, and earn much more per hour than both the

unincorporated self-employed and salaried employees. In contrast, the unincorporated have
lower levels of each of these human capital indicators than salaried employees and incorporated

business owners. There are also large differences in AFQT, Self-esteem, and Locus of control.

For example, the incorporated have AFQT scores that are, on average, 11.5 percentile points

greater than the unincorporated and 10.6 percentile point greater than salaried workers, while the

unincorporated have the lowest AFQT scores across employment types. Thus, while salaried

employees have similar human capital to the aggregate group of self-employed, entrepreneurs

tend to have much greater human capital than salaried workers, while other self-employed have

much less. Aggregation may account for the human capital puzzle.
                                                                                                  13


II.C. Patterns: Starting capital

       Table I also documents that the median self-employed individual (a) starts the business

with less than $3,500 and (b) has no employees. This is consistent with the findings of Evans and

Leighton (1989), Hurst and Lusardi (2004), Hurst and Pugsley (2011), and Levine and

Rubinstein (2017): most businesses are one-person, retail operations that provide routine, manual

services, such as landscaping, house cleaning, handyman services, etc. Indeed 17% of the self-

employed indicate that no capital was needed to start their businesses. These observations on

starting capital further motivate the question raised by the findings in Hurst and Lusardi (2004):

Do liquidity constraints represent a high entry barrier for many potential entrepreneurs?

       The notable differences between entrepreneurs and other self-employed may also account

for this liquidity puzzle. Table I indicates that the median starting capital for an unincorporated
business is about $2,000, but it is almost $20,000 for incorporated businesses. While 21% of

individuals report needing no capital to start an unincorporated business, only 5% of

incorporated business owners respond similarly. Also note, that the average incorporated

business has more than ten-times the number of employees as an average unincorporated

business. There are also pronounced differences in wealth. The total wealth of the

unincorporated self-employed is, on average, about $70,000, of which $19,500 is home wealth.

In contrast, the overall wealth of incorporated business owners is almost $160,000, of which
$32,000 is home wealth. These differences in collateral and starting capital suggest that

aggregating the incorporated and unincorporated self-employed might yield misleading

information on the degree to which liquidity constraints limit entry into entrepreneurship.

       Table I documents that contrary to influential theories, salaried employees and self-

employed individuals have similar human capital characteristics and most businesses start with

little or no capital. The data also suggest a strategy for resolving these puzzles: There are

material differences between incorporated and unincorporated self-employed and their

businesses. Thus, we now develop a three-sector Roy model to explore the selection of
                                                                                                      14


individuals on human capital and liquidity into entrepreneurship and other forms of self-

employment. Below, we empirically evaluate the predictions emerging from the model.


III. A MODEL OF SELECTION INTO ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SELF-EMPLOYMENT

III.A. Framework

       Each individual chooses one of three employment types: Salaried employment (S),
entrepreneurship (E), and other self-employment (U). Individual i then receives income ‫ܫ‬௃௜ from

working in employment type J, where J is S, E, or U. Individuals sort into employment types to
maximize utility, where the utility of individual i in employment type J is a function of income

and non-pecuniary benefits (ߜ௃௜ ):

                                           ܸ௃௜ = ‫ܫ‬௃௜ ‫ ݁ כ‬ఋ಻೔ .                                    (1)

The non-pecuniary benefits of self-employment could, for example, reflect preferences to be

one’s “own boss,” as emphasized by Hurst and Pugsley (2011). Non-pecuniary benefits are

defined relative to salaried employment, so that ߜௌ௜ = 0. We first derive the model with risk
neutral individuals, as in Evans and Jovanovic (1979), henceforth EJ, and then extend the model

to allow for risk aversion.

       Individuals are endowed with human capital, consisting of (1) entrepreneurial ability (ߠ௜ )

and (2) other employment specific skills (ߝ௃௜ ) that are uncorrelated with entrepreneurial ability.
Without loss of generality, we assume that ߠ௜ > 0, ߝா௜ = 0, and ‫ܧ‬൫ߝ௃௜ ൯ > 0, for J=S or U.
       Human capital skills are not equally productive across employment types. Specifically,

the effective human capital of individual i in employment type J (‫ܪ‬௃௜ ) is
                                                     ఘ
                                           ‫ܪ‬௃௜ = ߠ௜ ಻ ‫ ݁ כ‬ఌ಻೔ ,                                   (2)

where the effective human capital of entrepreneurial ability in employment type J is represented

by ߩ௃ , so that it is natural to set ߩா = 1. While EJ assume that ߩௌ = 0, we relax this assumption
and allow abilities that are useful for entrepreneurship to also be productive in salaried

employment. Thus, we assume that 0 ൑ ߩ௎ < ߩௌ ൑ 1. That is, we assume that entrepreneurial
                                                                                                                15


ability is productive in entrepreneurship and potentially in salaried work, but is not as productive

in other self-employment. Without further loss of generality, we set ߩ௎ = 0. 4 For salaried work,

the effective human capital of individual i in salaried employment is increasing in (a) the

person’s job-specific skills in salaried work (ߝௌ௜ ), (b) the persons entrepreneurial ability (ߠ௜ ), and

(c) the degree to which entrepreneurial ability is productive in salaried employment (ߩௌ ).
        An individual choosing employment type U or S earns

                                               ‫ܫ‬௃௜ = ‫ܪ‬௃௜ ,                                                      (3)

which expressed as log earnings is

                                            ‫ܫ݊ܮ‬௃௜ = ߩ௃ ݈݊ߠ௜ + ߝ௃௜ .                                             (4)

        Individuals engaged in entrepreneurship combine entrepreneurial ability and physical
capital (K) to produce output (Y) using a similar production function as in EJ:

                                           ܻ௜ = ‫ܪ‬ா௜ ‫ܭ‬௜ఈ ߥ௜ = ߠ௜ ‫ܭ‬௜ఈ ߥ௜ ,                                        (5)

where 0 < ߙ < 1, and ߥ௜ is a lognormal disturbance that reflects an independent and identically
distributed productivity shock, where ‫ߥ[ܧ‬௜ ] = 1. As in Lucas (1978), Jovanovic (1982), EJ, and
many others, entrepreneurs with more entrepreneurial ability have, ceteris paribus, larger average

and marginal products of capital at each level of capital.

        Net returns from entrepreneurship, i.e., entrepreneurial earnings (‫ܫ‬ா௜ ), equal

                                           ‫ܫ‬ா௜ = ߠ௜ ‫ܭ‬௜ఈ ߥ௜ െ ‫ݎ‬௜ ‫ܭ‬௜ ,                                            (6)

where the price of output is one and the gross cost of capital (‫ݎ‬௜ )—one plus the interest rate—is

heterogeneous across individuals and greater than one. For now, we simply take ‫ݎ‬௜ as given.
Below, we assume individuals are endowed with exogenously given assets and when these assets

are used as collateral to finance K, they reduce the cost of capital. This is a bit different from EJ,


4
  The assumption that ߩ௎ < ߩௌ ൑ ߩா is consistent with the findings in Levine and Rubinstein (2017) and those
reported below. Given this assumption, setting ߩ௎ = 0 is a simplifying normalization that does not affect the
analyses. If ߩௌ = 0, there is no unique ߠ௜ at which individuals are indifferent between U and S.
                                                                                                                     16


who assume that exogenously given collateral determines how much an individual can borrow.

In our model, collateral influences the cost of capital and endogenously influences the optimal

capital stock and hence borrowing. 5

           The ‫ܭ‬௜ that maximizes expected entrepreneurial earnings (‫ܭ‬௜‫) כ‬, given ߠ௜ and ‫ݎ‬௜ , is

                                                  ‫ܭ‬௜‫ߠ( = כ‬௜ ߙ/‫ݎ‬௜ )ଵ/(ଵିఈ) ,                                          (7)

and the log of expected entrepreneurial earnings at this maximum is therefore:

                                                   ‫כ‬                              ఈ
                                                ݈݊‫ܫ‬ா௜ = ߩாᇱ ݈݊ߠ௜ + ߙߩாᇱ ln ቀ௥ ቁ + ln(1 െ ߙ),                         (8)
                                                                                  ೔


                                                                  ଵ
                                                where ߩாᇱ = ቀଵିఈቁ.                                                   (9)


           Notice three features about entrepreneurial earnings. First, entrepreneurial earnings (and

the optimal capital stock) are increasing in entrepreneurial ability (ߠ௜ ) and decreasing in the cost

of capital (‫ݎ‬௜ ). Second, the elasticity of entrepreneurial earnings with respect to entrepreneurial
ability is greater than one, i.e., ߩாᇱ > 1. This reflects the endogeneity of capital to entrepreneurial

ability: Higher ߠ௜ not only increases the returns to entrepreneurship at each level of capital, it
increases the returns to increasing the capital stock. Third, by comparing equations (4) and (8),

note that the returns to entrepreneurial ability in entrepreneurship are larger than the returns to

entrepreneurial ability in salaried employment even when ߩௌ = 1. This arises because of the
complementarity between entrepreneurial ability and physical capital.



III.B. Selection into employment types

           Individuals select into employment types U, S, or E by comparing expected utility levels:

                                            ݈ܸ݊௎௜ = ߝ௎௜ + ߜ௎௜ ,                                                   (10.1)

                                           ݈ܸ݊ௌ௜ = ߩௌ ݈݊ߠ௜ + ߝௌ௜ ,                                                (10.2)
                                                                            ఈ
                                            ݈ܸ݊ா௜ = ߩாᇱ ݈݊ߠ௜ + ߙߩாᇱ ln ቀ௥ ቁ + ln(1 െ ߙ) + ߜா௜ .                   (10.3)
                                                                              ೔

5
    Under the same assumptions, all of the results hold when using the EJ formulation of liquidity constraints.
                                                                                                        17


        In comparing the logs of expected utilities across employment types, note the following

results on human capital. First, utility in entrepreneurship rises faster in ߠ௜ than utility rises in

either salaried work or other self-employment. This holds even when entrepreneurial abilities are

equally productive in salaried work—that is, when ߩௌ = 1—because of the complementarity
between entrepreneurial ability and physical capital within entrepreneurial endeavors. Second,

the log of utility in salaried employment (݈ܸ݊ௌ௜ ) reflects both human capital that is specific to

salaried employment (ߝௌ௜ ) and entrepreneurial human capital that is valuable in salaried work
(ߩௌ ݈݊ߠ௜ ). One implication of these first two results is that, ceteris paribus, increases in ߝௌ௜ boost
the relative utility of salaried employment, but increases in ݈݊ߠ௜ boost the relative utility of

entrepreneurship because ߩாᇱ > 1 ൒ ߩௌ . Third, liquidity constraints, in the form of higher capital
costs (‫ݎ‬௜ ), reduce the utility from entrepreneurship, and therefore have larger adverse effects on
able entrepreneurs. The overall effect of liquidity constraints on the log of expected utility in

entrepreneurship reflects the direct cost of capital and its indirect effect on the optimal level of

capital and hence gross earnings. Fourth, other human capital endowments (ߝ௃௜ ) and preferences

(ߜ௃௜ ) directly shape the relative utility of different employment types.

        We now derive the cutoff levels of entrepreneurial ability that lead individuals to select
into self-employment, salaried employment, or entrepreneurship. We derive these cutoff levels of

݈݊ߠ௜ as functions of the cost of capital (‫ݎ‬௜ ), non-entrepreneurial human capital skills (ߝ௎௜ and ߝௌ௜ ),

preferences (ߜ௃௜ ), and the degree to which entrepreneurial ability is remunerated in salaried
employment (ߩௌ ) and entrepreneurship (ߩாᇱ ).
        First, define ݈݊ߠௌ௜ as the level of entrepreneurial ability (݈݊ߠ௜ ), such that the individual is

indifferent between other self-employment and salaried work. Below ݈݊ߠௌ௜ , the individual prefers
other self-employment to salaried work; and above ݈݊ߠௌ௜ , the individual prefers salaried work to

other self-employment. Setting ݈ܸ݊௎௜ = ݈ܸ݊ௌ௜ , and solving for ݈݊ߠௌ௜ yields:
                                                ఋೆ೔ ା(ఌೆ೔ ିఌೄ೔ )
                                      ݈݊ߠௌ௜ =         ఘೄ
                                                               .                                   (11.1)
                                                                                                    18


Individuals with stronger preferences for other self-employment, ߜ௎௜ , (e.g., people who like

being their own bosses) will have higher ݈݊ߠௌ௜ cutoff values than otherwise similar individuals.

Furthermore, in economies where entrepreneurial ability is more highly remunerated in salaried

employment (higher ߩௌ ), ݈݊ߠௌ௜ will be correspondingly lower, because it takes less
entrepreneurial ability to generate the earnings level in salaried employment that makes the

individual indifferent between salaried work and other self-employment. Finally, note that if

there are insufficient pecuniary (ߝ௎௜ ) and nonpecuniary (ߜ௎௜ ) returns to other self-employment

(U) (or skills as a salaried worker are sufficiently high (ߝௌ௜ )), then ݈݊ߠௌ௜ ൑ 0 and individuals will
not sort into U.

       Next, define ݈݊ߠா௜ as the level of entrepreneurial ability (݈݊ߠ௜ ), such that the individual is
indifferent between salaried work and entrepreneurship. If ݈݊ߠ௜ < ݈݊ߠா௜ , the individual prefers
salaried work to entrepreneurship; and when ݈݊ߠ௜ > ݈݊ߠா௜ , the individual prefers

entrepreneurship to salaried work. Setting ݈ܸ݊ா௜ = ݈ܸ݊ௌ௜ , and solving for ݈݊ߠா௜ yields:

                                                 ᇲ
                                               ఈఘಶ ୪୬(ఈΤ௥೔ )ା୪୬(ଵିఈ)ା(ఋಶ೔ ିఌೄ೔ )
                                   ݈݊ߠா௜ = െ                 ᇲ ିఘ
                                                            ఘಶ
                                                                                   .             (11.2)
                                                                 ೄ



Equation (11.2) indicates that individuals facing a higher cost of capital are less likely to become
entrepreneurs, implying that individuals with higher ‫ݎ‬௜ require more entrepreneurial ability to

enter entrepreneurship than similar individuals with lower capital costs. Equation (11.2) also
indicates that individuals with greater salaried-specific human capital (larger ߝௌ௜ ) or those

receiving less utility from entrepreneurship (smaller ߜா௜ ) will require greater entrepreneurial
skills to prefer entrepreneurship over salaried employment.

       There are two scenarios. The first is when ݈݊ߠா௜ > ݈݊ߠௌ௜ . This is the benchmark case,
where all employment types are relevant, meaning there are levels of entrepreneurial ability such

that each employment type is optimal. The second scenario is when ݈݊ߠா௜ < ݈݊ߠௌ௜ . In this non-

benchmark case, some employment types are never optimal regardless of entrepreneurial ability.
                                                                                                     19


       Consider the benchmark case where the cost of capital (‫ݎ‬௜ ), non-entrepreneurial human

capital skills (ߝ௃௜ ), preferences (ߜ௃௜ ), and the production function parameter (ߙ) are such that

individuals might select into each of the three employment types—self-employment, salaried

work, and entrepreneurship—for different values of entrepreneurial ability ݈݊ߠா௜ . That is, the

benchmark involves values of ‫ݎ‬௜ , ߝ௃௜ , ߜ௃௜ , and ߙ, such that ݈݊ߠா௜ > ݈݊ߠௌ௜ , as discussed above.
       For the benchmark case, Figure I illustrates the relationship between the log of the

expected utility in each employment type and ݈݊ߠ. The horizontal line represents the log of

expected utility of other self-employment (݈ܸ݊௎௜ ) and equals ߝ௎௜ + ߜ௎௜ . The upward sloping line
with squares is the log of expected utility of salaried employment (݈ܸ݊ௌ௜ ), where the slope is ߩௌ .
݈ܸ݊ௌ௜ intersects ݈ܸ݊௎௜ at the first cutoff level of entrepreneurial ability: ݈݊ߠௌ௜ . The upward

sloping line with circles is the log of the expected utility of entrepreneurship (݈ܸ݊ா௜ ), where the

slope is ߩாᇱ , and where ݈ܸ݊ா௜ intersects ݈ܸ݊ௌ௜ at the second cutoff level: ݈݊ߠா௜ . Except where
explicitly noted, we focus on this benchmark case.

       Figures I and II illustrate key features of the model under these benchmark conditions.

Figure I shows how human capital shapes selection into different employment types. On human

capital, entrepreneurs are positively selected on entrepreneurial ability, but the other self-

employed are negatively selected on ݈݊ߠ௜ . On liquidity constraints, Figure II indicates that ‫ݎ‬௜

shapes entry into entrepreneurship, but not into self-employment. In particular, increases in ‫ݎ‬௜
shift downward the intercept of the line for the log utility of entrepreneurship, constraining entry
into entrepreneurship. Changes in ‫ݎ‬௜ , however, do not alter the intercepts or slopes of the other

lines and therefore liquidity constraints do not affect entry into other self-employment.

       Figure I shows that entrepreneurs expect to earn more than salaried workers when the

non-pecuniary benefits from entrepreneurship are low (for example ߜ௎௜ ൑ 0), but this is not the
case for the other self-employed, especially given the non-pecuniary benefits from self-

employment documented by Hurst and Pugsley (2011). Finally, note that the model illustrates

the problems with aggregating the entrepreneurs (E) and the other self-employed (U). The typical

self-employed individual in this aggregate group is not selected on entrepreneurial traits; does
                                                                                                      20


not earn more than the typical salaried worker; and does not face binding liquidity constraints,

since entrepreneurs are a small proportion the aggregate group of self-employed individuals.



III.C. Testable implications and discussion

        The model yields testable implications with respect to the impact of human capital,

liquidity, and the business cycle on entrepreneurship and other self-employment. In this

subsection, we highlight three testable implications for the benchmark case, i.e., for the non-

degenerative cases, in which individuals can feasibly sort into each of the three employment

types depending on their entrepreneurial ability.

        The first two novel testable implications relate to selection on entrepreneurial ability and

salaried wages. First, there is negative selection on entrepreneurial ability into other self-
employment; but positive selection into entrepreneurship. Second, there is negative selection on

salaried wages into other self-employment; yet, there is potentially positive selection on salaried

wages into entrepreneurship when entrepreneurial ability is highly productive in salaried work

(e.g., if ߩௌ = 1).
        Figure I illustrates both of these implications. Individuals with entrepreneurial abilities

above ݈݊ߠா௜ have better salaried job opportunities and even better entrepreneurial opportunities
than otherwise similar people with lower entrepreneurial abilities. The opposite is true of people
who sort into other self-employment, i.e., the U-employment type. Ceteris paribus, it is people

with lower entrepreneurial abilities and hence people with comparatively low-paying salaried

options, who choose other self-employment. As for selection into entrepreneurship on salaried

wages, this depends on the importance of entrepreneurial abilities in paid-employment. For

example, in an economy where only one skill determines people’s productivity in both salaried

employment and entrepreneurship, people with the best salaried job opportunities become

entrepreneurs. As illustrated in Figure II, for ߩௌ = 1 and ߝ௦ = 0, all other things equal, the most
productive salaried workers become entrepreneurs. The positive selection into entrepreneurship
                                                                                                      21


reflects the complementarity between ability and capital in entrepreneurship and the lack of

perfect adjustment of capital to human-capital in paid employment.

        Yet, when entrepreneurial abilities are not very useful in paid-employment (low ߩௌ ), then

there can be negative selection on salaried wages. For example, when ߩௌ = 0 and wage
differences reflect only ߝ௦ , as in the EJ model, then there is negative selection on wages into

entrepreneurship. Thus, our model allows for positive and negative selection into
entrepreneurship on salaried wages depending on the sources of variation in salaried earnings.

        The third testable implication is that entrepreneurs are negatively selected on the cost of
capital, but the other self-employed are not. As illustrated in Figure II, an increase in the cost of

capital implies a parallel drop in the line representing the log utility of entrepreneurship (݈ܸ݊ா௜ ).

This implies a higher entrepreneurial ability threshold with respect to selection into
entrepreneurship but has no effect on selection into other forms of self-employment.

        A fourth testable implication involves the cyclicality of entrepreneurship and other self-

employment. In the context of our model, we characterize the manifestation of aggregate

fluctuations as changes in both the demand for salaried employees and the severity of liquidity

constraints. For example, we characterize recessions as a simultaneous reduction in labor

demand and a tightening of credit constraints. This is illustrated in Figure III. The tightening of

liquidity constraints involves a parallel fall in the log utility of entrepreneurship line (݈ܸ݊ா௜ ). As

shown, this tightening reduces selection into entrepreneurship but has no effect on entry into
other self-employment, i.e., the liquidity effect exerts a procyclical influence on entrepreneurship,

but not on other self-employment. With respect to labor demand, a reduction in the demand for

salaried employees implies a parallel drop in the line depicting the log utility of salaried

employment (݈ܸ݊ௌ௜ ). The labor demand effect is countercyclical for both types of self-
employment. Thus, the model yields (a) an ambiguous prediction about the cyclicality of

entrepreneurship but (b) an unambiguous prediction that other self-employment is

countercyclical. It is worth noticing that aggregate self-employment might be countercyclical

even if entrepreneurship is procyclical.
                                                                                                       22


          These implications of the model are unique. Other models of entrepreneurship do not

distinguish between entrepreneurs and other self-employed individuals. Therefore, they do not

derive predictions regarding the contrasting selection of individuals into entrepreneurship and

other self-employment. Our model explains why aggregating these two groups and calling the

combined group “entrepreneurs” can lead to mis-leading perspectives on entrepreneurship. In

addition, our model’s prediction that entrepreneurs might be positively selected on salaried

wages is very different from EJ, where the less able salaried workers select into entrepreneurship.



III. D. Extension: Risk aversion

We now generalize the utility function to allow for risk-averse individuals. In particular, consider

the constant absolute risk aversion utility (CARA) function as in Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987,
1994):

                                                 ܸ௃௜ = െ exp൛െ߬௜ ‫ܫ‬௃௜ ‫ ݁ כ‬ఋ಻೔ ൟ,                      (1’)

where ߬௜ is the Arrow-Pratt index of absolute risk aversion that represents the degree of

individual i’s risk aversion, as defined by െܸ௜ᇱᇱ Τܸ௜ᇱ . Equation (1’) converges to the risk neutral
utility function defined by equation (1) as ߬௜ ՜ 0. Furthermore, we slightly modify the

specification of the shock to productivity, so that

                                                 ܻ௜ = ߠ௜ ‫ܭ‬௜ఈ (1 + ߥ௜ᇱ ),                             (5’)

where ߥ௜ᇱ is a zero mean, normally distributed shock to productivity. Assuming that the variance-
to-mean ratio of output equals ߪ ଶ , so that the variance of aggregate output does not change if a

firm is split into two or more firms, the expected utility in entrepreneurship is then given by 6:

                         ‫ܸ{ܧ‬ா௜ } = െexp{െ߬௜ [ߠ௜ ‫ܭ‬௜ఈ െ ‫ݎ‬௜ ‫ܭ‬௜ െ ߬௜ ߠ௜ ‫ܭ‬௜ఈ (ߪ ଶ Τ2)]},




6
    The variance of output is ߪ௒ଶ = ߪ ଶ ߠ‫ ܭ‬ఈ .
                                                                                                     23


where, for simplicity, we have set ߜா௜ = 0 (rather than ߜௌ௜ = 0). Exploiting the observation that
                                                            ᇱ
the certainty equivalent earnings from entrepreneurship is ‫ܫ‬ா௜ = ߠ௜ ‫ܭ‬௜ఈ (1 െ ߬௜ (ߪ ଶ Τ2)) െ ‫ݎ‬௜ ‫ܭ‬௜ , the

optimal capital stock for entrepreneur i is:

                                       ‫ܭ‬௜‫ߠ( = כ‬௜ ߛ௜ ߙ/‫ݎ‬௜ )ଵ/(ଵିఈ) ,                                (7’)

where ߛ௜ = (1 െ ߬௜ (ߪ ଶ Τ2)), so that ߛ௜ is increasing in risk tolerance and decreasing with risk.
                                                                               ᇱ
       The log of the certainty equivalent earnings from entrepreneurship, ݈݊{‫ܫ‬ா௜ }, evaluated at

the optimal capital stock is then given by:

                                          ᇱ                              ఈ
                                      ݈݊{‫ܫ‬ா௜ } = ߩாᇱ ln[ߠ௜ ߛ௜ ] + ߙߩாᇱ ‫ ݊ܮ‬ቀ ቁ + ‫(݊ܮ‬1 െ ߙ).         (8’)
                                                                          ೔௥

Furthermore, since there is no income uncertainty associated with salaried employment or other

self-employment, risk aversion does not alter the expected utilities from these employment types.

       Allowing for risk aversion, therefore, yields the following insights. First, the core

predictions from the benchmark, risk-neutral specification hold: (1) entrepreneurs are positively

selected on entrepreneurial ability (݈݊ߠ௜ ), but other self-employed are negatively selected on

entrepreneurial ability, (2) entrepreneurs are positively selected on salaried wages when
productivity in salaried employment is highly correlated with entrepreneurial abilities (i.e., when
ߩௌ is sufficiently large), but other self-employed are negatively selected on salaried wages, and
(3) entrepreneurs are negatively selected on the cost of capital but other self-employed are not.
       Second, risk aversion reduces the optimal capital stock—and hence the efficiency of

entrepreneurial activity. In particular, the optimal capital stock reflects the interaction between

ability (ߠ௜ ), and attitudes toward risk (߬௜ ), weighted by risk (ߪ ଶ ). This interaction suggests that

“effective” entrepreneurial human capital is a mixture of narrowly defined entrepreneurial ability
and personality traits that allow individuals to effectuate those skills. Self-selection into

entrepreneurship depends on the joint distribution of entrepreneurial abilities (T) and attitudes

toward risk (W). Thus, the most successful entrepreneurs might not be those with the most

entrepreneurial ability, e.g., if risk tolerance (W) and entrepreneurial ability (T) are negatively
                                                                                                                   24


correlated. 7 This is akin to the combination of “smart and illicit” traits emphasized by Levine and

Rubinstein (2017), where illicit captures attitudes toward breaking from the norm, undertaking

novel endeavors, and investing in risky ventures. 8



                                         IV. STATISTICAL MODEL

         As discussed above, it is puzzling that existing theoretical models emphasize the crucial

roles of both human capital and liquidity constraints in shaping selection into entrepreneurship,

but existing empirical research finds that (1) the aggregate group of self-employed has very

similar human capital traits and earnings to their salaried counterparts and (2) it takes little

capital to start most U.S. businesses. Our model suggests that these findings might reflect the

aggregation of entrepreneurs and other self-employed into one category when selection into these
two employment types differs systematically on human capital traits, labor market skills, and

liquidity constraints.

         In this section, we take the theoretical model from section III and derive estimable

equations that will allow us to identify statistically and quantify empirically the roles of human

capital traits, salaried employment opportunities, and liquidity in shaping selection across

employment types and entry into entrepreneurship. In moving from the model toward an

estimable equation we need proxies for entrepreneurial traits, salaried employment opportunities,
and liquidity constraints. First, with respect to entrepreneurial traits, we follow Levine and

Rubinstein (2017) and use the interaction between cognitive and non-cognitive traits (“smart and

illicit”) measured early in life, which they show shape selection into entrepreneurship and

success as an entrepreneur. This is consistent with our risk-aversion model that highlights the

non-separability of entrepreneurial abilities and non-cognitive skills in shaping selection into

7
 Therefore, selection on entrepreneurial ability might vary across industries if ߪ ଶ differs across industries.
8
 This view of effective entrepreneurial ability motivates additional research. For example, it might help explain the
gender gap in entrepreneurship if women tend to be more risk averse than men as some research documents (e.g.,
Halevy 2007 and Borghan et al. 2009). Also, the model suggests that with less risk, selection into entrepreneurship
will be determined more by pure entrepreneurial ability. This might explain cross industry (and cross country)
differences in the human-capital qualities of entrepreneurs and the performance of their businesses.
                                                                                                        25


entrepreneurship and performance as entrepreneurship conditional on selection into this

employment type. Second, we exploit the observation that almost all individuals work as paid-

employees before becoming business owners and use these early career wages to proxy for

salaried employment opportunities later in life. Third, on liquidity constraints, we note that home

equity is frequently used as collateral to obtain loans. Thus, we use home equity as a proxy for

collateral and hence the cost of capital facing an individual.

        Assuming that the cost of capital for individual i diminishes with the person’s collateral

(‫ܥ‬௜௧ ) in the following form ߙΤ‫ݎ‬௜௧ = exp(ߢ‫ܥ‬௜௧ ), where ߢ is a positive constant, and letting ܵ‫ܮܫ‬௜
represent the interaction between cognitive ability (“smart”) and non-cognitive attitudes
(“illicit”) of individual i, then the probability that individual i prefers entrepreneurship or other

self-employment to salaried work is:


         ܲ(ܸ௃௜௧ > ܸௌ௜௧ ) = ܲ(ߚ௃ௐ ܹ௜ + ߚ௃ௌூ௅ ܵ‫ܮܫ‬௜ + ߚ௃஼ ‫ܥ‬௜௧ + ߚ௃௑ ܺ௜௧ > ߟௌ௜௧ െ ߟ௃௜௧ ),              (12)


where ܹ௜ represents person i’s salaried employment opportunities. As discussed further below,
we proxy for ܹ௜ using person i’s early career wages, i.e., wages between the ages of 25 and 29.
‫ܥ‬௜௧ represents the collateral of person i at time t, which, as described below, which we proxy with

the equity value of the person’s home. ܺ௜௧ is a vector of observable characteristics, including

demographics, schooling and early measures of cognitive and non-cognitive traits that might
influence employment choices. The error term (ߟ௃௜௧ ) combines person-specific shocks to

productivity in employment type J in period t and taste, ߟ௃௜௧ = ߝ௃௜௧ + ߜ௃௜௧ . Assuming that the
error term follows an extreme value distribution, we can estimate the reduced form parameters in

(12) using the following multinomial logit regression:

                 ‫ܲ(݊ܮ‬௃௜௧ /ܲௌ௜௧ ) = ߚ௃ௐ ܹ௜ + ߚ௃ௌூ௅ ܵ‫ܮܫ‬௜ + ߚ௃஼ ‫ܥ‬௜௧ + ߚ௃௑ ܺ௜௧ ,                       (13)

where the link function, ‫ܲ(݊ܮ‬௃௜௧ /ܲௌ௜௧ ), is the log-odds ratio of the probability of person i being

an entrepreneur (J=E) or other self-employed (J=U), rather than a salaried worker (ܲௌ௜௧ ) at time t.
                                                                                                                    26


         There are three main reduced form parameters of interest: selection on (i) “smart and

illicit” (ߚ௃ௌூ௅ ), (ii) salaried wages (ߚ௃ௐ ) and (iii) collateral (ߚ௃஼ ). With respect to cognitive and

non-cognitive traits, the model predicts that ߚ௎ௌூ௅ < 0 and ߚாௌூ௅ > 0. That is, the model predicts
that smart and illicit traits are negatively associated with entry into other self-employment (the

U-employment type) and positively associated with entry into entrepreneurship. With respect to

wages, the model predicts that ߚ௎ௐ < 0: increases in wages increase the utility of salaried
employment relative to other self-employment. The model, however, generates ambiguous

predictions with respect to ߚாௐ . To the extent that wages are higher because the individual has
higher salaried-specific skills, then ߚாௐ < 0: wages rise but entrepreneurial earnings do not.
However, when productivity as a salaried worker is sufficiently positively associated with

entrepreneurial ability (high ߩௌ ), then the model predicts positive selection into entrepreneurship

on wages (ߚாௐ > 0) (assuming that SILi is not a perfect measure of entrepreneurial ability).
Appendix Table II provides empirical evidence that productivity as a salaried worker and

entrepreneurial ability are highly correlated, suggesting that we should find positive selection on

wages into entrepreneurship. 9 With respect to collateral, the model predicts ߚ௎஼ = 0 and
ߚா஼ > 0. That is, collateral does not shape directly barriers to becoming a salaried worker or U-

self-employment type, but collateral lowers the costs of becoming an entrepreneur.




9
 Appendix Table II presents regressions of log hourly earnings of individual i in year t on the average log hourly
salaried wages of the individual between the ages of 25 and 29 (Wages (25-29)) while conditioning on Mincerian
characteristics, measures of cognitive and non-cognitive traits (AFQT, Rosenberg self-esteem, Rotter Locus of
Control), as well as race, gender, year, and state fixed effects. We run this regression by employment type in year t.
We find that early career salary wages are positively related to later entrepreneurial earnings and future salaried
earnings but not to earnings in unincorporated self-employment.
                                                                                                   27


     V. SELECTION INTO ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND OTHER SELF-EMPLOYENT

       In this section, we empirically evaluate the effects of human-traits, early career wages,

and collateral on selection into entrepreneurship, salaried employment, and other self-

employment.

V.A. Section on wages and home wealth

       We begin by examining differential selection into incorporated self-employment
(entrepreneurship) and unincorporated self-employment (other self-employment) on cognitive

and non-cognitive skills, early careers wages, and collateral. Based on equation (13), we estimate
the multinomial logit regression:

                ‫ܲ(݊ܮ‬௃௜௧ /ܲௌ௜௧ ) = ߚ௃ௐ ܹ௜ + ߚ௃ௌூ ܵ‫ܮܫ‬௜ + ߚ௃஼ ‫ܥ‬௜௧ + ߚ௃௑ ࢄ௜௧ ,                      (13’)

where the link function is the log-odds ratio of being incorporated (J=E) or unincorporated
(J=U) rather than a salaried worker and the other terms are defined above. In Table II, we

provide the multinomial logit results on unincorporated and incorporated self-employment

(columns 2-3), where we do not report results on other employment categories such as unpaid

family and nonprofit businesses. In column 1, we provide the results from a logit regression in

which the dependent variable is a binary indicator that equals one if the individual is self-

employed (either incorporated or unincorporated) in year t and zero otherwise.

       The key explanatory variables are as follows. For potential salaried wages (ܹ௜ ), we use
Wages (25-29), which equals log hourly salaried earnings when the individual was 25-29 years.
For ܵ‫ܮܫ‬௜ , we use Smart & Illicit, which equals one if an individual has both above the NLSY79

sample median of AFQT and Illicit and zero otherwise. For ‫ܥ‬௜௧ , we use Home Wealth(t-2), which
equals the market value of the individual’s home (if any) minus mortgages on the house divided

by $100,000 two year before period t. For X, we use the following controls that are not reported

in the tables: Mincerian characteristics (a quartic expression for potential work experience and
                                                                                                                  28


dummy variables for six education categories), 10 measures of cognitive and non-cognitive traits

(AFQT, Self-esteem, Locus of Control), as well as gender-year, race-year, and state fixed effects.

Since the data on home wealth begins in sample year 1985 and we restrict the sample to

individuals with data on home wealth in t-4, the sample starts in 1989. The sample also excludes

individuals who were self-employed in either t-2 or t-4. The table provides heteroskedasticity

robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.

         As shown in column (1) of Table II for the aggregate group of self-employed, we find

(1) a mild, yet statistically significant association between wealth and entry into self-employment,

(2) negative selection on salaried wages into self-employment, and (3) no association between

cognitive and non-cognitive traits and entry into self-employment. These findings are consistent

with previous research, e.g., Evans and Jovanovic (1979) that examines aggregate self-
employment. In contrast to previous studies, however, we find that that these patterns reflect

differential selection into entrepreneurship (incorporated) and other self-employment

(unincorporated) on wealth, salaried wages, and entrepreneurial traits. In particular, and as we

will now describe in greater detail, Table II shows that there is positive selection into

entrepreneurship on wealth, salaried wages, and entrepreneurial traits but negative selection into

other self-employment on salaried wages and entrepreneurial traits and no relationship between

other self-employment and wealth.
         More specifically, and consistent with the model’s predictions, the results reported in

Table II indicate positive selection into incorporated self-employment on early career wages and

negative selection into unincorporated self-employment on those wages. Wages (25-29) enters

positively and significantly when examining selection into incorporated self-employment but

negatively and significantly when assessing entry into unincorporated self-employment. The

economic magnitudes are substantial. Using the estimates from the multinomial logit regressions,
10
   The six educational attainment categories are: (i) high school dropouts: less than 12 years of schooling (ii) GED
degree (iii) high school graduates: 12 years of schooling (iv) had some college education: 13-15 years of schooling
(i) college education: 16 years of schooling (vi) advanced studies: 17+ years of schooling. Potential work experience
(pwe) equals age minus years of schooling minus six (or zero if this computation is negative). The quartic includes
pwe, pwe2, pwe3, and pwe4.
                                                                                                    29


consider two people: a high early-career wage earner, where Wage (25-29) is 25% above the

sample median and a low early-career wage earner, where Wage (25-29) is 25% below the

sample median. The coefficient estimates suggest that the odds of the high early-career wage

earner switching from salaried work into incorporated business ownership next period are

approximately 17% greater than the low early-career wage worker (1.17=exp(0.5*0.3139)).

Similarly, the estimated coefficients indicate that the odds of the low early-career wage earner

switching from salaried work into unincorporated self-employment next period are 20% greater

than the high early-career wage worker (1.2=exp(0.5*0.3713)). Table II also highlights the

pitfalls of using the aggregate group of self-employed business owners. As shown in column (1),

there is negative selection into aggregate self-employment on early career wages, which masks

the differential selection into entrepreneurship and other self-employment.
       Also consistent with the model’s predictions, we find positive selection into incorporated

self-employment on collateral, but no link between collateral and entry into unincorporated self-

employment. That is, Home Wealth(t-2) enters positively, significantly, and with an

economically large coefficient when examining incorporated self-employment but enters with a

small, insignificant coefficient when examining unincorporated self-employment. With respect

to the economic size of the estimated coefficients, consider a high-collateral and low-collateral

person, where the high-collateral person has $50,000 of additional home wealth in year t-2 than
the low-collateral person. The coefficient estimates suggest that the odds of the high-collateral

person switching into incorporated business ownership next period from salaried employment

this period) are 6.5% greater than the low-collateral person (1.065=exp(0.5*(0.1607-0.0344).

       The findings on Smart & Illicit are also consistent with the model and the findings in

Levine and Rubinstein (2017). Like Wages (25-29), Smart & Illicit is positively associated with

entry into entrepreneurship but negatively associated with entry to unincorporated self-

employment. To the extent that Smart & Illicit is an additional proxy for effective

entrepreneurial abilities that is imperfectly correlated with Wages (25-29), these results are fully

in line with the model’s broad predictions. The combination of strong analytical skills and break-
                                                                                                     30


from-the-norm, risk-tolerant preferences is positively associated with expected success and

hence entry into entrepreneurship. However, these Smart & Illicit traits are not productive, and

might even be counterproductive, for undertaking the manual-skills-based self-employment

activities associated with unincorporated self-employment.



V.B. Section on wages and home wealth: Individual fixed effects and a falsification test

       We next address the concern that omitted time-invariant individual traits drive the results
on home wealth. For example, if individuals from rich families have characteristics that facilitate
both entry into entrepreneurship and larger home equity stakes, then the Table II results might

lead us to conclude inappropriately that collateral shapes entry into entrepreneurship when it is

the other characteristics that drive both (as argued by Hurst and Lusardi, 2004).

       To address this concern, we estimate linear probably models of entry into incorporated

and unincorporated self-employment while (a) controlling for an array of observable

characteristics and (b) conditioning on individual fixed effects. We report these results in Table

III. Of course, including individual fixed effects will essentially eliminate Wages (25-29), as it

varies little over time. As explained in Section II, there is slight time variation in Wages (25-29)

when individuals are between 27 and 30 years old. For comparison purposes, we present the key

earlier analyses from Table II using a linear probability model. Table III shows that some of the
association between wealth and entry into self-employment reflects person, rather than wealth,

effects (as suggested by Hurst and Lusardi, 2004). Yet, even after controlling for person fixed

effects, we continue to find positive selection into entrepreneurship on Home Wealth(t-2) but

little relation between selection into unincorporated self-employment and Home Wealth(t-2).

       We also provide a falsification test in Table III. Instead of examining selection into

employment types in period t on home wealth in period t-2, we examine selection into

employment types in period t on future home wealth in period t+2 (i.e., on Home Wealth(t+2)).

If Home Wealth(t-2) captures changes in wealth that can be used as collateral to finance entry
                                                                                                    31


into entrepreneurship in year t, then the model predicts that Home Wealth(t-2) will be positively

associated with entry into incorporated self-employment. We would not, however, expect that a

change in future household wealth would influence past entry into entrepreneurship unless Home

Wealth(t+2) is capturing something else about the evolving characteristics of the individual.

When controlling for individual effects, we find positive selection into entrepreneurship on

Home Wealth(t-2) but not on Home Wealth(t+2). The results from this falsification test are
consistent with the view that (a) home wealth is positively related to collateral and (b) collateral

is important for entering entrepreneurship.

V.C. The impact of home wealth on entry into self-employment
       Although the results reported in Tables II and III indicate positive selection into
entrepreneurship on wages, collateral, and entrepreneurial traits and strong negative selection
into unincorporated self-employment on wages and entrepreneurial traits, the empirical strategies
employed in Tables II and III do not identify an external source of variation in collateral. The
estimated impact of collateral on entry into entrepreneurship, therefore, might reflect factors
other than liquidity effects. In particular, lagged housing wealth, even when including individual
effects, might not represent an exogenous source of variation in collateral if other time-varying
factors shape both home wealth and entry into self-employment.
       In this section, we use a Bartik-type instrumental variable to evaluate the impact of
collateral on entry into incorporated and unincorporated self-employment. Building on the work
in Hurst and Lusardi (2004), Corradin and Popov (2015), and Schmalz, Sraer, and Thesmar
(2017), we use ‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ ‫(݃ כ‬௧ିସ,௧ିଵ) , which equals the net value of the home owned by
individual i in year t-4 (‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ ) times the growth rate of home prices in the state in
which the home is located from year t-4 to year t-1 (g (௧ିସ,௧ିଵ) ). If the individual does not own a
home in year t-4, ‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ equals zero. Our identifying assumption is that conditional
on the other regressors, the value of a person’s home in t-4 and the growth rate in state housing
prices between t-4 and t-1 is exogenous to the individual’s decision in year t about switching into
incorporated or unincorporated self-employment.
       We estimate the following multinomial logit model and report the results in Table IV:
                                                                                                    32


        ‫ܲ(݊ܮ‬௃௜௧ /ܲௌ௜௧ ) = ߚ௃ௐ ܹ௜ + ߚ௃ௌூ ܵ‫ܮܫ‬௜ + ߚ௃஼ ‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௦௧ିସ ‫(݃ כ‬௧ିସ,௧ିଵ) + ߚ௃௑ ࢄ௜௧ , (14)

where the link function is the log-odds ratio of entry into either incorporated or unincorporated
self-employment relative to not switching into self-employment. X includes the same controls
defined above. The sample includes individuals who were not self-employed in either t-2 or t-4.
       Before turning to the multinomial logit regressions, we assess—and validate—the “first-
stage.” That is, we evaluate whether ‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ ‫(݃ כ‬௧ିସ,௧ିଵ) predicts ‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧
after controlling for ‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ , g (௧ିସ,௧ିଵ) , as well as Wages(25-29) and X. We conduct
these analyses using OLS in columns (1) and (2) of Table IV, where the column (2) regression
includes individual fixed effects. As shown, ‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ ‫ כ‬g (௧ିସ,௧ିଵ) enters positively and
significantly at the one percent level, when controlling for lagged values of the individual’s
home wealth, the recent growth rate of home prices in the state, early career wages, and the array
of control variables and fixed effects listed above.

       We next examine entry into the aggregate group of self-employed. For these analyses, we

use a logit estimator since the dependent variable is a simple one-zero indicator variable. As
shown in column (3), ‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ ‫ כ‬g (௧ିସ,௧ିଵ) does not help account for entry into

aggregate self-employment. This is consistent with findings that, on average, liquidity constraints

do not account for entry into self-employment, as reported by Hurst and Lusardi (2004).

       When distinguishing between the incorporated and unincorporated, we discover that
collateral impacts entry into entrepreneurship but not into unincorporated self-employment. As
shown in columns (4) and (5), ‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ ‫ כ‬g (௧ିସ,௧ିଵ) enters positively and significantly
when examining entry into incorporated self-employment, but ‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ ‫ כ‬g (௧ିସ,௧ିଵ)

enters negatively and insignificantly when considering the odds of switching into unincorporated
self-employment. The economic magnitudes are material. For example, consider two similar

individuals, where each has $100,000 of home wealth in t-4. Let one live in a state where

housing prices rise by 25% from t-4 to t-1 while the other resides in a state where housing prices

stagnate. The coefficient estimates indicate that the odds that the individual receiving the positive

housing price shocks switches from salaried employment to incorporated self-employment in
                                                                                                     33


year t are 4% higher than the otherwise similar individual who did not receive this housing price

boost (1.04=exp(0.25*0.1566)).

       We were concerned that (a) state housing price growth might be correlated with changes

in the state’s overall economic conditions, (b) home wealth is correlated with other individual

traits that independently shape entry into entrepreneurship, and (c) these other individual traits

are sensitive to overall economic conditions. Under these conditions, ‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ ‫כ‬
g (௧ିସ,௧ିଵ) might proxy for the interactive impact of (non-home wealth) individual traits and

changes in overall economic conditions on entry into entrepreneurship, so that the results cannot

be interpreted as the impact of collateral on the odds of switching into entrepreneurship. To

address this concern, we controlled for shocks to overall economic conditions by including

changes in the state unemployment rate (individual i’s state) between t-1 and t (¨Unemployment),

and its interaction with housing wealth in period t-4 (‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ ¨8QHPSOR\PHQW. The
results reported in Table IV hold.
       We also conducted a falsification test, similar to the one presented in Table III, to address

the concern that Home Wealth(t-4)*g(t-4, t-1) is capturing something else about an individual

besides a shock to home wealth. If Home Wealth(t-4)*g(t-4, t-1) captures shocks to a person’s

collateral between year t-4 and t-1, then we expect that (a) Home Wealth(t-4)*g(t-4, t-1) will
positively influence selection into incorporated self-employment in year t and (b) Home
Wealth(t-4)*g(t+1, t+4) will not explain entry into entrepreneurship. That is, we would not

expect that a shock to future household wealth would influence entry into entrepreneurship
unless these future shocks are capturing something else about the evolving characteristics of the

individual. In Appendix Table III, we show that Home Wealth(t-4)*g(t+1, t+4) does not explain
entry into entrepreneurship in period t. While shocks to wealth before period t explain entry into

entrepreneurship, shocks to wealth after period t do not.
                                                                                                     34


V.D. Entry into entrepreneurship: Effective entrepreneurial human capital

       Although we have focused on how entrepreneurial ability shapes selection into different

employment types, we now expand the notion of entrepreneurial ability from one skill—

entrepreneurial ability—to include a second skill: the “capacity,” or willingness, to use

entrepreneurial skills to undertake entrepreneurial ventures. The theoretical model with risk

aversion developed in Section III.D motivates this examination. The model predicts positive

selection into entrepreneurship on the interaction between entrepreneurial ability (ߠ௜ ) and

noncognitive attitudes toward risk (ߛ௜ ), where these noncognitive attitudes shape the
capacity/willingness to use entrepreneurial abilities to start and run a business. This “smart and

illicit” interaction term represents effective entrepreneurial human capital as a mixture of

narrowly defined entrepreneurial ability and the noncognitive traits that give individuals the

capacity to exercise those skills.

       Our extended model with risk aversion highlights the conceptual and empirical
advantages of using a measure of effective entrepreneurial human capital. In a risk neutral

economy, the model suggests that if early career wages are a good proxy for people’s ability to

establish a risk-free business, we may find positive selection into entrepreneurship on wages:

The best-paid employees turn out to be the most successful business owners. Yet, when risk

matters, this prediction does not necessarily hold. Even when early career wages are a good

proxy for pure entrepreneurial ability, high wage employees will not necessarily make the most

successful business owners. Rather, the positive selection into entrepreneurship on wages should

hold only among people with the non-cognitive capacity to “deal with risk” and exercise their

entrepreneurial skills in entrepreneurial ventures.

       Our model, therefore, predicts that we should examine the interaction between Wages

(25-29) and Illicit and that it should be this interaction term—and not Wages (25-29) or Illicit
independently—that explains selection into entrepreneurship. The model also predicts that

Wages (25-29)*Illicit will not account for selection into other forms of self-employment. To
                                                                                                    35


evaluate these predictions, Table V presents the results from regressions that are similar to those

in Table IV except that Table V also includes the interaction term Wages (25-29)*Illicit.

       Two key findings emerge from the Table V regression results. First, we confirm the
results from Table IV: shocks to collateral (‫݄ݐ݈ܹܽ݁ ݁݉݋ܪ‬௜௧ିସ ‫ כ‬g (௧ିସ,௧ିଵ) ) are positively

associated with selection into incorporated self-employment but not into unincorporated self-

employment. Second, and consistent with the model, we find that Wages (25-29) is positively

associated with selection into incorporated self-employment only among individuals with above

the median Illicit scores. These findings suggest that entrepreneurial ability is most strongly
associated with selection into entrepreneurship among people with the noncognitive capacity to

use those skills in entrepreneurial ventures.

       These findings suggest that effective entrepreneurial human ability is a mixture of

cognitive skills that are also valuable in paid employment and non-cognitive traits that might be

a burden in paid-employment. A unique mixture of smart and illicit skills—cognition and
personality—provides the capacity for successful entrepreneurial ventures.


           VI. EMPIRICAL RESULTS: CYCLICALITY OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP

       The model yields distinct predictions about the cyclicality of entrepreneurship and other

self-employment. For example, consider a recession as involving (1) a drop in the demand for

salaried workers (labor demand effect) and (2) a tightening of credit conditions (liquidity

constraint effect). As discussed above, the model indicates that as labor market opportunities

worsen this will have a countercyclical effect on other self-employment and entrepreneurship: A

deterioration of labor market opportunities induces more people to sort into other self-

employment and entrepreneurship as some loss their salaried jobs or earn less in paid

employment; and a boom in labor market opportunities attracts people into salaried jobs on both

margins. The liquidity constraint effect is different. A tightening of liquidity constraints in a

recession discourages entry into entrepreneurship but has no effect on other self-employment that
                                                                                                                36


requires no capital. Thus, the model predicts (1) that other self-employment is countercyclical

and (2) entrepreneurship is procyclical when the liquidity constraint effect dominates the labor

demand market effect. Under this condition, aggregating entrepreneurs and other self-employed

individuals will hide the distinctive cyclical patterns of entrepreneurs.


VI.A. The cyclicality of entrepreneurship: Stocks
        To assess the cyclicality of entrepreneurship and evaluate whether self-employment

provides a misleading perspective on the creation and destruction of new businesses over the

business cycle, we document the basic cyclical patterns of salaried workers, the aggregate group

of self-employed, the incorporated self-employed, and the unincorporated self-employed. To

document these patterns, we use state unemployment rates to measure local economic conditions.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics produces data on state unemployment for each month. We

compute Unemployment as the average unemployment rate in an individual’s state over the

twelve months prior to the individual’s interview with the NLSY79.

        We estimate the following set of linear probability models:

                                 ‫ܧ‬௃௜௦௧ = ߚ௃ + ߚ௃௎ ܷ݊݁݉‫ݐ݊݁݉ݕ݋݈݌‬௦௧ + ߚ௃௑ ࢄ௜௧ + ߝ௃௜௦௧ .                          (15)

‫ܧ‬௃௜௦௧ is a binary indicator that equals one if person i from state s is observed in employment type
J in time t and zero otherwise. 11 ܷ݊݁݉‫ݐ݊݁݉ݕ݋݈݌‬௦௧ is the unemployment rate of state s in year t.
ࢄ௜௧ is the same set of controls discussed above. We provide the results without (Panel A) and
with (Panel B) individual fixed effects.

        Table VI reports the coefficient estimates on state unemployment and also gives the mean

of the dependent variables. As shown in the column reporting the means of the dependent

variables, the proportion of salaried workers, unincorporated self-employed, and incorporated

self-employed in our sample are 80.7%, 6.8% and 1.7% respectively.



11
  The results below hold when (1) using the Current Population Survey or (2) examining the extensive margin, i.e.,
using the number of hours that individuals work in each employment type J as the dependent variable.
                                                                                                                  37


         There are three key findings from Table VI: (1) entrepreneurship is procyclical, (2)

unincorporated self-employment is countercyclical, and (3) aggregate self-employment is

countercyclical when including individual fixed effects. As shown in Panel B, the state

unemployment rate enters negatively and significantly when the dependent variable is

incorporated self-employment, but enters positively and significantly when the dependent

variable is either unincorporated self-employment or the aggregate group of self-employed. Thus,

we both confirm the common finding that aggregate self-employment is countercyclical and

document that entrepreneurship is procyclical.
         The estimated magnitudes are economically large. Consider, the analyses controlling for
individual fixed effects. The coefficient estimates indicate that a one-percentage point increase in
the state unemployment rate (i.e., an increase of 0.01) is associated with a 1.10% drop in salaried
employment relative to the average number of salaried workers (1.10%=[100*0.01*0.89]/0.807).
The “elasticity” is much larger for incorporated and unincorporated self-employment. Relative to
the average number of incorporated and unincorporated self-employed respectively, a one-
percentage point increase in the state unemployment rate is associated with 4.16% increase in
unincorporated self-employed and a 5.35% decrease in incorporated self-employment. 12



VI.B. The cyclicality of entrepreneurship: First differences
         In this subsection, we further exploit the longitudinal nature of the NLSY79 to account
for omitted state-year factors and draw more confident inferences about the relationship between
business cycles and selection into entrepreneurship and other self-employment. Specifically, we
estimate the following net entry regressions and report the results in Table VII:

                     ο‫ܧ‬௃௜௦௧ = ߛ௃ + ߛ௃ο௎ οܷ݊݁݉‫ݐ݊݁݉ݕ݋݈݌‬௦௧ + ߛ௃௑ οࢄ௜௧ + ߭௃௜௦௧ ,                                    (16)

where ο‫ܧ‬௃௜௦௧ is the change into employment type J of individual i between periods t-2 and t, so
that ο‫ܧ‬௃௜௦௧ equals +1 if the individual moves into employment type J; -1 if the person leaves type

12
  For the unincorporated, there is an increase of 4.16= (100*0.01*0.283)/0.068; and for the incorporated, there is a
decrease of 5.35 = (100*0.01*0.091)/0.017.
                                                                                                     38


J; and 0 if the individual does not change designation with respect to employment type J.

οܷ݊݁݉‫ݐ݊݁݉ݕ݋݈݌‬௦௧ is the change in the state unemployment rate between year t and t-1. Thus,

ߛ௃ο௎ is the coefficient estimate on the relationship between a change in the state’s unemployment
rate and switches into and out of each employment type. As above, the regressions control for

schooling, potential work experience, gender-year, race-year, and state fixed effects. We use

lagged dependent variables to control for serial correlation. We also provide the results without

(Panel A) and with (Panel B) individual fixed effects. Including state and individual fixed effects

in these first differences regressions conditions out individual and state specific linear trends.
       As shown in Table VII, the results from the first differences indicate that (1) self-
employment is countercyclical, (2) entrepreneurship is procyclical, and (3) these patterns reflect
the net entry and exit into unincorporated and incorporated self-employment respectively. The
differential impact of the business cycle on incorporated and unincorporated self-employment is
consistent with our model that highlights the adverse effect of a tightening of liquidity
constraints on entrepreneurship in contrast to other self-employment, which demands little
starting capital and human-capital. In demonstrating that entrepreneurship is procyclical and
unincorporated self-employment is countercyclical, our findings highlight the importance of
distinguishing between entrepreneurs and other types of self-employed individuals. This finding
relates to research exploring the entry and exit of businesses and the resultant creation and
destruction of jobs, while differentiating among firms, e.g., Davis and Haltiwanger (1992, 1999).
We show analytically and empirically that it is crucial to distinguish between entrepreneurs and
other self-employed when examining business and employment dynamics in general and over the
business cycle.


                                       VII. CONCLUSIONS

       In this paper, we addressed several gaps that have emerged between theoretical and

empirical analyses of entrepreneurship. We begin by offering a new three-sector Roy model of

selection into entrepreneurship, other self-employment, and salaried work on human capital and

liquidity constraints. The model predicts that (1) entrepreneurs are positively selected on
                                                                                                   39


entrepreneurial talent, but the other self-employed are negatively selected on those same skills

and traits, (2) entrepreneurs are positively selected on salaried wages—when there is a

sufficiently strong connection between entrepreneurial ability and productivity as a salaried

worker, but the other self-employed are negatively selected on salaried wages, (3) entrepreneurs

are positively selected on collateral, but entry into other self-employment is unrelated to liquidity

constraints. Thus, the model suggests that existing puzzles and unresolved debates concerning

human capital, earnings, liquidity constraints, and the cyclicality of business starts might reflect

the failure to distinguish between entrepreneurs and the other self-employed.

       Consistent with the theoretical model, we discover that (1) the incorporated are positively

selected on proxies for entrepreneurial talent, but the unincorporated are negatively selected on

entrepreneurial talent, (2) the incorporated are positively selected on salaried wages, but the
unincorporated are negatively selected on wages, and (3) collateral exerts a large, positive impact

on entry into incorporated self-employment, but collateral does not influence entry into

unincorporated self-employment.

       Our analyses also indicate that the sharp differences between entrepreneurship and other

self-employment should be integrated into the study of business cycles. Our model suggests the

conditions under which aggregate self-employment is countercyclical while entrepreneurship is

procyclical. In our empirical analyses, we indeed discover that self-employment is
countercyclical and entrepreneurship is procyclical. The results highlight the conceptual and

empirical shortcoming of using the aggregate group of self-employed to assess selection into

entrepreneurship as human capital and liquidity constraints shape entry into entrepreneurship

very differently from entry into unincorporated self-employment.
                                                                                                40

                                         REFERENCES

Adelino, M., Schoar, A., and Severino, F., 2015. House prices, collateral, and self-employment.
       Journal of Financial Economic, 117(2), pp. 288-306.
Aghion, P., and Howitt, P., 1992. A model of growth through creative destruction. Econometrica.
      60(2), pp. 323-351.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Andrew F. Newman. 1993. Occupational choice and the process of
       development. Journal of Political Economy 101(2): 274-298.
Barlevy, Gadi. 2007. On the cyclicality of research and development. American Economic
       Review 97(4), pp. 1131-1164.
Baumol, William J. 1990. Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, and destructive. Journal
     of Political Economy 98(5), pp. 893-921.
Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler. 1989. Agency costs, net worth, and business
      fluctuations. American Economic Review 79(1), pp. 14-31.
Bernardo, A.E. and Welch, I., 2001. On the evolution of overconfidence and
       entrepreneurs. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 10(3), pp.301-330.
Black, J., De Meza, D. and Jeffreys, D., 1996. House prices, the supply of collateral and the
       enterprise economy. Economic Journal, 106(1), pp. 6-75.
Blanchflower, David G., and Andrew J. Oswald. 1998. What makes an entrepreneur? Journal of
       Labor Economics 16(1), pp. 26–60.
Benmelech, E., Garmaise, M.J. and Moskowitz, T.J., 2005. Do liquidation values affect financial
      contracts? Evidence from commercial loan contracts and zoning regulation. The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), pp.1121-1154.
Benmelech, E. and Bergman, N.K., 2008. Liquidation values and the credibility of financial
      contract renegotiation, pp. Evidence from US airlines. The Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 123(4), pp.1635-1677.
Borghans, L., Heckman, J.J., Golsteyn, B.H. and Meijers, H., 2009. Gender differences in risk
      aversion and ambiguity aversion. Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(2-3),
      pp.649-658.
Borjas, G.J. and Bronars, S.G., 1989. Consumer discrimination and self-employment. Journal of
        political economy 97(3), pp. 581-605.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Mohamad L. Hammour. 1994. The cleansing effect of recessions.
       American Economic Review 84(5), pp. 1350-68.
Cagetti, M., and De Nardi, M., 2006. Entrepreneurship, frictions, and wealth. Journal of Political
       Economy 114(5), pp. 835-870.
                                                                                              41

Chaney, T., Sraer, D. and Thesmar, D., 2012. The collateral channel: How real estate shocks
      affect corporate investment. American Economic Review, 102(6), pp.2381-2409.
Corradin, S., and Popov, A., 2015. House prices, home equity borrowing, and entrepreneurship.
       Review of Financial Studies, 28(8), pp. 2399-2428.
Davis, S.J. and Haltiwanger, J., 1992. Gross job creation, gross job destruction, and employment
       reallocation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), pp.819-863.
Davis, S.J. and Haltiwanger, J., 1999. Gross job flows. Handbook of labor economics, 3,
       pp.2711-2805.
Dawson, C., de Meza, D., Henley, A. and Arabsheibani, G.R., 2014. Entrepreneurship: cause and
     consequence of financial optimism. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 23(4),
     pp.717-742.
De Meza, D. and Southey, C., 1996. The borrower's curse: optimism, finance and
      entrepreneurship. The Economic Journal, pp.375-386.
Evans, David S., and Boyan Jovanovic. 1989. An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice
       under liquidity constraints. Journal of Political Economy 97(4), pp. 808-827.
Evans, David S., and Linda S. Leighton. 1989. Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship.
       American Economic Review 79(3), pp. 519-535.
Fairlie, R.W., 1999. The absence of the African-American owned business: An analysis of the
         dynamics of self-employment. Journal of Labor Economics, 17(1), pp.80-108.
Fairlie, R.W., 2002. Drug dealing and legitimate self-employment. Journal of Labor
         Economics, 20(3), pp.538-537.
Fairlie, Robert W. 2013. Entrepreneurship, economic conditions, and the great recession. Journal
         of Economics and Management Strategy 22(2), pp. 207-231.
Fairlie, Robert W., and Harry A. Krashinsky. 2012. Liquidity constraints, household wealth, and
         entrepreneurship revisited. Review of Income and Wealth 58(2), pp. 279–306.
Fairlie, R.W. and Robb, A., 2007a. Families, human capital, and small business: Evidence from
         the characteristics of business owners survey. ILR Review, 60(2), pp.225-245.
Fairlie, R.W. and Robb, A.M., 2007b Why are black-owned businesses less successful than
         white-owned businesses? The role of families, inheritances, and business human
         capital. Journal of Labor Economics, 25(2), pp.289-323.
Fairlie, R. and Woodruff, C.M., 2010. Mexican-American Entrepreneurship. The BE Journal of
         Economic Analysis & Policy, 10(1).
Farber, Henry S., 1999. Alternative and part-time employment arrangements as a response to job
        loss. Journal of Labor Economics 17(4), pp. S142-S169.
                                                                                                 42

Fazzari, S.M., Hubbard, R.G., Petersen, B.C., Blinder, A.S., and Poterba, J.M., 1988. Financing
       constraints and corporate investment. Brookings papers on economic activity, 1988(1),
       pp.141-206.
Fisher, Irving. 1933. The debt-deflation theory of great depressions. Econometrica 1(4), pp. 337-
        57.
Fort, T.C., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R.S. and Miranda, J., 2013. How firms respond to business
        cycles: The role of firm age and firm size. IMF Economic Review, 61(3), pp.520-559.
Francois, Patrick, and Huw Lloyd-Ellis. 2003. Animal spirits through creative destruction.
       American Economic Review 93(3), pp. 530-550.
Gan, Jie, 2007a. Collateral, debt capacity, and corporate investment. Journal of Financial
       Economics 85, pp. 709-734.
Gan, Jie, 2007b. The real effects of asset market bubbles: Loan-and-firm-level evidence of a
       lending channel. Review of Financial Studies 20, pp.1941-1973.
Gan, Jie, 2010. Housing wealth and consumption growth: Evidence from a large panel of
       households. Review of Financial Studies 23, pp. 2229-2267.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2013.
      Human capital and regional development. The Quarterly journal of economics, 128(1),
      pp. 105-164.
Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist, S. 1994. Monetary policy, business cycles, and the behavior
        of small manufacturing firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(2), pp. 309-40.
Hamilton, Burton H., 2000. Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns to
      self-employment. Journal of Political economy, 108(3), pp.604-631.
Halevy, Yoram. 2007. Ellsberg revisited: An experimental study. Econometrica, 75(2), pp. 503-
      536.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1987. Aggregation and linearity in the provision of
      intertemporal incentives. Econometrica, 55(2), pp. 303-28.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1994. The firm as an incentive system. The American
      Economic Review 84(4), pp. 972-91.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen. 1994a. Entrepreneurial decisions
       and liquidity constraints. RAND Journal of Economics 25(2), pp. 334-347.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen. 1994b. Sticking it out:
       Entrepreneurial survival and liquidity constraints. Journal of Political Economy 102(1),
       pp. 53-75.
Hoshi, Takeo, Kashyap, Anil K., and Scharfstein, David. 1991. Corporate structure, liquidity,
       and investment: Evidence from Japanese industrial groups. Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 106(1), pp. 33-60.
                                                                                                43

Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Anil K. Kashyap. 1992. Net worth and the investment process: An
      application to U.S. agriculture. Journal of Political Economy 100(3), pp. 506-34.
Hurst, E., Li, G. and Pugsley, B., 2014. Are household surveys like tax forms? Evidence from
       income underreporting of the self-employed. Review of economics and statistics, 96(1),
       pp.19-33.
Hurst, Erik, and Annamaria Lusardi. 2004. Liquidity constraints, household wealth, and
       entrepreneurship. Journal of Political Economy 112(2), pp. 319-347.
Hurst, Erik, and Benjamin W. Pugsley. 2011. What do small businesses do? Brookings Papers
       on Economic Activity (Fall 2011), pp. 73-118.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1982. Selection and the Evolution of Industry. Econometrica 50(3), pp. 649-
      670.
Kerr, S., Kerr, W.R. and Nanda, R., 2015. House money and entrepreneurship (No. w21458).
       National Bureau of Economic Research.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London:
      Macmillan.
Kihlstrom, Richard, and Jean-Jacques Laffont. 1979. A general equilibrium entrepreneurial
       theory of firm formation based on risk aversion. Journal of Political Economy 87(4), pp.
       719-748.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy 105(2),
       pp. 211-248.
Knight, Frank H. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. New York: Harper and Row.
Koellinger, Philipp D., and A. Roy Thurik. 2012. Entrepreneurship and the business cycle.
       Review of Economics and Statistics 94(4), pp. 1143-1156.
La Porta, Rafael, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. The unofficial economy and economic development.
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 47(1), pp. 275ᄙ352.
La Porta, Rafael, and Andrei Shleifer. 2014. Informality and development, Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 28(3), pp. 109ᄙ126.
Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein. 2017. Smart and illicit: who becomes an entrepreneur and
       do they earn more? Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(2), pp. 963-1018.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1978. On the size distribution of business firms. Rand Journal of
       Economics 9, pp. 508-23.
Manso, Gustavo, 2016. Experimentation and the Returns to Entrepreneurship. The Review of
      Financial Studies, 29(9), pp.2319-2340.
Mian, Atif R., Rao, Kamalesh, and Sufi, Amir. 2013. Household balance sheets, consumption,
       and the economic slump. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, pp. 1687-1726.
                                                                                               44

Moskowitz, T.J. and Vissing-Jørgensen, A., 2002. The returns to entrepreneurial investment: A
     private equity premium puzzle?. American Economic Review, 92(4), pp.745-778.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1991. The allocation of talent, pp.
      Implications for growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(2), pp. 503-530.
Nanda, R. and Sørensen, J.B., 2010. Workplace peers and entrepreneurship. Management
       Science, 56(7), pp.1116-1126.
Parker, Simon C. 2009. The Economics of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press.
Schmalz, M.C., Sraer, D.A., and Thesmar, D., 2017. Housing collateral and entrepreneurship.
      Journal of Finance, 72(1): 99-132.
Schoar, Antoinette. 2010. The divide between subsistence and transformational entrepreneurship.
       In: Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 10, Eds: Josh Lerner and Scott Stern.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 57-81.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. 2011. Theorie Der Wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung (Theory of Economic
     Development). Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
Shleifer, Andrei. 1986. Implementation cycles. Journal of Political Economy 94(6): 1163-1190.
Smith, Adam. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. London:
       Methuen, 1776).
Veblen, Thorstein. 1904. The Theory of Business Enterprise. New York: Scribner.
Yu, L., Orazem, P.F. and Jolaghionly, R.W., 2014. Entrepreneurship over the business cycle.
        Economics Letters 122: 105-110.
                                                                                                             45




                                            TABLE I
                                       SUMMARY STATISTICS

                                                                    Legal Form of Business
                                      Employed              Total      Unincorporated Incorporated
Human capital
      AFQT                               49.2               51.4             48.3              59.8
      Self-esteem                        0.05               0.09             -0.02             0.35
      Locus of control                   -0.05              -0.21            -0.13             -0.43
      Illicit                            -0.02              0.17             0.21              0.07
      Smart & Illicit                    0.18               0.20             0.16              0.28
      Years of schooling                 13.8               13.7             13.5              14.4
      College graduate                   29%                28%              24%               39%

Demographics
      Female                             49%                33%               37%              24%
      Black                              14%                11%               14%              5%
      Hispanic                           7%                 5%                6%               4%

Wages:
         Wages (25-29)                   2.35               2.39              2.32             2.57

Wealth
         Wealth                        $49,939            $94,018           $69,017          $159,763
         Home Wealth                   $13,722            $22,982           $19,537           $32,007

Starting Capital
        Starting Capital (Mean)                           $50,508           $35,715          $90,555
        Starting Capital (Median)                         $3,463            $2,033           $19,633
        None needed                                        17%               21%               5%

Employees
      Employees (Mean)                                       2.7              0.7               8.2
      Employees (Median)                                     0.0              0.0               2.0

Note: The table provides summary statistics on individuals and their businesses while differentiating by
whether the person is not a business owners (Employed), a business owners (Total), and if the person is a
business owners, the legal form of the business (Unincorporated or Incorporated). The data are from the
2010 and 2012 business ownership part of the NLSY79 survey. Individuals are classified as incorporated
or unincorporated only if the legal form of the business from the business ownership part of the NLSY79
survey is confirmed by the individual employment type part of the survey. For the Sources of starting
capital, the respondents indicate with each category was an actual component of the capital used to start
the business. We examine full-time, full-year individuals. Appendix Table 1 provides variable definitions.
                                                                                                                46




                                      TABLE II
               SELECTION ON WAGES AND HOME WEALTH: LOGIT AND M-LOGIT

                                       Logit                             Multinomial Logit
                                  Self Employed                 Unincorporated        Incorporated
                                        (1)                          (2)                   (3)
Wages (25-29)                       -0.1851***                    -0.3713***               0.3139**
                                     (0.0587)                       (0.0653)                (0.1491)
Smart & Illicit                        -0.0861                     -0.2683**                0.5198**
                                     (0.1198)                       (0.1324)                (0.2628)
Home Wealth (t-2 )                  0.0654***                        0.0344                0.1607***
                                      (0.0148)                      (0.0246)                (0.0213)
Observations                          93,755                         93,755                  93,755
R-Squared                             0.0258                         0.0912                  0.0912

Notes: This table reports logit (columns 1) and multinomial logit (columns 2-3) analyses of selection into
different employment types in year t on early career salaried wages (Wages (25-29)), Smart & Illicit
(which is a zero-one indicator that equals one if the individual had above the median values of AFQT
and Illicit in the initial years of the sample), and the net value of the individual's home in year t-2 (Home
Wealth (t-2 )). In columns (1), the dependent variable is an indicator variable of whether the individual is
self-employed (either unincorporated or incorporated) in year t . Columns (2-3) report the results of
multinomial logit regressions, where we do not report the results on unpaid family and other business
ownership categories. All regressions include Mincerian characteristics (a quartic expression for
potential work experience and dummy variables for six education categories), measures of cognitive and
non-cognitive traits (AFQT, Rosenberg self-esteem, Rotter Locus of Control), as well as gender-year,
race-year, and state fixed effects. Since the data on home wealth begins in sample year 1985 and we
restrict the sample to individuals with data on home wealth in t-4 , the sample starts in 1989. The sample
also excludes individuals who were self-employed in either t-2 or t-4 . Appendix Table 1 provides
variable definitions. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors, clustered at the individual level are in
parentheses, where *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively.
                                                                                                                                                         47




                                                               TABLE III
                                               SELECTION ON WAGES AND HOME WEALTH: OLS

                                    Self Employed                              Unincorporated                              Incorporated
                           (1)            (2)          (3)             (4)          (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)           (9)
Wages (25-29)          -0.0058***      -0.0036       -0.0039       -0.0074***      -0.0039       -0.0042       0.0015**       0.0003        0.0002
                         (0.0020)     (0.0037)      (0.0037)         (0.0018)     (0.0035)      (0.0035)       (0.0008)      (0.0018)      (0.0018)
Smart & Illicit           -0.0027                                   -0.0074**                                  0.0046**
                         (0.0039)                                    (0.0034)                                  (0.0019)
Home Wealth (t-2)      0.0025***      0.0018**                       0.0003        0.0004                     0.0022***      0.0013**
                        (0.0007)      (0.0008)                      (0.0005)      (0.0006)                     (0.0005)      (0.0005)
Home Wealth (t+2)                                    0.0005                                      0.0001                                     0.0004
                                                    (0.0008)                                    (0.0006)                                   (0.0005)
Individual FE              No            Yes          Yes              No           Yes           Yes             No            Yes          Yes
Observations             93755         93755         88448           93755         93755        88448           93755         93755         88448
R-square                 0.0074        0.2545        0.2672          0.0073        0.2498       0.2623          0.0158        0.2454        0.2573

Notes: This table reports OLS analyses of selection into different employment types in year t on early career salaried wages (Wages (25-29)),
Smart & Illicit (which is a zero-one indicator that equals one if the individual had above the median values of AFQT and Illicit in the initial years
of the sample), and the net value of the individual's home in year t-2 (Home Wealth (t-2 )). As a falsification test, columns 3, 6, and 9, examine the
net value of the individual's home in year t+2 (Home Wealth (t+2)). The dependent variable is a one-zero indicator variable of whether the
individual is self-employed (columns 1-3), unincorporated self-employed (columns 4-6), or incorporated self-employed (columns 7-9) in year t .
All regressions include Mincerian characteristics (a quartic expression for potential work experience and dummy variables for six education
categories), measures of cognitive and non-cognitive traits (AFQT, Rosenberg self-esteem, Rotter Locus of Control), as well as gender-year, race-
year, and state fixed effects. As indicated, all regressions, except those reported in columns 1, 4, and 7 include individual fixed effects. Since the
data on home wealth begins in sample year 1985 and we require values of home wealth in t-4, the sample starts in sample year 1989. The sample
also excludes individuals who were self-employed in either t-2 or t-4 . The sample if smaller in columns 3, 6, and 9 because the analyses require
nonmissing values on Home Wealth in t+2 . Appendix Table 1 provides variable definitions. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors, clustered at
the individual level are in parentheses, where *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively.
                                                                                                                 48




                                              TABLE IV
                           SELECTION ON WAGES AND SHOCKS TO HOME WEALTH

                                         Home Wealth                 Self-Employed      Unincorporated Incorporated
                                    (OLS)        (OLS-FE)                (Logit)             (Multinomial Logit)
                                     (1)             (2)                   (3)               (4)             (5)
Wages (25-29)                     0.1064***           0.0264           -0.1825***          -0.3637***        0.3143**
                                   (0.0138)          (0.0184)            (0.0585)            (0.0648)         (0.1496)
Smart & Illicit                     -0.0371                               -0.0853           -0.2718**         0.5244**
                                   (0.0310)                              (0.1197)            (0.1322)         (0.2629)
Home Wealth(t-4)*g(t-4, t-1)      0.6265***         0.4883***             -0.0001             -0.0711         0.1566**
                                   (0.0748)          (0.0735)            (0.0482)            (0.0790)         (0.0769)
g(t-4, t-1))                      0.3742***         0.3718***             0.2357             0.4295*          -0.8995*
                                   (0.0585)          (0.0595)            (0.2057)            (0.2231)         (0.5303)
Home Wealth (t-4)                 0.7575***         0.4993***          0.0650***              0.0177         0.1679***
                                   (0.0246)          (0.0322)            (0.0163)            (0.0280)         (0.0228)
Observations                        93755             93755              93755               93755             93755
R-Squared                           0.5444            0.6475             0.0229              0.0867            0.0867

This table reports analyses of selection into different employment types in year t on Wages (25-29)), Smart & Illicit, and
a Bartik instrument for changes in home wealth (Home Wealth(t-4)*g(t-4, t-1)), where Home Wealth(t-4) is the
individual's net home wealth in year t-4 , and g(t-4, t-1) is the growth rate in state housing prices between year t-4 and
year t-1 for the state in which the individual lives. Columns (1-2) report OLS regressions in which the dependent
variable is the individual’s net home wealth in year t , where column (2) includes individual fixed effects. In column (3),
the dependent variable is a one-zero indicator variable of whether the individual is self-employed in year t . In columns
(4-5), the dependent variable is a one-zero indicator of employment type, where the reported categories are
unincorporated and incorporated respectively, and the unreported categories are salaried, unpaid family, and other
business ownership. All regressions include Mincerian characteristics (a quartic expression for potential work
experience and dummy variables for six education categories), measures of cognitive and non-cognitive traits (AFQT,
Illicit, Rosenberg self-esteem, Rotter Locus of Control), as well as gender, race, year, and state fixed effects. Since the
data on home wealth begins in sample year 1985 and we require values of home wealth in t-4 , the sample starts in 1989.
We exclude individuals who were self-employed in either t-2 or t-4 . Appendix Table 1 provides variable definitions.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors, clustered at the individual level are in parentheses, where *, **, and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively.
                                                                                                            49




                               TABLE V
SELECTION ON WAGES AND SHOCKS TO HOME WEALTH: DIFFERENTIATING BY ILLICIT

                                Unincorporated Unincorporated            Incorporated    Incorporated
                                     (Multinomial Logit)                      (Multinomial Logit)
                                     (1)             (2)                      (3)             (4)
Wages (25-29)                     -0.3637***        -0.3653***             0.3143**           0.0703
                                    (0.0648)         (0.0869)              (0.1496)          (0.1779)
Smart & Illicit                    -0.2718**         -0.2729*              0.5244**           0.3998
                                    (0.1322)         (0.1393)              (0.2629)          (0.2739)
Home Wealth(t-4)*g(t-4, t-1)         -0.0711          -0.0711              0.1566**          0.1541**
                                    (0.0790)         (0.0790)              (0.0769)          (0.0781)
g(t-4, t-1))                        0.4295*           0.4297*              -0.8995*          -0.8992*
                                    (0.2231)         (0.2231)              (0.5303)          (0.5295)
Home Wealth (t-4)                    0.0177           0.0177              0.1679***         0.1684***
                                    (0.0280)         (0.0280)              (0.0228)          (0.0228)
Wages (25-29)*Illicit                                 0.0031                                 0.5479*
                                                     (0.1181)                                (0.2841)
Observations                         93755             93755                93755             93755
R-Squared                            0.0914            0.0915               0.0914            0.0915
This table reports analyses of selection into different employment types in year t on Wages (25-29)),
Smart & Illicit, the interaction between early career salaried waged and Illicit (Wages (25-29)*Illicit),
and a Bartik instrument for changes in home wealth (Home Wealth(t-4)*g(t-4, t-1)), where Home
Wealth(t-4) is the individual's net home wealth in year t-4 , and g(t-4, t-1) is the growth rate in state
housing prices between year t-4 and year t-1 for the state in which the individual lives. The dependent
variable is a one-zero indicator of employment type, where the reported categories are unincorporated
and incorporated respectively, and the unreported categories are salaried, unpaid family, and other
business ownership. All regressions include Mincerian characteristics (a quartic expression for
potential work experience and dummy variables for six education categories), measures of cognitive
and non-cognitive traits (AFQT, Illicit, Rosenberg self-esteem, Rotter Locus of Control), as well as
gender, race, year, and state fixed effects. Since the data on home wealth begins in sample year 1985
and we require values of home wealth in t-4 , the sample starts in 1989. We exclude individuals who
were self-employed in either t-2 or t-4 . Appendix Table 1 provides variable definitions.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors, clustered at the individual level are in parentheses, where *,
**, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively.
                                                                                                                                     50




                                          TABLE VI
                       EMPLOYMENT TYPES VS. STATE UNEMPLOYMENT: NLSY79
                                            Worker          Salaried      Self-employed Unincorporated Incorporated
                                  Panel A: Employment Type vs. State Unemployment
State Unemployment                        -0.782***        -0.962***            0.180             0.268***            -0.088*
                                            (0.137)          (0.167)           (0.110)             (0.100)            (0.052)
Mean                                         0.892            0.807            0.085                0.068              0.017
Observations                                161518           161518           161518               161518             161518
R-square                                     0.068            0.041            0.020                0.013              0.015

             Panel B: Employment Type vs. State Unemployment Including Individual Fixed Effects
State Unemployment                        -0.698***        -0.890***          0.193**             0.283***           -0.091**
                                            (0.087)          (0.109)          (0.077)              (0.070)            (0.039)
R-square                                     0.422            0.438             0.418               0.387              0.367
Observations                                161518           161518           161518               161518             161518
Notes: This table reports OLS regression results of employment types, Worker, Salaried, Self-employed, Unincorporated, and
Incorporated, on state unemployment. Panels A - B each reports the results of six OLS regressions, one for each employment type,
where the dependent variable equals 1 if the person has the designated employment type in period t and 0 otherwise. In Panel B,
the regressions control for individual fixed effects. Though not shown, all regressions control for schooling (measured in six
categories), potential work experience (quartic), gender, race, state, and year-gender fixed effects, and lagged values of the
dependent variable. The table also provides the means of the dependent variables. The sample includes who are least 25 years old.
Appendix Table 1 provides variable definitions. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the state-year level are in
parentheses, where *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively.
                                                                                                                                  51




                                   TABLE VII
           EMPLOYMENT TYPES AND STATE UNEMPLOYMENT: FIRST DIFFERENCES
                                           Worker        Salaried     Self-employed Unincorporated Incorporated
                              3DQHO$¨(PSOR\PHQW7\SHYV¨6WDWH8QHPSOR\PHQW
¨6WDWH8QHPSOR\PHQW                       -0.628*** -0.919***             0.291**             0.441***            -0.150**
                                            (0.154)   (0.193)             (0.143)              (0.132)             (0.068)
Observations                               160108         160108           160108              160108              160108
R-square                                    0.409          0.311            0.195               0.209               0.156

                  3DQHO%¨(PSOR\PHQW7\SHVYV¨6WDWH8QHPSOR\PHQW,QGLYLGXDO(IIHFWV
¨6WDWH8QHPSOR\PHQW                       -0.615*** -0.912***             0.297**             0.456***            -0.159**
                                            (0.146)   (0.180)             (0.132)              (0.122)             (0.065)
R-square                                    0.514          0.438            0.340               0.347               0.283
Notes: This table reports OLS regression results of the change in employment type (Worker, Salaried, Self-employed,
Unincorporated, and Incorporated) on the change in the state unemployment rate and a set of control variables. The dependent
variable equals +1 if the individual moves into the indicated employment type between t-2 and t ; -1 if the person leaves the
employment type; and 0 if the individual does not change designation with respect to the indicated employment type. Each
panel reports the results of six OLS regressions, one for each employment type. Though not shown, all regressions control for
schooling (measured in six categories), potential work experience (quartic), state, year-race, year-gender fixed effects, and
lagged values of the dependent variable. The regressions in Panel B also control for individual fixed effects. Appendix Table 1
provides variable definitions. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are in parentheses,
where *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively.
                                                                                                              52


                                       APPENDIX TABLE I:
                               VARIABLE DEFINITIONS AND SOURCES
          Variable                                                 Definition
1. Human capital
     AFQT                      Armed Forces Qualifications Test score measures the aptitude and trainability
                               of the respondent. Collected during the 1980 NLSY79 survey, the AFQT score
                               is based on arithmetic reasoning, world knowledge, paragraph comprehension,
                               and numerical operations. It is frequently employed as a general indicator of
                               cognitive skills. This AFQT score is measured as a percentile of the NLSY79
                               survey, with a median value of 50.
     Illicit                   Illicit measures the aggressive, risk-taking, disruptive, "break-the-rules,"
                               behavior of individuals based on the 1980 NLSY79 survey. Taken from Levine
                               and Rubinstein (2017), this index is based on 20 questions, where 17 concern
                               delinquency, e.g., damaging property, fighting at school, shoplifting, robbery,
                               using force to obtain things, assault, threatening to assault, drug use, dealing
                               drugs, gambling, and so forth, and three are about interactions with the police,
                               e.g., stopped by the policy, charged with an illegal activity, or convicted for
                               activities other than minor traffic violations. For each question, a value of one
                               is assigned if the person responds in 1980 that they engaged in that activity and
                               zero otherwise. The average of the answers is then computed for each
                               individual. Finally, we construct a standardized version by subtracting the
                               sample mean and dividing by the standard deviation to create a mean zero,
                               standard deviation of one indicator of illicit activity.
     Smart & Illicit           Smart & Illicit equals one if the individual's AFQT score is greater than or
                               equal to 50 and Illicit is greater than or equal to zero and Smart & Illicit equals
                               zero otherwise.
     Rosenberg self-esteem     Rosenberg Self-Esteem score is based on a ten-part questionnaire given to all
     (standardized)            NLSY79 participants in 1980. It measures the degree of approval or
                               disapproval of one’s self. The values range from six to 30, where higher values
                               signify greater self-approval. Rosenberg Self-Esteem (standardized)
                               standardizes the score, so that it has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of
                               one.
     Rotter locus of control   Rotter Locus of Control measures the degree to which respondents believe
     (standardized)            they have internal control of their lives through self-determination relative to
                               the degree that external factors, such as chance, fate, and luck, shape their
                               lives. It was collected as part of a psychometric test in the 1979 NLSY79
                               survey. The Rotter Locus of Control ranges from 4 to 16, where higher values
                               signify less internal control and more external control. This is standardized, so
                               that it has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.
     Years of schooling        The respondent’s maximum number of years of schooling, so it does not vary
                               over time for a respondent.
                                                                                                           53


     College graduate          Graduated from college or obtained an advanced degree.
     Educational               The six educational attainment categories: (i) high school dropouts: less than
     Attainment                12 years of schooling (ii) GED degree (iii) high school graduates: 12 years of
                               schooling (iv) had some college education: 13-15 years of schooling (i) college
                               education: 16 years of schooling (vi) advanced studies: 17+ years of schooling.
                               These are measured at the end of the respondent’s educational experience, so
                               that they do not vary over time for a respondent.
     Potential Experience      Age of the respondent minus the years of schooling minus six, or, if this
                               computation is less than zero, then potential experience set equal to zero.
     Female                    Equals one if the respondent reports being female and zero otherwise.
     Black                     Equals one if the respondent reports being Black and zero otherwise.
     Hispanic                  Equals one if the respondent reports being Hispanic and zero otherwise.

2. Collateral, Wealth, and Earnings
      Home Wealth               The market value of the respondent’s home net of any mortgages.
      Wealth                    Created by summing all asset values and subtracting all debts.
      Wages (25-29)             When the respondent if 31 or more years old, Wages (25-20) equals the
                                respondent's average log real wages (2010 prices) as a salaried employee when
                                the respondent is 25-29 years old. When the respondent is 27-30 years old,
                                Wages (25-29) equals the individual’s average log real hourly earnings as a
                                salaried employee at the age of t-2.
      Earnings                  Wages plus income from business. Deflated by the CPI corresponding to when
                                those earnings were realized. Earnings are in 2010 prices.

3. Employment Types
     Unincorporated         If a respondent is self-employed, the NLSY79 further asks whether the
                            business is incorporated or not. If the respondent is self-employed and the
                            business is unincorporated, then Unincorporated Self-employed equals one and
                            it is zero otherwise.
     Incorporated           If a respondent is self-employed, the NLSY79 further asks whether the
                            business is incorporated or not. If the respondent is self-employed and the
                            business is incorporated, then Incorporated Self-employed equals one and it is
                            zero otherwise. See Levine and Rubinstein (2017) for additional coding
     Self-employed          From the NLSY79’s unified class of worker (R24455.10), there are four
                            responses for working respondents: (1) Private company, including non-profit,
                            (2) government, (3) self-employed, and (4) those working without pay,
                            including in family businesses. We set Self-employed equal to one if the
                            respondent’s class of worker is “(3)” and zero otherwise.
     Salaried               From the NLSY79’s unified class of worker (R24455.10), there are four
                            responses for working respondents: (1) Private company, including non-profit,
                            (2) government, (3) self-employed, and (4) those working without pay,
                            including in family businesses. We set Salaried equal to one if the respondent’s
                            class of worker is either “(1)” or “(2)”and zero otherwise.
     Unpaid family business Equals one if the respondent indicates that they are unpaid and work in a
                            family business and zero otherwise.
                                                                                                                         54


4. Legal Form of Business
      Unincorporated (B)           Equals one if the respondent indicates that the legal form of the business is a
                                   sole proprietorship and zero otherwise. This information is obtained from the
                                   business ownership part of the NLSY79 that was given in survey years 2010
                                   and 2012.
      Incorporated (B)             Equals one if the respondent indicates that the legal form of the business is
                                   either (a) a partnership or limited liability partnership, (b) a limited liability
                                   corporation, (c) a sub-chapter S corporation, or (d) a general corporation and
                                   zero otherwise. This information is obtained from the business ownership part
                                   of the NLSY79 that was given in survey years 2010 and 2012.
      Other Business (B)           Equals one if the respondent indicates that the legal form of the business is
                                   either (a) a nonprofit organization or (b) other and zero otherwise. This
                                   information is obtained from the business ownership part of the NLSY79 that
                                   was given in survey years 2010 and 2012.

6. State-Year Characteristics
      g(x,y)                       The growth rate in state housing prices between years x and y. The Federal
                                   Housing Finance Agency provides house price indices by state and year.
      ¨8QHPSOR\PHQW                The change in the unemployment rate in the respondent's state over the
                                   preceding twelve months. In particular, the Bureau of Labor Statistics produces
                                   data on state unemployment for each month. The NLSY79 gives the date when
                                   each person was sampled. We compute change in the state's unemployment
                                   over the preceding twelve months from the date of the interview.


Notes:
(1) All data are from the NLSY79 unless otherwise indicated.
(2) The NLSY79 is a representative survey of 12,686 individuals who were 15-22 years old when they were first surveyed
(3) We use the sampling weights provided by the NLSY79.
(4) In Table 1, which covers the survey years 2010 and 2012, we classify an individual as incorporated if both Incorporated
and Incorporated (B) indicate that the individual is an incorporated business owner for the 2010 (2012) survey. We get
very similar results if we instead use only the business survey (Incorporated (B) to classify the legal form of the business.
The same holds for unincorporated business owners.
                                                                                                          55




                             APPENDIX TABLE II
           EARNINGS BY EMPLOYMENT TYPE AND EARLY SALARIED WAGES

                     Panel A: Earnings vs. early salary wages, standard controls
                                                      Log Hourly Earnings (31+)
                                       Salaried     Self-Employed Unincorporated        Incorporated
                                         (1)              (2)            (3)                 (4)
Wages (25-29)                         0.510***          0.2367*           0.067           0.936***
                                       (0.036)          (0.1369)         (0.147)           (0.322)
Observations                            41015            3488             2568               920
R-square                                0.101           0.0732            0.102             0.104

          Panel B: Earnings vs. early salary wages, standard controls and state-year effects
                                                      Log Hourly Earnings (31+)
                                       Salaried     Self-Employed Unincorporated        Incorporated
                                         (5)              (6)            (7)                 (8)
Wages (25-29)                        0.5105***           0.2198           0.0275          1.0058**
                                      (0.0364)          (0.1480)         (0.1675)         (0.4282)
Observations                           41015             3488              2568             920
R-square                               0.1138           0.2039            0.2698           0.3631

Notes: This table provides regression results of log hourly earnings in year t on an individual's
average log wages as a salaried employee during the ages of 25 through 29 (Wages (25-29)). All
regressions include "standard controls:" Mincerian characteristics (a quartic expression for potential
work experience and dummy variables for six education categories), measures of cognitive and non-
cognitive traits (AFQT, Rosenberg self-esteem, Rotter Locus of Control), as well as race, gender,
year, and state fixed effects. In Panel B, the regressions also include state-year fixed effects. As
indicated, each regression includes the subsample of individuals who are salaried (columns 1-5), self-
employed (columns 2-6), unincorporated self-employed (columns 3-7), or incorporated self-employed
(columns 4-8) in year t . The sample includes full-time, full-year workers who are 31 years of age or
older. Appendix Table 1 provides variable definitions. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors,
clustered at the individual level are in parentheses, where *, **, and *** indicate significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively.
                                                                                        56




                              APPENDIX TABLE III
         SELECTION ON WAGES AND SHOCKS TO HOME WEALTH:
                       FALSIFICATION TEST

                               Self-Employed       Unincorporated Incorporated
                                   (Logit)              (Multinomial Logit)
                                     (1)                (2)             (3)
Wages (25-29)                    -0.1831***          -0.3670***        0.3162**
                                   (0.0587)            (0.0651)         (0.1497)
Smart & Illicit                     -0.0865           -0.2705**         0.5254**
                                   (0.1197)            (0.1323)         (0.2625)
Home Wealth(t-4)*g(t, t+4)          0.0818              0.1660           0.0719
                                   (0.0773)            (0.1113)         (0.1248)
g(t, t+4))                          0.0619              -0.1745        1.3717***
                                   (0.2437)            (0.2751)         (0.5323)
Home Wealth (t-4)                0.0618***              0.0069         0.1737***
                                   (0.0175)            (0.0301)         (0.0252)
Observations                        93722              93755             93755
R-Squared                           0.0258             0.0914            0.0914

This table reports analyses of selection into different employment types in year t on
Wages (25-29)), Smart & Illicit, and a Bartik instrument for changes in home
wealth (Home Wealth(t-4)*g(t, t+4)), where Home Wealth(t-4) is the individual's
net home wealth in year t-4, and g(t, t+4) is the growth rate in state housing prices
between year t+1 and year t+4 for the state in which the individual lives. In
column (1), the dependent variable is a one-zero indicator variable of whether the
individual is self-employed in year t . In columns (2-3), the dependent variable is a
one-zero indicator of employment type, where the reported categories are
unincorporated and incorporated respectively, and the unreported categories are
salaried, unpaid family, and other business ownership. All regressions include
Mincerian characteristics (a quartic expression for potential work experience and
dummy variables for six education categories), measures of cognitive and non-
cognitive traits (AFQT, Illicit, Rosenberg self-esteem, Rotter Locus of Control), as
well as gender, race, year, and state fixed effects. Since the data on home wealth
begins in sample year 1985 and we require values of home wealth in t-4 , the
sample starts in 1989. We exclude individuals who were self-employed in either t-
2 or t-4 . Appendix Table 1 provides variable definitions. Heteroskedasticity robust
standard errors, clustered at the individual level are in parentheses, where *, **,
and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively
                                                                                                                       57




                          APPENDIX TABLE IV
        EMPLOYMENT TYPES AND HOURS OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE: CPS
                               Worker         Salaried Self-employed Unincorporated Incorporated
                     Panel A: Employment Type vs. State Unemployment: OLS
State Unemployment           -0.530***       -0.610***        0.080***             0.113***            -0.032*
                               (0.042)         (0.047)         (0.026)              (0.023)            (0.019)

Mean                           0.843           0.756            0.087               0.059              0.028
Observations                  2199569         2199569          2199569             2199569            2199569
R-square                       0.076           0.034            0.030               0.016              0.020

             Panel B: Employment Type vs State Unemployment: Multinomial Logit
                           Not Working Salaried Self-employed Unincorporated Incorporated
State Unemployment            4.418***                                             2.654***            -0.805
                               (0.354)                                              (0.400)            (0.713)
Notes: This table reports OLS and multinomial logit regression results of each employment type (Worker,
Salaried, Self-employed, Unincorporated, and Incorporated, ) on state unemployment using the CPS. Panel A
reports the results of five OLS regressions, one for each employment type. The dependent variable is the
proportion of individuals in the specified employment type. Panel C reports multinomial logit regression results,
where the dependent variable is the log-odds of being in the indicated employment type rather than a salaried
worker. Though not shown, all regressions control for race, schooling (measured in six categories), potential
work experience (quartic), state fixed effects, and year-gender fixed effects. Panel A also report the means of the
dependent variables. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the state-year level are in parentheses,
where *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively.
       Figure I: Selection into Employment Types by Entrepreneurial Ability
       )#'"%

       )#("%           !"#$%&$%"'%$(
       )#""%           )*+*$,%-(
                       )%+./!0&+12%-(
       "#$"%

       "#&"%

       "#'"%

       "#("%

       "#""%
           "#""%       "#)"%      "#("%      "#*"%      "#'"%      "#+"%      "#&"%      "#,"%      "#$"%       "#-"%      )#""%
       !"#("%

       !"#'"%

       !"#&"%
                                  lnθS                                                                 lnθE
       !"#$"%
Figure I illustrates the relationship between the log utility in each employment type and the log of entrepreneurial ability (!"#). The
horizontal line represents the log utility of other self-employment (!"!!" ! and equals !!" ! !!" . The upward sloping line with squares
is the log utility of salaried employment (!"!!" !, where the slope is !! . !"!!" intersects !"!!" at the first cutoff level of entrepreneurial
ability: !"#!! . The upward sloping line with circles is the log utility of entrepreneurship (!"!!" ), where the slope is !!! , and where !"!!"
intersects !"!!" at the second cutoff level: !"#!! .
Figure II: Selection into Employment Types: Tightening Liquidity Conditions
 )#'"%

 )#("%          !"#$%&$%"'%$(
 )#""%
                )*+*$,%-(
 "#$"%

 "#&"%

 "#'"%

 "#("%

 "#""%
     "#""%         "#)"%        "#("%         "#*"%         "#'"%        "#+"%         "#&"%         "#,"%         "#$"%        "#-"%         )#""%
!"#("%

!"#'"%
                                                                                                                  LnθE         LnθE
!"#&"%
                                LnθS
!"#$"%

!)#""%
 Figure II illustrates the change in selection into each employment type when credit conditions tighten, i.e., when !! increases. The
 horizontal line represents the log utility of other self-employment (!"!!" !; the upward sloping line with squares is the log utility of
 salaried employment (!"!!" !, where the slope is !! , and the upward sloping line with circles is the log utility of entrepreneurship
 (!"!!" ), where the slope is !!! . !"!!" intersects !"!!" at the first cutoff level of entrepreneurial ability: !"#!! . !"!!" intersects !"!!" at
 the second cutoff level: !"#!! . When credit conditions tighten this shifts downward the intercept of the line for the log utility of
 entrepreneurship, constraining entry into entrepreneurship. Changes in !! , however, do not alter the intercepts or slopes of the other
 lines and therefore liquidity conditions do not affect entry into other self-employment.
 Figure III: Selection into Employment Types: A Recession
     )#'"%

     )#("%            !"#$%&$%"'%$(
     )#""%
                      )*+*$,%-(
     "#$"%
                      )%+./!0&+12%-(
     "#&"%

     "#'"%

     "#("%

     "#""%
         "#""%       "#)"%      "#("%       "#*"%      "#'"%       "#+"%       "#&"%      "#,"%       "#$"%       "#-"%      )#""%
    !"#("%

    !"#'"%
                                                                                                      lnθΕ =
    !"#&"%
                              lnθ/         Lnθ/                                                    lnθ**.
    !"#$"%

    !)#""%
Figure III illustrates the change in selection into each employment type when there is a recession that tightens credit conditions and
reduces the demand for salaried workers. The tightening of liquidity conditions involves a parallel fall in the log utility of
entrepreneurship line (!"!!! ), i.e., the upward sloping line with circles. As shown, this tightening reduces selection into
entrepreneurship but has no effect on entry into other self-employment, i.e., the liquidity effect exerts a procyclical influence on
entrepreneurship, but not on other self-employment. The reduction in the demand for salaried workers involves a parallel fall in the
log utility of salaried employment (!"!!" ! line, i.e., the upward sloping line with squares. This labor demand effect exerts a
countercyclical influence on both entrepreneurship and other self-employment. The figure depicts the special case when liquidity and
labor demand effects exactly counterbalance each other with respect to entrepreneurship.
