NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN MOBILE-LINKED BANK ACCOUNTS BOLSTER SAVINGS? EVIDENCE
FROM A RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL IN SRI LANKA
Suresh De Mel
Craig McIntosh
Ketki Sheth
Christopher Woodruff
Working Paper 25354
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25354

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

We are grateful to the International Growth Center, 3ie, and the Consortium on Financial Systems
and Poverty at the University of Chicago for funding, to Kandy Consulting Group for data
collection, and to Mike Callen for fieldwork on the project. The project received human subjects
approval under UCSD IRB #091191S. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Suresh De Mel, Craig McIntosh, Ketki Sheth, and Christopher Woodruff. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Mobile-Linked Bank Accounts Bolster Savings? Evidence from a Randomized Controlled
Trial in Sri Lanka
Suresh De Mel, Craig McIntosh, Ketki Sheth, and Christopher Woodruff
NBER Working Paper No. 25354
December 2018
JEL No. G21,O12,O16
ABSTRACT
In developing economies, mobile-linked services have the potential to significantly reduce
transaction costs and provide a truly new conduit that could be used to facilitate the flow of
savings into banks. We test this premise by introducing a product that permits Sri Lankan
households to deposit mobile airtime balances into a formal bank using a new mobile money
interface. Using high frequency panel survey data and randomizing access and prices at the
individual level, we find that there are moderate percentage increases in savings deposits with the
partner institution and formal banks more generally, but no change in overall savings deposits.
When the transaction costs are completely removed, only 26 percent of those offered the service
use it, and 7 percent use it frequently. Overall, our results imply that transaction costs may not be
a significant barrier to increasing deposits, limiting the potential gains of mobile-linked savings
products for financial inclusion.
Suresh De Mel
University of Peradeniya
demel.suresh@gmail.com
Craig McIntosh
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
ctmcintosh@ucsd.edu

Ketki Sheth
Department of Economics,
University of California, Merced
5200 North Lake Road
Merced CA 95343
shethketki@gmail.com
Christopher Woodruff
Queen Elizabeth House
University of Oxford
OX1 3TB
United Kingdom
and NBER
christopher.woodruff@qeh.ox.ac.uk

1

Introduction

A majority of the world’s poor are unbanked. This is troubling given well-identified studies showing that
increased access to formal savings causes surprisingly large impacts on business investment (Dupas and
Robinson, 2013), health and education (Prina, 2015), income (Schaner, 2016), and labor supply (Callen
et al., 2014). But Dupas et al. (forthcoming) provide evidence from large samples in three countries that
simply reducing the fixed cost of opening a bank account is not sufficient to generate widespread usage of the
accounts. One explanation is that transactions costs of using the accounts remain high even when the fees
charged to open the accounts are eliminated. This is particularly true for potential users who may live some
distance from the nearest bank branch. Given the small size of typical deposits of the working poor, the time
and pecuniary costs of traveling to the bank may make regular use of formal savings accounts impractical.
We report here on a field experiment in Sri Lanka that aimed to reduce the ongoing banking transactions
costs by allowing participants to make deposits into regular bank savings accounts through their mobile
phone. The intervention allowed participants to make deposits through any mobile phone agent. Because
there are many more mobile agents than bank branches, mobile-linked accounts have the potential to reduce
the ongoing transactions costs. For this reason, there is a belief that mobile technology can increase saving
rates and provide significant welfare benefits. The promise of mobile-linked services has led to significant
resources and political will devoted to facilitating its spread.1 Despite the push to link mobile money to
conventional interest-bearing bank accounts (Goss et al., 2011), progress in building these products has been
slow (Suri, 2017). Penetration in most countries remains low, with less than one in four households globally
using any mobile money service.2 Moreover, mobile money systems are rarely integrated with formal banks
(or even integrated across telecom companies), limiting options for true mobile banking services (Suri, 2017).
This slow growth raises questions of whether mobile-linked saving products will have significant demand and
will increase savings mobilization, and whether the willingness to pay for these services can support their
development and sustainability.
Participants in our experiment were randomly assigned to a control group or one of four treatment groups
that differed in the fees charged to make a deposit. By varying the fees from 8 percent of the deposit – slightly
more than the partner’s estimated cost – to zero, we are able to provide evidence on the willingness to pay
for banking services, and to estimate the related elasticity of demand. Because our largest treatment group
paid no fee to use the service, we are also able to measure the increase in demand for formal savings accounts
when deposit-related transactions costs are reduced nearly to zero.3 As such, our study complements Dupas
1 For example, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation’s strategy for financial inclusion focuses on broadening “the reach of
low cost digital financial services” and India’s 2016 demonitization is often justified as a push to transition to a digital economy.
2 In addition, not all countries that have invested in building digital economies have been successful. As evidenced as perhaps
one of the strongest pushes towards digital finance, a year after the 2016 demonetization in India, digital transactions have
dropped below its peak and are growing at slower rates each month (Chakrovorti, 2017).
3 To further reduce the effective transaction costs, our intervention included measures to eliminate other potential barriers
to savings deposits as well: 1) assistance with opening the partner bank account, including payment of the $4.55 minimum
balance requirement, 2) a mobile phone and SIM card, and 3) personalized demonstrations on using the service, including two
transfers of $.45 into one’s own account.

2

et al. (forthcoming) in reducing the ongoing transactions costs associated with using a bank account. Using
high-frequency household income and expenditure surveys, we examine the effect of accounts on overall
household savings, consumption, and labor earnings.
We have three main findings. First, use of the service was relatively low, even for those assigned to
the group able to use the service for free. While 80 percent of participants opened the bank account and
participated in demonstrations on how to make deposits, only 26 percent made at least one deposit through
the mobile service, and only 7 percent made 10 or more deposits. Though we find some heterogeneity in
usage in expected directions - women and those living at intermediate distances from bank branches were
more frequent users - the usage levels remain low in all subgroups.4 The modest adoption rates are in line
with those found in several other studies introducing innovations designed to reduce transaction costs (e.g.
Dupas et al., forthcoming; Flory, 2011; Ashraf, Karlan and Yin, 2006).
Second, we find that the mobile-linked deposit service caused a 44 percent increase in savings deposits in
the partner bank and a 29 percent increase in savings in the formal banking sector more generally. However,
there was no increase in total household savings. Moreover, these percentage gains are relative to a very small
control-group mean, and hence do not correspond to meaningful increases in the average amount deposited
into formal savings, even with the partner bank. Not surprisingly then, we see no change in household
welfare measures, such as household consumption or labor supply. Furthermore, a significant proportion of
the gain in bank savings we observe comes from the traditional channel of depositing savings in person at
the bank, suggesting that once the account was opened, those interested in using it were willing to incur the
in-person transaction costs even when the mobile-deposit service was free to use.
Third, we find a general lack of responsiveness to the (randomly assigned) price levied for the service:
the amount deposited through the mobile channel does not decrease consistently as the fee increases. Only
at the 8 percent fee do we observed reduced usage of the mobile deposit service. But even then, our data
suggest that the fee simply shifted the transactions from the mobile channel to the in-person channel, with
no overall difference in deposits made in the partner bank.
Taken together, these three findings suggest that transaction costs for saving deposits are unlikely to be
a significant inhibitor for saving rates. Our modest impacts from providing an ever-present, private, and free
mobile deposit service can be seen as bounding the transactions cost improvements from this mobile savings
technology relative to the next-best channel. The experiment provides one of the first estimates of the effect
of mobile-deposit services on savings, contributing to growing literatures on the uses of mobile money and
on the importance of transaction costs for savings mobilization. With the strong push for financial inclusion
built on the premise of reducing market imperfections in formal financial markets, understanding the impact
of digital finance is particularly important. Our analysis is based on a large individual-level randomized
controlled trial with high-frequency panel data on savings for over two years. The significant sample size and
4 Women theoretically have greater concern for other-control (Ashraf, 2009), more restricted mobility, and smaller average
deposits, all features potentially addressed by the technology. Those living at intermediate distances would arguably most value
reduction in transaction costs for deposits, but not be deterred by less frequent withdrawal costs.

3

length of study, near-perfect compliance with the randomization, and low attrition all bolster the internal
validity of our causal interpretation. In addition, our measures not only capture savings with the partner
institution, but also estimate impact on total savings and formal savings, which have implications on financial
intermediation and economic growth.
The Sri Lankan setting is a particularly good one for estimating the effect and price elasticity for mobilelinked financial savings. First, Sri Lanka is typical of most low- and lower-middle income countries in that
mobile phones are ubiquitous but electronic financial services (e.g., ATMs) are more limited. Mobile money
was absent at the time of the intervention and continues to have very low penetration. While Sri Lanka has
relatively high rates of formal bank account ownership, a large proportion of savings continues to be held
in informal saving devices (The World Bank, 2013). Second, there is high trust in the banking system in
Sri Lanka, helping to overcome market imperfections related to informational asymmetry and institutional
uncertainty that may dampen the marginal benefit of reducing transaction costs in other contexts. And
finally, previous research in Sri Lanka identified significant latent demand for formal banking services and
provided compelling reasons to suspect transaction costs were an important market imperfection resulting
in undersaving: Callen et al. (2014) find that a weekly deposit collection service increased total savings by
over 15%.5
Our results are consistent with the growing literature on mobile-linked savings, and more broadly, on
the impact of reducing transaction costs for savings deposits to improve savings. The handful of studies
examining mobile-linked savings generally find results consistent with ours, despite being in settings where
mobile money is more popular. Both Batista and Vicente (2017) and Bastian et al. (2018) measure the
marginal effect of connecting formal saving options to mobile platforms in contexts of existing mobile money
users. In both cases, they observe savings being directed to the savings product, but also reductions in
alternate saving devices, leading to no significant increase in total savings. Studies focusing on reducing
transaction costs for a mobile-money-based saving device that is absent many of the features of formal
savings find similarly modest results. Batista and Vincente (2016) conduct a field experiment introducing
mobile money alone in Mozambique. Consistent with earlier findings of Jack and Suri (2014) in Kenya, they
find that mobile money increased consumption smoothing through remittances, but not through increased
savings.6
Batista and Vicente (2017) and Bastian et al. (2018) identify the marginal demand for formal banking
features, relative to existing mobile money, in the absence of transaction costs for depositing savings. The
mirroring studies by Batista and Vincente (2016) and Jack and Suri (2014) identify the effect of eliminating
transaction costs for a saving device that is absent many of the features of formal savings. We add to the
literature by estimating an intervention that combines these two components. This is key to understanding
the impact of transaction costs in facilitating formal savings, a particularly relevant issue given the focus
5 Our

results are robust to limiting our sample to be similar to the sample selection process used in this earlier work.
Jack and Suri (2016)’s follow up work, they do find that savings was higher in places with mobile money, but are unable
to identify whether this is a direct effect of mobile money or an indirect downstream effect from intermediary outcomes (e.g.,
reduced vulnerability to shocks may also yield increased savings in the long run).
6 In

4

financial inclusion initiatives place on “banking” individuals due to concerns that informal savings are higher
risk, higher cost, and less convenient. The marginal effects identified in previous studies identify each
component separately and therefore provide lower bounds to an intervention like ours which estimates a
combined effect that captures potential complementarities. Our results are consistent with their modest
impacts and suggests that the marginal gain from the interaction is low.
More broadly, our results contribute to the role of deposit transaction costs as barriers to efficient savings
mobilization. Studies eliminating the pecuniary costs of opening bank accounts have found mixed results,
with the largest and most representative (Dupas et al., forthcoming) finding modest effects (Dupas et al.,
2012; Dupas and Robinson, 2013; Prina, 2015; Cole, Sampson and Zia, 2011).7 Studies that have directly
focused on reducing transaction costs for savings deposits have also generally found modest results, but
have also not measured impact on total savings mobilization (Flory, 2011; Ashraf, Karlan and Yin, 2006)
An exception is Callen et al. (2014) who introduce a weekly deposit collection service in Sri Lanka and
do find significant gains in total savings. The heterogeneity in this literature may be due to intervention
features addressing additional constraints or confounding contextual constraints. For example, some of these
interventions also introduce features that address commitment concerns or are implemented in contexts
where the benefit of decrased transaction costs is reduced (e.g., respondents in Dupas et al. (2012) list risk
of embezzlement and high withdrawal costs as explanations for their lack of demand). Our results support
what we see as the growing consensus in this literature that deposit transaction costs determine where a
person saves, but are unlikely to be a primary barrier responsible for inefficiently low savings.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the study context and design, Section 3 analyzes the impact of the product at the individual level, Section 4 presents demand and implications
on targeting for the mobile-linked savings product, and Section 5 concludes.

2
2.1

Study Context and Details
Product Description

In 2009, we began working with a large mobile operator and a small software company in Sri Lanka to develop
a savings product that would allow deposits to be made directly through a mobile phone to a savings account
in a large, government-owned bank (referred to as the partner bank). Customers could purchase mobile phone
top-up scratch cards to deposit funds into the bank account using a procedure similar to that used for adding
minutes to their mobile phone.8 The product allowed the user to dial a number, enter the scratch card serial
7 Dupas et al. (2012) found low demand for bank accounts in Kenya even after waiving account fees. But Cole, Sampson and
Zia (2011) found that subsidized accounts in Indonesia led to greater opening and use of the account; Prina (2015) similarly
finds high demand for subsidized accounts in Nepal with little support for increases in downstream effects; and Dupas and
Robinson (2013) found significant effects on business investment and expenditure from free accounts, but for only a subset of
their sample.
8 77 percent of our sample lived within 200 meters of a merchant selling scratch cards and 58 percent of our sample added
minutes to their phone at least once a week. In contrast, our sample’s average time to make a deposit at a bank is 21 minutes
and only 23 percent had made a bank deposit in the previous month at baseline.

5

number, and deposit the amount on the card into an m-purse account linked to the phone. The m-purse
account was linked to a savings account, and by entering a PIN, the user could move the money from the
m-purse to the savings account. The scratch cards were available in multiple denominations, from 50 LKR
to 1,000 LKR (.45 USD to 9.09 USD).9 In our baseline survey, 72 percent of our primary sample (described
in the following section) reported that their typical deposit into any formal saving devices was 1,000 LKR or
less, suggesting that the scratch card denominations available would not have been unduly burdensome.10
This was the first product of this type offered in Sri Lanka.
While the use of scratch cards for loading airtime on phones is becoming less common, the time and effort
costs of scratch cards are not materially different from newer methods, which continue to require interacting
with a local agent. And at the time of this study, scratch cards were still very common. The scratching of
the card itself is a very small component of the transaction time. In addition, in places that currently have
connectivity between mobile money and linked saving accounts, a PIN is a common method for transferring
mobile money into an account. Finally, at the time of the experiment, the majority of our sample were
adding minutes to their mobile phone at least once a week, suggesting that the marginal time and effort
costs were small.
The mobile operator with whom we partnered agreed not to market the product in the region where we
were conducting the research during the term of the project, ensuring perfect compliance with the randomized
controlled trial. This unusual degree of control over access to the product is a major advantage for estimating
causal effects relative to other studies of mobile banking products.
On the other hand, the product was launched without advertising and other support typical of new product offerings. We took a series of steps to overcome the lack of advertisement, stimulate use of the product,
and overcome potential barriers to realizing the service’s benefits. These are thus bundled components of the
intervention. First, we worked with the mobile operator to inform and train customer service representatives
so that someone knowledgeable of the product was always available at the service call center. Second, we
offered participants a free basic phone and SIM card. Third, we helped them open the savings account linked
to the phone, including providing the 500 LKR (4.55 USD) minimum balance required to open a savings account at the bank.11 Forth, we arranged a demonstration of how to use the product, which included making
two deposits of 50 LKR (0.45 USD) each into the individual’s account. And finally, for two months in each
municipality, we encouraged use of the service by conducting a lottery among users of the service.12 These
incentives were provided to all treated individuals and are intended to eliminate constraints to account usage
9 The

median exchange rate in 2011 was 110 LKR to the US dollar.
PIN offers protection for the account in the event the phone is lost or stolen. It also means that other members of
the household could use the phone for calls without having access to the account, a feature which may be important in some
households.
11 The bank account provided 4 percent interest annually which is comparable to saving accounts at banks in general at this
time.
12 Each deposit into the account generated one chance of winning a deposit of 5,000 LKR (45.5 USD) for the account holder.
This incentive was offered in one municipality, Kandy, in August and September 2012, and the remaining municipalities in
April and May 2013. Our primary results are robust to excluding these months in our analysis. In the former, we observe a
statistically significant increase in the use of the service (.5 more transactions, significant at the 5 percent level). In the latter,
we observe a statistically insignificant increase of .04 transactions.
10 The

6

arising from other pecuniary costs (e.g., bank fees), material costs (e.g., phone costs), or lack of experience
using the service. We are unable to isolate the importance of each component of the treatment bundle, but
given the modest results we estimate, we do not see this as a major drawback.

2.2

Distribution Timeline

The introduction of the product to study subjects, initiated by the sending of the offer letter, was subject
to several delays. This means that we have more baseline survey rounds than anticipated, but in all cases
the accounts were available to be opened and the mobile conduit was functional when the product was first
offered to an individual. The first offer letters were delivered in December 2011, one year after our baseline
survey, providing us with an year of savings data prior to households being aware of the intervention.
Demonstrations began by February 2012 in one municipality, by April 2012 in four more municipalities, and
by September 2012 in the remaining municipality. By September 2012, 86% had accepted the offer (i.e.,
opened an account and received the phone and SIM card). Figure 1 provides a summary of the timeline for
the roll out of the mobile-deposit service intervention and the data collection.

2.3

Sample Selection and Randomization

To select the sample for the study, we conducted a listing exercise in August 2010 in six municipalities13 in
central Sri Lanka. The household listing identified 13,435 economically active adults from 10,300 households.
This initial listing was stratified by distance to the nearest town (i.e., to a bank branch): urban (under 2km),
semi-urban (2km to 5km), and rural (over 5km).14 We then narrowed this sample based on characteristics
predicted to have high demand for the mobile-deposit service: households with members paid on a daily
or weekly basis (and therefore having higher value for frequent deposits) and stated willingness to have
an interest-bearing savings account. Imposing these restrictions narrowed the potential sample to 3,102
individuals (2,372 households), from which we selected 2,006 individuals from unique households as our
final sample. This final selection oversampled individuals with characteristics that would arguably have a
greater likelihood of adopting the savings service (those who lived within .5 km of the nearest mobile phone
agent, who used their phones to send SMS messages regularly, who had previously changed a SIM card,
and who were under 50 years of age) or were of particular interest (female). However, given that we select
an individual from 85 percent of the households (2,006 out of 2,372), these oversampling criteria mostly
determined which individual in the household (rather than which households) we selected.
The mobile-deposit service (along with the bundled activities described in the previous section) was
randomly offered to 1,625 individuals from the baseline sample of 2,006 individuals. Within this treatment
group, individuals were randomly assigned a fee to be deducted from each deposit made through the mobile
13 Kandy

(KN), Katugastota (KT), Pelimathalawa (PL), Matale (MT), Kurunegala (KR), and Kegalle (KG).
primary purpose in including those over 5km away was to compare the intervention’s results with those found in Callen
et al. (2014), in which a weekly deposit collector significantly increased savings.
14 A

7

Figure 1: Study Timeline (Not drawn to scale)

channel: free (683 individuals), 2% fee (316 individuals), 4% fee (310 individuals), and 8% fee (316 individuals). Those in the free service were further randomized to be surveyed annually (227 individuals) or
monthly (435 individuals), as described in further detail in the following section. The control sample received
no offer nor the promotional activities surrounding the offer, but were surveyed monthly. The treatment
randomization was stratified on quartiles of baseline saving balances and terciles of a test score based on the
ability to read a text message. Figure 2 provides an overview of the sample selection.

2.4

Data

We conducted an initial baseline survey in November and December 2010 (see Figure 1). From 2011 to 2013,
three detailed annual surveys were conducted each November. To improve the precision of our estimates,
we surveyed the control sample and 456 randomly selected individuals from the free mobile-deposit service
treatment arm every month from January 2011 to December 2012 and in January and May of 2013 (i.e.,
25 waves of the survey). We refer to this as the monthly surveyed sample. This high-frequency panel has
the advantage of increasing statistical power for detecting the causal effect of the free mobile-deposit service
offer. Due to the unforeseen delay on rolling out the service, our baseline data covers more than a year of
monthly surveys and two annual surveys. These surveys provide rich detail on savings behavior prior to the
intervention, with detailed information on individual savings deposits using a monthly recall period.
We also observe deposits made through the mobile-deposit service from the start of the intervention until
May 2013. We are unable to observe account balances and withdrawals using institutional data from the
bank, and so rely on survey data for impacts on savings behavior. Given our design, the core analysis focuses
on the comparison of the free treatment to the control using the monthly surveyed sample, and the estimation
of price elasticities uses the annually surveyed sample within which the service fee was randomized.

8

Figure 2: Sample Selection

2.5

Validity: Attrition and Balance

Given the length of time between the initial baseline survey and the roll-out of the intervention, there is some
attrition in the sample. Since participants were unaware of their treatment status until they received an
offer letter in December 2011, we take this attrition as random with respect to treatment. We define a Panel
Sample of individuals surveyed at least once after the mobile-deposit service offer letters were delivered, and
use this sample for our analysis. Online Appendix Table A.2 tests for differential attrition into the Panel
Sample and differential response rates to the multiple surveys by treatment status. We find attrition is low
and balanced across treatment status among those surveyed monthly (including among sub-groups of interest
for heterogeneity). Though we do find some statistically significant differences in attrition across treatment
arms in the annual sample, for all prices except the 8 percent fee, there is no differential response rate in the
period after the mobile-deposit service is offered relative to the months before. The remainder of the paper
limits observations to the Panel Sample to be consistent with the sample used in the key estimations of the
impact of the mobile-deposit service.
The Panel Sample is balanced on baseline characteristics (Online Appendix Table A.1) and on savings
outcomes of interest15 as measured in the monthly surveys prior to the intervention roll-out (Online Appendix
15 The survey questions are as follows: “After deducting the total amount of money given to others from the total amount of
money received, you had Rs
remaining for saving or spending in the past month of
. Can you tell me how much
money you saved using the following methods – Saving in an institution such as a bank? Total?” Beginning in September 2012,
the first question was replaced with the following two: “Money saved in [the partner bank] ? Money saved in bank accounts in

9

Table A.3). We confirm balance for both: 1) the monthly sample (used to estimate the causal effect of the
mobile-deposit service), comparing those who received the mobile-deposit service for free with those in the
control group; and 2) the annual sample (used to estimate the price elasticity for the mobile-deposit service),
comparing those randomly assigned to different mobile transaction fees.

2.6

Sample Characteristics: Banking and Mobile Phones

Our sample selection is stratified on distance to the nearest town, a proxy for banking services: forty-four
percent live within two kilometers of a bank, another forty percent live 2 and 5 kilometers from a bank,
and the remaining 16 percent lived more than 5 km away. The average travel time to the closest bank is
16 minutes (21 minutes for a deposit) and travel costs are 9 LKR (.08 USD). In contrast, 72 percent of our
sample is able to top up their phone within 200 km. There is a negative correlation between the time it takes
to go to the bank and both formal and total savings deposits. There is no correlation between savings and the
cost of going to the bank. Though 88 percent of the sample has a bank account and 62 percent report having
“a great deal” of trust in banks and financial institutions, only 19 percent of the sample have visited an ATM
to withdraw funds in the previous year, suggesting lower usage of electronic banking services. A significant
proportion of our sample are not actively using formal bank accounts, despite having an account in their
name: only 12 percent report using a formal savings account more frequently than once a month. During this
baseline period, average monthly formal savings deposited were 1,533 LKR (14.04 USD), whereas average
monthly total savings deposits were 5,989 LKR (54.84 USD). Among those who made any saving deposits
in a given month, only 11 percent of savings was deposited into a formal account. Note that these average
amounts hide a very skewed distribution – in fact, over 75 percent of subjects in a given month reporting no
formal deposits and the median monthly total deposits is 2,075 LKR (19.00 USD). At baseline, 69 percent
report having a balance of less than 10,000 LKR (92 USD) in their formal account, just 42 percent of their
reported mean monthly household consumption.16 Given our sampling rules, we observe a high penetration
of mobile phones (89 percent), though capacity to use various functions on a mobile phone is more limited.
See Online Appendix Table A.1 for additional descriptive summary statistics.
Our sample reflects the Sri Lankan context: despite significant penetration of formal bank accounts,
informal savings methods remain common and frequent usage of formal banks for saving deposits is low. In
general, 83 percent of Sri Lankans have a bank account, but only 31 percent save at a financial institution
and only 45 percent report “[having personally] saved or set aside money for any reason” in the previous
year. The low use of financial institutions suggests unmet demand for formal bank accounts, despite the
high penetration of owning bank accounts.
your name at banks other than [the partner bank]?”. We use the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of savings amounts to
account for the skewed non-normal distribution of savings deposits (Burbidge, Magee and Robb, 1988). The same balance test
using outcomes without the inverse hyperbolic sine transformations confirms the validity of the research design (not shown).
16 See Appendix for more details on variable definitions and balance tests.

10

Table 1: Mobile Deposit Service Adoption by Fees Charged

Letter Delivered
Account Accepted
Demonstration completed
Used service
Observations

(1)
0%

(2)
2%

(3)
4%

(4)
8%

0.979
0.910
0.800
0.258

0.990
0.903
0.733∗∗
0.203∗

0.990
0.921
0.760
0.226

0.969
0.873
0.702∗∗∗
0.178∗∗∗

656

300

292

292

Letter Delivered and Account Accepted are based on enumerator reports.
Demonstration completed and Used service are based on institutional data
provided by the partner bank. The 0% sample combines those surveyed
annually and monthly. Statistical significance is based on regressions
which include variables upon which the random assignment were stratified
and uses robust standard errors. Observations are limited to individuals
in the panel sample. Comparisons to the free mobile service offer are
indicated by * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

2.7

Implementation of the mobile-deposit service

The adoption of the mobile-deposit service proceeded in several steps. First, treated participants were
offered the service at the randomly designated price by letter (Letter Delivered). The participant then
decided whether or not to accept the offer by coming to the partner bank branch during a designated time
window to open and account and receive the phone and SIM card (Account Accepted). Finally conditional
on opening the account, the project team arranged a demonstration at the participant’s house in which 100
LKR (.91 USD) was deposited in the account using the mobile-deposit service (Demonstration Completed).
Table 1 provides summary statistics on take-up for each stage of this process. Because these events happen
in succession, a later stage can only occur if the previous stage was completed. All treated participants could
make deposits on their own into their account.
Subjects were unaware of the product until the first offer letters were sent in December 2011, a year
after the initial baseline survey. We were able to reach 98 percent of the Panel Sample to make the initial
offer (Row 1). Among those provided the service for free, 91 percent accepted the offer and 80 percent
completed the demonstration. The service itself is used at least once by 26 percent of those who received
the mobile-deposit service for free (Used service); 7 percent made 10 or more mobile deposits. Though this
usage rate is low, it is similar to take up rates of savings products in several other studies (e.g. Dupas et al.,
forthcoming; Flory, 2011; Ashraf, Karlan and Yin, 2006).17
In May 2012, about three months after the the product was first launched, we asked a series of questions
on our monthly survey to better understand adoption and usage patterns of the service. We asked the treated
sample for their own assessment of their ability to use the service. Of the 186 respondents who had received
the demonstration by the time of the survey, 45 percent said they had high confidence and 39 percent said
17 99 percent recalled received a demonstration in subsequent surveys, allowing us to rule out lack of awareness of the service
as a potential explanation for low demand.

11

they had somewhat high confidence in their ability to use the service. However, 41 percent agreed at least
“to some extent” that the mobile bank saving service was complicated/difficult, and 20 percent said they
disliked the service due to technical problems. These responses suggest that despite the high levels of selfreported confidence, learning how to use the service still imposed a cognitive cost. When asked why they
hadn’t used the service more, the two leading responses were that the respondent did not have enough money
(36 percent), and that technical concerns that arose when depositing (31 percent); 25 percent said at least
“to some extent” they preferred to deposit directly at the bank rather than using the mobile channel. No
respondent voiced a lack of trust in the banking system or mobile phone companies as an explanation for lack
of use. When asked what they liked about the service, the most common response, by far, were the “ability
to save at any time of day” and the “ability to save even a small amount.” This suggests that individuals
were well aware and understood the direct benefits of a mobile-deposit service. Overall, our survey responses
suggest that individuals understood well that the service reduced transaction costs for saving deposits, but
that this benefit may not have been appealing enough to overcome learning costs, despite the fact that the
service closely mimicked a well-known process.

3

The Savings Effects of a Mobile-Deposit Service

3.1

Primary Estimating Equations

Our primary question of interest is whether the intervention resulted in increased total savings, a reallocation
towards formal savings, or at a minimum, a diversion into the partner institution. We estimate the standard
experimental intention to treat using the random assignment to treatment with the following linear regression
specification:
SavingsDepositssi = β0 + β1 M obileOf f erF reesi + µs + si

(1)

where SavingsDeposits are the monthly mean of the following: the amount of total savings deposits at
the partner bank, an indicator for making a formal saving deposit, the amount of formal savings deposits,
an indicator for making any saving deposit, and the amount of total savings deposits. These dependent
variables have a monthly recall and are the mean responses over all surveys conducted in months after the
baseline period (i.e., December 2011 onward). MobileOfferFree is an indicator for whether the individual
was assigned to the free mobile-deposit service offer, and µs reflect fixed effects for the the variables upon
which the randomization was stratified; s represents the strata used in the randomization and i represents
individual. For the impact estimation we limit the estimation to the monthly survey sample, meaning that
individuals are either in the control arm or in the free treatment arm.
Additionally, we estimate a difference-in-difference model by expanding our estimating equation to include

12

individual fixed effects, α, and include the one year of data prior to the initial offer letters:
SavingsDepositssit = β1 M obileOf f erF ree ∗ P ostsit + wt + αi + sit

(2)

where Post is an indicator for the month of and after December 2011, after the initial letters introducing the
mobile deposit service were delivered; w reflects fixed effects for each survey wave; t reflects the monthly recall
period of the survey. Table A.3 confirms the identifying assumption of savings deposits being statistically
similar across treatment status prior to the offer letters being sent. We use probability weights to ensure that
each individual is given equal weight in our estimates regardless of differential response rates by individuals
to a given survey wave.18 In earlier survey waves, savings recall with respect the partner bank was not
specifically asked, and so partner bank savings is excluded in the individual fixed-effects specification. Eq
(2) is our preferred estimating model due to the increased precision from controlling for average individual
behavior, but we include Eq (1) primarily to estimate effects on savings with the partner institution, which
we do not observe in initial post-treatment months.
The core impact analysis focuses on the free mobile-deposit service for the following two reasons. First,
the free service offers an estimate that is not confounded by financial frictions levied on the consumer, and
therefore provides an upper bound of the effect of a mobile-deposit service. Secondly, the control sample was
interviewed monthly whereas the fee-treatment samples were interviewed annually. Because being surveyed
at different frequencies may differentially affect responses, we focus our comparison on the control sample and
the (randomly selected) subset of the free mobile-service deposit that were also surveyed monthly. Finally, the
increased survey frequency provides a high-powered estimate of a frictionless mobile-deposit service offer.19
Section 3.4 then uses the annual survey sample to estimate price elasticities

3.2

Variable Transformations and Robustness Statistics

Given that savings deposits follow a highly skewed non-normal distribution, we follow the recent financial
services impact literature in analyzing our primary outcomes of interest using the inverse hyperbolic sine
transformation (Burbidge, Magee and Robb, 1988). This transformation retains the interpretation of a log
(i.e., impacts are in percent changes) but can handle zero values. Because absolute savings deposits are still
the relevant measure for bank profits and purchasing power, we also report effects on non-transformed total
amounts in the text of the paper (with the complete tables presented in the Appendix).
To overcome this sensitivity to scale, we augment our results by testing whether the control’s distribution of savings is significantly different from those offered the mobile-deposit service. Using average monthly
savings per individual20 , we estimate the Kolmorogov-Smirnov (KS) statistic, testing whether the distri18 Results

from Eq(2) are robust to excluding these probability weights.
from Eq(1) and Eq (2) are relatively robust to including subjects surveyed annually and comparing those who
received the free service to the control, and comparing those who received the service at any fee to the control. When we
include those surveyed annually, we observe slightly higher percent increases in deposits to the partner bank and formal
banking more generally, but continue to find no support for increased total savings deposits.
20 To abstract away from the issue of frequency versus total amount of savings deposited, both of which may be affected by
19 Results

13

butions of changes in average monthly savings are significantly different as a function of treatment status.
Changes in savings deposited is measured by calculating an individual’s average monthly savings during the
pre-period and post-period and taking the difference between the two, akin to our individual fixed-effects
difference-in-difference approach in the regression framework (i.e., Eq 2). Because savings deposits with the
partner bank were not measured in the pre-period, we are unable to measure changes and instead use the
average monthly savings deposited with the partner bank in the post-period for the months in which this
question was asked. The benefit of the KS statistic is it is non-parametric, insensitive to scale, and robust
to non-normal distributions.
In addition to the KS statistic, we illustrate the impact on saving deposits across the distribution by
plotting the cumulative distribution function by treatment status of average monthly deposits with the partner bank and the change in average monthly formal and total deposits.21 This provides a more transparent
and graphical representation of how saving deposits are changing along the distribution.
Given the relatively low uptake, large number of zero deposits, and large variance in savings deposits, we
do not expect that the distribution of changes in savings deposits in the treated group to first-order dominate
the distribution of those in the control group. Instead, we test whether the probability of observing a higher
amount of savings with the partner bank or a more positive change in formal and total average monthly
savings deposits for those offered the service is greater than one would expect by chance.22 We estimate this
probability from random draws of our sample: we randomly draw an observation from the control sample
and the treatment sample and compare which of the two experienced the higher gain in their average formal
and total monthly savings deposits from baseline period to the post-period; for the partner bank deposits,
we observe which is higher in the post-period. We repeat this 1,000 times, with replacement, to estimate
the probability of observing a larger change in savings among the treatment relative to the control (Savings
Probability, SP, Statistic). We then bootstrap standard errors for the SP statistic by arbitrarily reassigning
treatment status to our entire monthly surveyed sample and estimating the SP statistic for this arbitrary
treatment assignment – we repeat the procedure for 1,000 different samples where treatment is arbitrarily
reassigned. We then compare the SP statistic given the true treatment assignment to the distribution of
simulated SP statistics, providing us with the likelihood, or p-value, of observing our SP statistic by chance.
The KS statistic, CDF, and SP statistic are all methods that are scale-invariant and identify distributional
shifts that may not be detected when simply comparing means.
the mobile deposit service, we calculate mean monthly savings per individual when comparing distributions. For example, if
the mobile-deposit service offer led to no difference in total savings but deposits became small and more frequent, then this
would result in the CDF being dominated by the control sample at higher amounts when using individual-month observations,
even though the offer had not reduced the total amount of savings deposited.
21 Specifically, an individual’s monthly saving deposit is transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. We
then calculate the average in the months prior to the intervention and the average for after the start of the intervention, and
take the difference of the two.
22 This test is analogous to the Mann-Whitney test (Mann and Whitney, 1947). The only difference is that instead of testing
whether the probability of a random draw from the treated distribution is greater than the control is higher than 50 percent,
we test whether the probability is higher than would be under chance. We do this to account for the large number of “ties” in
the two distributions because of the many zeros.

14

3.3

Estimated Impacts on Savings

Table 2 provides the intent-to-treat estimates on the causal effect of the free mobile-deposit service offer
estimated by Eq (1), Panel A, and Eq (2), Panel B. We observe a significant increase in monthly savings
deposits with the partner bank (44 percent) and formal banks more generally (13 to 29 percent). However,
we find no support for an increase in total saving flows, suggesting that these results are either driven by
substitution from other savings sources or the percentage gains were not meaningful with respect to total
savings.
Despite the large percentage increase in savings with the partner bank, only a portion is being deposited
through the mobile-deposit channel. For those who received the service for free23 , we observe only 16 percent
of deposits are accounted for by the mobile channel, despite the intervention yielding an increase of 44 percent
saved with the partner institution. This suggests that the mobile channel is accounting for approximately
half of the observed diversion to the partner institution.
When using savings amounts without the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation, we observe no significant
increase in average savings, even with the partner bank. The magnitude of increased savings towards the
partner bank is relatively small (95 LKR/month, 0.86 USD/month), and even the direction for formal bank
savings and total savings is not consistent across both estimating equations (see Appendix Table A.4).
Given the percent gains in monthly deposits to the formal sector, this inconsistency in levels is suggestive
that increased saving amounts are driven by small savers, likely at the extensive margin.24
Figure 3 graphs the CDF by treatment status of the mean in monthly saving deposits with the partner
bank and change in mean monthly formal and total savings deposits. We find strong evidence of increased
savings with the partner bank – Figure 2a highlights significant movement along the extensive margin into
saving with the partner bank. Averaging at each percentile ranking, the CDF of the treatment sample does
first order stochastically dominate the controls’ savings in the partner bank. This is corroborated by both
the KS statistic of .207 and the SP statistic of .369, both of which are statistically significant.
We find less robust support for an increase in formal savings - though the KS statistic is statistically
significant at the 10 percent level, the SP statistic is not. Figure 3b does find that formal savings by those
offered the free mobile deposit service is primarily to the right of the control. The shifted CDF supports the
movement coming from the middle. We do find the expected increase in formal savings along the extensive
margin and small savers, but this difference is small and easily dominated by behavior of larger savers. In
contrast, we find no support for increased total savings, and the distributions lay virtually on top of one
another at almost every savings amount (Figure 3c).
These results suggest that the intervention was effective in diverting savings towards the partner bank,
but this did not result in a meaningful increases in total savings. Furthermore, the increase was too small to
23 This summary statistic is based on the monthly survey panel sample in the post intervention period for the surveys in
which the sample report partner savings.
24 Due to the skewed distribution of savings and that we observe no consistent statistical increase when using saving amounts,
it is difficult to speculate on the substitution of other savings devices.

15

Table 2: Effect of Free Mobile Deposit Offer

(1)
Partner
savings

(2)
1[Formal
deposit]

(3)
Formal
savings

(4)
1[Any
deposit]

(5)
Total
savings

Panel A: Post period (December 2011 - November 2013)
Free Mobile Deposit Offer
Deposit Offer
Observations (Ind)

0.442∗∗∗
(0.0758)

0.0249∗
(0.0145)

0.131
(0.135)

-0.00538
(0.00760)

-0.0249
(0.0952)

790

803

803

803

803

Panel B: All months with individual fixed effects
Free Mobile
Deposit Offer * Post
Observations (Ind-month)

0.0382∗∗∗
(0.0104)

0.287∗∗∗
(0.0903)

-0.00520
(0.00811)

-0.0283
(0.0714)

20028

20028

20028

20028

Control Mean

.33

.19

1.70

.93

8.14

KS Statistic
p-value
SP Statistic
p-value

.207
0.00
.369
.012

.103
.026
.521
.062

.0929
.059
.536
.202

.037
.940
.42
.499

.051
.664
.458
.793

Estimations are conducted on the monthly panel sample. Savings variables are analyzed using the
Inverse Hyperbolic Sine, so the interpretation is as a log (percent impact). Outcomes are monthly
flows over the month prior to the survey wave, and the unit of observation is individual in Panel
A and individual-month in Panel B. All regressions control for the stratification variables used in
the randomization protocol and use robust standard errors. Panel A conducts a cross sectional
comparison of treatment and control outcomes using all post-treatment survey waves. Panel B uses
the full set of monthly surveys, includes individual and survey wave fixed effects, and uses inverse
propensity weights for attrition across survey waves to retain representativeness of the overall panel
sample. The Control Mean is the mean of control individuals’ means across post-treatment survey
waves for the given outcome variable. Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01

Figure 3: All individuals frequently surveyed

16

increase average deposits collected by the partner bank or the formal sector in a meaningful way, suggesting
limited scope for large profits or improved financial intermediation. The results do show that although the
intervention did not yield significant increases in savings deposits on average, there were shifts along the
distribution, particularly by small and marginal savers.
Among the control sample, the monthly formal savings usage rate (i.e., making a deposit into a formal
accounts) is only 19 percent, whereas the total monthly savings usage rate is 93 percent (i.e., making any
savings deposit); in general, formal savings is a small percentage of total savings. Perhaps unsurprisingly
then, we do not find support for downstream effects, including household consumption and labor earnings25 .
However, our December 2011 survey does reveal that despite this low use of formal savings, subjects have
a strong preference for bank savings; subjects overwhelmingly responded that banks were the most secure
methods for savings (82 percent), and was the easiest method for savings (48 percent) followed by cash in
hand (42 percent). This suggests that even though the intervention did not yield an increase in total savings
deposited, the shift towards the formal sector may have important welfare benefits to the individual that are
not captured in outcomes such as household consumption.

3.4

Sensitivity to Price

Table 3 tests for differences in savings behavior as a function of the fees levied on the service. We run
regressions equivalent to Equations (1) and (2), but replacing the dummy for treatment with the inverse
hyperbolic sine of the fee charged that individual to deposit. We limit our observations to those offered the
service and surveyed annually, meaning that we compare across randomized fee amounts only among those
offered the treatment.26 Because the fee variable contain zeros, we use its inverse hyperbolic sine (as with the
continuous outcomes) to preserve the elasticity (log-log) interpretation. In addition to the saving outcomes
reported in earlier tables, we also include Mobile Savings, the amount deposited through the mobile platform,
and Mobile Proportion, the ratio of saving deposits observed through the mobile platform to the total saving
deposits reported to the partner bank.27 We continue to use the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation for
both the fee and the savings deposits to provide an elasticity interpretation to γ1 .
We observe a price elasticity that is not statistically different from zero.28 For differences in amounts
(i.e., without using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation), we do not observe any statistically significant
differences in monthly deposits in the partner bank (even when limited to just mobile deposits), in formal
25 Household consumption is a measure of total monthly expenditure by the household, and labor earnings is total monthly
income earned from economic activity.
26 Unlike the previous analysis that used high frequency (primarily monthly) survey data, these estimations have two observations for the baseline period (i.e., prior to the offer letters) and two observations after the mobile deposit service was introduced
(i.e., after the offer letters).
27 For those who do not report any deposits to the partner bank, we record Mobile Proportion as zero. Assuming that the fee
deterred use of the partner bank, this will bias our estimates in favor of finding a significant price elasticity for the service.
28 Online Appendix Table A.5 confirms no consistent or meaningful percentage differences in savings deposits with the partner
bank, bank savings deposits, or total savings deposits as a function of the percentage point increase in the fee, and Online
Appendix Table A.6 finds these results are robust to the use of probability weights based on the predicted likelihood of being
in the panel sample as a function of baseline characteristics, confirming that our results are unlikely to be driven by differential
attrition.

17

Table 3: Price Sensitivity to Fees Offered

(1)
Mobile
savings

(2)
Mobile
proportion

(3)
Partner
savings

(4)
1[Formal
deposit]

(5)
Formal
savings

(6)
1[Any
deposit]

(7)
Total
savings

Panel A: Post period (December 2011 - November 2013)
Fee (IHS)

Observations (Ind)

-0.0196
(0.223)

-0.000630
(0.768)

-0.0124
(0.845)

-0.000604
(0.954)

-0.0435
(0.635)

-0.00505
(0.400)

-0.0978
(0.110)

1104

1104

1104

1104

1104

1104

1104

Panel B: All months with individual fixed effects
Fee (IHS) *Post

Observations (Ind-month)
Free Treatment Mean

.19

.01

1.18

0.00725
(0.556)

0.0396
(0.707)

0.000400
(0.966)

-0.0558
(0.509)

4317

4317

4317

4317

.27

2.35

.94

8.26

Estimation conducted on the annual sample within which mobile transfer fees were randomized. Saving variables and fees
are analyzed using Inverse Hyperbolic Sine, so the interpretation is as an elasticity (percent impacts). Mobile proportion
is recorded as 0 for those who did not deposit any partner savings. All regressions control for the stratification variables
used in the randomization protocol and use robust standard errors. Panel A conducts a cross-sectional comparison of
treated and control outcomes using all annual post-treatment survey waves. Panel B uses the full set of annual surveys,
including individual and survey wave fixed effects, and uses inverse propensity weights for attrition across rounds to make
the results representative of the overall panel sample. Free Treatment Mean is the mean of the individuals’ mean of those
in the annual sample who received the deposit-service for free across post-treatment survey waves. Standard errors in
parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

18

savings, or in total savings (see Appendix Table A.7).
Combined with the increases we observed in Table 2, this suggests that the mobile-deposit offer resulted
in increased savings with the partner bank and formal saving deposits regardless of the price charged. The
lack of price sensitivity we observe is largely driven by the low fees; at 2 and 4 percent fees we do not
observe a consistent decrease in use as the fee increases and differences in using the service are generally not
statistically significant. However, we do observe that the total amounts deposited using the mobile channel
significantly drops for the group charged 8 percent (126 LKR versus 389 LKR mean deposits in the free
group, averaged by individual over the entire observed period, significant at 5 percent), though deposits
in the partner bank do not. This suggests that at this higher fee, people were still interested in the bank
account at the partner bank, but sidestepped the mobile-deposit service. Coupled with the mobile-deposits
being a relatively small percent of total reported deposits at all prices, the results suggest that individuals
on average may not be willing to pay for the removal of distance related costs, but that the fees associated
with opening the savings account were an important transaction cost that reduced savings with a specific
provider.

4

Examining heterogeneity in demand

Given the relatively low average adoption rates and moderate impacts on savings, we explore whether
baseline characteristics predicted demand and improved targeting would have yielded greater impact on
savings. Table 4 explores a number of theoretically motivated baseline characteristics on demand for the
service. In addition to the covariates displayed in Table 4, we additionally include the frequency of being
surveyed and treatment status as additional controls. We limit the sample to those who were successfully
delivered the offer letter, to ensure that the results are driven by demand for the service rather than an
inability to offer the service. These covariates were not pre-specified, and are instead motivated by our
review of the theoretical literature and our own priors as reflected in the sampling design. We therefore
consider these correlations to be exploratory in providing potential direction in targeting subgroups who
may have higher demand and greater marginal benefits from mobile-linked financial services.
In general, we find women, those living at intermediate distances from formal banks, and those owning
a mobile phone at baseline were significantly more likely to use the service. This suggests that those who
experienced a reduction in transit costs (e.g., women, who save smaller amounts more frequently relative to
men, and those living further from the bank), and those already familiar with the technology’s interface,
were most likely to use the service. But we fail to find support for other characteristics predicting demand,
including those supported by our sampling hypothesis (e.g., a reported willingness to pay for the service)
or theoretically motivated: phone capacity (reduced effort costs), present-biasedness (asymmetric costs for
depositing versus withdrawing), bank familiarity (trust related information asymmetry), baseline savings

19

Table 4: Determinants of Takeup of the Mobile Deposit Service

Female
Married
Owns mobile phone
Phone savvy
2 to 5 km from bank
More than 5km from bank
Bank experience
Present-biased
Discount rate
Willingness to take risks
Total savings
Household consumption
Willingness to Pay
Constant
Observations

(1)
Accepted
account

(2)
Demonstration
completed

(3)
Used
service

(4)
Amount
deposited,
IHS

(5)
Amount
deposited,
LKR

(6)
Deposited in
Partner Bank,
self-reported

0.0375∗∗
(0.0172)
0.0264
(0.0213)
0.0108
(0.0261)
0.00498
(0.00335)
0.0105
(0.0153)
-0.00166
(0.0207)
0.0173∗∗
(0.00723)
0.0301∗∗
(0.0153)
-0.0590
(0.0683)
-0.00120
(0.00268)
-0.00104
(0.00193)
-0.0422∗∗∗
(0.0149)
0.00225
(0.00173)
-0.0312
(0.0211)

0.0910∗∗∗
(0.0266)
0.0690∗∗
(0.0333)
0.0493
(0.0401)
0.00301
(0.00477)
0.0559∗∗
(0.0232)
-0.0393
(0.0328)
0.000241
(0.0108)
0.00584
(0.0242)
-0.0362
(0.0973)
-0.00413
(0.00401)
0.00122
(0.00311)
-0.0571∗∗∗
(0.0208)
0.00355
(0.00275)
0.0111
(0.0273)

0.0756∗∗
(0.0302)
-0.0330
(0.0336)
0.0733∗∗
(0.0360)
0.000276
(0.00444)
0.0948∗∗∗
(0.0244)
-0.0383
(0.0284)
-0.00845
(0.0107)
-0.0231
(0.0238)
0.0809
(0.103)
-0.00817∗∗
(0.00410)
0.00306
(0.00297)
0.000489
(0.0195)
-0.00172
(0.00319)
0.0190
(0.0295)

0.405∗∗
(0.191)
-0.207
(0.218)
0.537∗∗
(0.220)
-0.00479
(0.0284)
0.647∗∗∗
(0.157)
-0.177
(0.184)
-0.00717
(0.0696)
-0.150
(0.152)
0.772
(0.682)
-0.0521∗∗
(0.0260)
0.0136
(0.0190)
-0.00992
(0.124)
-0.00236
(0.0221)
0.121
(0.193)

-29.38
(141.7)
-253.6
(304.9)
186.1∗
(110.5)
6.311
(24.87)
294.1∗∗
(140.5)
67.25
(141.7)
98.40∗
(57.85)
-27.12
(120.7)
518.5
(530.0)
-2.704
(12.14)
-16.24
(21.23)
-109.5
(148.2)
38.71
(28.77)
123.1
(194.5)

0.00428
(0.0302)
0.0331
(0.0336)
0.0413
(0.0367)
0.00622
(0.00475)
0.0812∗∗∗
(0.0247)
0.0511
(0.0329)
0.0133
(0.0112)
-0.0175
(0.0253)
0.0176
(0.105)
-0.00956∗∗
(0.00420)
0.00504
(0.00316)
0.0122
(0.0204)
0.00427
(0.00337)
0.0367
(0.0312)

1504

1504

1504

1504

1504

1498

Account Accepted is based on enumerator reports. Demonstration completed, Used service, Total Amount Deposited are based on
institutional data provided by the partner bank. Deposited in Partner Bank is an indicator of whether the respondent self-reported
depositing savings to the partner bank in the previous month on one of the two annual surveys conducted after the roll out of the
mobile-deposit service. IHS refers to amounts transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine function. Demonstration completed
indicates that the individual is observed in the partner bank’s dataset as having used the service. Regressions pool monthly and
annual samples. Regressions are conditional upon the letter being delivered and being in the Panel Sample, include treatment status
and frequency of being surveyed as additional covariates, and use robust standard errors.
∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

20

(higher value for the service).29,30
Those living 2 to 5 km from a bank branch are 11 percentage points more likely to try the service and
deposited 70 percent more through the service. This suggests that those living closer may not value the
reduction in distance costs as much, and that this benefit tapers off at greater distances, perhaps due to
costs of withdrawals. We additionally find that measures of time requirements for banking services are also
correlated with higher adoption rates (not shown). This highlights that a primary mechanism for usage is
through reducing distance related transaction costs.
Among women, we observe an 8 percentage point greater likelihood of trying the service, and a 40 percent
increase in the amount deposited through the mobile-deposit service relative to men. The lack of a difference
in total amounts is due to the non-normal distribution of savings deposits and is consistent with gender
patterns at baseline – women are more likely than men to save some amount, but conditional on saving, men
save larger amounts. This baseline difference suggests women may indeed value the service more as they are
smaller and more frequent savers, with arguably higher mobility costs and other-control concerns.
Finally, for those who already owned a mobile phone at baseline, they were no more likely to go through
the steps of learning the service, but were more likely to use the service (7 percentage points) and deposited
58 percent more through the service, for an increased amount of 190 LKR (1.73 USD. This suggests that
despite the simplicity of the product, the learning costs were high for those who were not previously exposed
to the underlying technology.
Given the significant number of non-adopters and evidence of a distributional shift even in the absence
of large difference in means, we explore whether targeting the intervention among women and those living
at intermediate distances would have been more effective. We do this by expanding Eq (1) and Eq (2) to be
a difference-in-difference, Eq (3), and a triple-difference, Eq (4), with respect to the baseline characteristic
of interest:
SavingsDepositssi = β0 + β1 M obileOf f erF reesi + β2 T argetsi + β3 M obileOf f erF ree ∗ T argetsi + µs + s i
(3)
SavingsDepositssit = β0 + β1 M obileOf f erF ree ∗ P ostsit + β2 T arget ∗ P ostsit + β3 M obileOf f erF ree ∗ T arget
P ostsit + wt + αi + sit
(4)
where Target is the characteristic of interest. β3 signifies the additional marginal effect of the intervention of
belonging to the subgroup of interest relative to the average effect of those not belonging (β1 ). Our primary
29 We see similar patterns in demand if we replace the indicator for living 2km to 5km from the bank with self-reported time
to bank, with the only difference being no significant increase in the amount deposited when measured in LKR. We prefer to
use the indicator variable for bank distance, rather than a continuous variable, to allow for graphical representations of the
distribution conditional on distance. These distance ranges (under 2km, 2 to 5 km, and over 5km) were defined prior to the
intervention and were used to stratify the original listing for the study’s sample.
30 Though we do not observe present-biasedness as being correlated with demand for the service, we still explore heterogeneous
effects given the strong theoretical foundation of commitment devices and present-biasedness in saving decision. In general, we
do not find support for heterogeneous returns to the present bias. These results are presented in an online appendix.

21

hypothesis of interest is H0 : β1 + β3 = 0, testing for the total effect of the intervention on the potentially
targeted sub-group.31
Table 5, Column 1 finds that the increase in savings being deposited into the partner bank is significantly
higher among women offered the mobile-deposit service. The mean increase found among women is twice as
large as that of treated men. Though not statistically different from men, we do observe that women offered
the free mobile-deposit service are more likely to make a monthly deposit into formal savings (6 percentage
point increase), and have higher formal savings (55 percent). Additionally, we observe a marginally significant
increase in total savings of 23 percent among women. This suggests that women, relative to men, were less
likely to substitute saving deposits to the partner bank and formal savings deposits from alternative saving
sources. In fact, the negative point estimate suggests a potential of men substituting at a rate greater than
1 to 1 such that there is a net decline in total savings when offered the mobile-deposit service. Overall, our
results suggest that the mobile-deposit service was useful to women, who on average save small amounts
more frequently.
Similarly, among those at the intermediate distance (2km to 5km from a bank), we observe higher partner
bank and formal savings deposits, with some potential for a corresponding increase in total savings. Table 6
finds increased deposits to the partner bank (79 percent) and in formal deposits (26 percent) among those
living in the intermediate distance range. Though Panel A finds an increase in total savings, this is less
robust when controlling for savings deposited in the period prior to the intervention. Our results by distance
suggests that though substitution from formal savings may be comparatively less compared to those living
closer and further, it is still the case that the increased deposits in the partner bank is being sourced from
alternative savings resulting in a lack of transformative increased savings.
These differences by gender and distance are echoed in our measures for changes in the distribution of
savings.32 However, similar to the total sample, when estimating impact on deposit amounts, as opposed
to percent changes, results generally remain statistically insignificant. For both females and those living at
intermediate distances, the increased partner savings suggests the first month alone is enough to cover the
initial subsidy for opening the bank account (502 LKR and 703 LKR33 , respectively). For females, we see a
statistically insignificant gain in formal savings (1,025 LKR) and an increase in total savings (3,114 LKR)
that is statistically significant. In contrast, for those living at intermediate distances, we see a statistically
31 We do not show heterogeneity by those who owned a mobile phone at baseline, as this is a significant portion of the sample
and is unlikely to be a characteristic that would be used for targeting to improve financial inclusion.
32 Appendix Figure 1a and 2a depicts the CDF of savings in the partner bank and changes in formal and total savings by
gender and intermediate distance, respectively. They show an increase to the partner bank in both the extensive and intensive
margin. This effect is corroborated by a KS statistic of .375 and .32 and the SP statistic of .46 and .413, respectively, all of
which are statistically significant with p − value < .001. Appendix Figure 1b further illustrates the increased savings in formal
banking more generally by women, with a KS statistic of .237 (p − value = .028), and SP Statistic of .58 (p − value = .115).
Appendix Figure 1c finds no apparent difference in the distribution of total savings by gender, though for the most part, those
with the mobile-deposit offer are either to the right or on par with the control for every ranking; the corresponding KS statistic
is .118 (p − value = .664) and SP statistic is .52 (p − value.44). Appendix Figure 2b and 2c show less convincing evidence of
an increase in formal savings or total savings by distance, however. By distance, for formal savings we estimate a KS statistic
of .142 (p − value = .08) and SP statistic of .55 (p − value = .166); for total savings, a KS of .118 (p − value = .206) and SP
of .497 (p − value = .561).
33 This marginal difference is statistically significant at the one percent level.

22

Table 5: Differential Impacts, by Gender

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Partner
savings

1[Formal
deposit]

Formal
savings

1[Any
deposit]

Total
savings

Panel A: Post period (December 2011 - November 2013)
Free Mobile
Deposit Offer (β1 )

0.352∗∗∗
(0.0859)

0.0182
(0.0157)

0.0715
(0.151)

-0.00928
(0.00854)

-0.104
(0.108)

Free Mobile
Deposit Offer * Female (β3 )

0.482∗∗
(0.194)

0.0465
(0.0397)

0.387
(0.339)

0.0225
(0.0189)

0.411∗
(0.227)

Observations (Ind)
β1 + β3
Prob > F-statistic

790
0.831∗∗∗
0.00

803
.0695∗
0.0754

803
0.4867
0.1295

803
0.0121
0.4323

803
0.272
0.1212

Panel B: All months with individual fixed effects
Free Mobile Deposit
Offer * Post (β1 )

0.0316∗∗∗
(0.0114)

0.211∗∗
(0.100)

-0.00955
(0.00927)

-0.102
(0.0816)

Free Mobile Deposit
Offer * Post * Female (β3 )

0.0293
(0.0279)

0.308
(0.231)

0.0194
(0.0186)

0.347∗∗
(0.164)

Observations (Ind-month)
β1 + β3
Prob > F-statistic

20028
0.0642∗∗
0.0166

20028
0.552∗∗
0.0112

20028
0.0087
.5417

20028
0.233∗
0.0841

.15
.30
.498
.279

.237
.028
.58
.115

.078
.97
.382
.542

.118
.664
.52
.440

KS Statistic
p-value
SP Statistic
p-value

.375
.000
.46
.005

Female is an indicator for the subject being female. Estimations are conducted on the monthly panel
sample. Savings variables are analyzed using the Inverse Hyperbolic Sine, so the interpretation is as a
log (percent impact). Outcomes are monthly flows over the month prior to the survey wave, and the
unit of observation is individual in Panel A and individual-month in Panel B. All regressions control for
the stratification variables used in the randomization protocol and use robust standard errors. Panel
A conducts a cross sectional comparison of treatment and control outcomes using all post-treatment
survey waves. Panel B uses the full set of monthly surveys, includes individual and survey wave fixed
effects, and uses inverse propensity weights for attrition across survey waves to retain representation of
the overall panel sample. Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

23

Table 6: Differential Impacts, by Distance to the Bank

(1)
Partner
savings

(2)
1[Formal
deposit]

(3)
Formal
savings

(4)
1[Any
deposit]

(5)
Total
savings

Panel A: Post period (December 2011 - November 2013)
Free Mobile
Deposit Offer (β1 )

0.208∗
(0.117)

0.00371
(0.0222)

-0.0790
(0.205)

-0.0301∗∗∗
(0.0115)

-0.223
(0.147)

Free Mobile Deposit
Offer * Intermediate Distance (β3 )

0.577∗∗∗
(0.168)

0.0528
(0.0326)

0.512∗
(0.303)

0.0546∗∗∗
(0.0165)

0.514∗∗
(0.209)

Free Mobile Deposit
Offer * Far Distance

0.0762
(0.213)

0.00588
(0.0393)

0.0801
(0.358)

0.0237
(0.0213)

0.0418
(0.262)

Observations (Ind)
β1 + β3
Prob > F-statistic

790
0.785∗∗∗
0.00

803
.0565∗∗
0.0176

803
0.433∗
0.0527

803
.0245∗∗
0.0363

803
0.291∗∗
0.0499

Panel B: All months with individual fixed effects
Free Mobile Deposit
Offer * Post (β1 )

0.0348**
(0.0157)

0.290**
(0.136)

-0.0157
(0.0120)

-0.0934
(0.106)

Free Mobile Deposit Offer
*Post * Intermediate Distance (β3 )

0.00255
(0.0229)

-0.0305
(0.200)

0.0331*
(0.0177)

0.266*
(0.157)

Free Mobile Deposit Offer
*Post * Far Distance

0.0160
(0.0304)

0.0521
(0.260)

-0.00613
(0.0236)

-0.167
(0.204)

Observations (Ind-month)
β1 + β3
Prob > F-statistic

20028
0.0373**
0.0259

20028
0.2595*
0.0759

20028
0.0174
0.1818

20028
0.1726
0.1139

.172
.018
.529
.103

.142
.080
.55
.166

.074
.748
.458
.230

.118
.206
.497
.561

KS Statistic
p-value
SP Statistic
p-value

.320
.000
.413
.006

Intermediate distance refers to households 2-5 km from the nearest bank, Far Distance refers to households located
greater than 5 km from the nearest bank. Estimations are conducted on the monthly panel sample. Savings
variables are analyzed using the Inverse Hyperbolic Sine, so the interpretation is as a log (percent impact).
Outcomes are monthly flows over the month prior to the survey wave, and the unit of observation is individual
in Panel A and individual-month in Panel B. All regressions control for the stratification variables used in the
randomization protocol and use robust standard errors. Panel A conducts a cross sectional comparison of treatment
and control outcomes using all post-treatment survey waves. Panel B uses the full set of monthly surveys, includes
individual and survey wave fixed effects, and uses inverse propensity weights for attrition across survey waves to
retain representation of the overall panel sample. Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01

24

insignificant reduction in formal savings (1,575 LKR) and increase in total savings (1,167 LKR)34 .

5

Conclusion

Our experiment is one of the first to examine the potential for using mobile phone-linked bank accounts
to encourage savings. We find that the introduction of a mobile-deposit service with zero transaction fees
significantly increased the share of savings deposited with the partner institution and in the formal banking
sector more generally. However, we observe no increase in total household savings or in downstream welfare
measures, such as household consumption or labor earnings. Moreover, while the effect on partner bank
deposits is proportionally large, the increases were driven by small savers and hence we do not find statistically
significant gains in the average level of deposits, suggesting a lack of meaningful increases in deposits from
the bank’s perspective. Several patterns in the data for subsamples suggest that the groups we expected to
benefit most from the reduced transaction costs, such as women and those living at intermediate distances
from banks, did indeed have had higher demand for and impact from the service.
Overall, we do not find a transformative effect on total savings from providing a mobile-deposit service.
This is despite a concentrated effort to reduce barriers to a minimum (e.g., by removing bank account fees and
offering demonstrations of the service) and despite the intervention being a combined effect of mobile money
and formal saving benefits. Our results suggest limited effects from increasing convenience and reducing
transaction costs for savings deposits. This is further supported by the lack of responsiveness to the price of
using the service and the large share of deposits made to accounts via traditional channels.
The recent work by Dupas et al. (forthcoming) finds similarly modest effects from increasing bank access by eliminating pecuniary costs for opening bank accounts. Our results suggest it is unlikely that the
additional reduction in transaction costs gained from introducing mobile savings will transform saving rates,
at least in an environment with relatively well developed and low-cost banking options such as Sri Lanka.
This is consistent with studies in contexts more integrated with mobile money that focus on the impact
of savings from mobile money or connecting formal accounts to existing mobile-money users (Batista and
Vicente, 2017; Bastian et al., 2018; Jack and Suri, 2016; Batista and Vincente, 2016). While it still may be
the case that the impact on savings would be greater in places that are more familiar and integrated with
mobile money or where banks are more remote, our findings still highlight that a “build it and they will
come” solution is not enough for people to internalize the benefits of reduced transaction costs related to
formal saving devices.
Our results highlight two potential explanations for why reducing transaction costs for formal deposits
may generate modest marginal gains in increasing savings. First, though removing transaction costs is
critical for savings efficiency, the marginal gain from reduced transaction costs may be relatively small due
34 The estimates for saving amounts with the partner bank use the estimating equation in Panel A, and estimates for formal
and total savings amount use the estimating equation in Panel B. Estimates for formal and total savings are not meaningfully
different between the two estimating equations.

25

to the presence of easily accessed informal saving methods. This suggests that we should think of the
marginal benefits to formal savings products relative to the status quo provided by informal saving devices.
This may also explain heterogeneity observed in the savings mobilization literature - perhaps interventions
that address behavioral constraints are especially promising as they may not be solved by either formal or
informal saving methods Further progress in generating financial inclusion by ‘banking the unbanked’ will
depend on improving our understanding of the ways that formal financial services differ from and improve
upon informal financial options.
Second, the gains from reducing transaction costs in saving may be mediated by other constraints.
Specifically, our paper, along with others on mobile money, focuses on reducing the transaction costs of
deposits. There is good reason to do so: deposits are more frequent than withdrawals and such asymmetrical
costs may be well-founded given concerns of present-biasedness (i.e., these asymmetrical costs serve as a
commitment device). However, this pattern of the frequency of saving deposits relative to withdrawals may
instead reflect the high cost of withdrawal that is present in mobile money and many informal devices (e.g.,
ROSCAs and Seetus). It could be that reduced withdrawal costs are an important transaction costs that
inhibit greater use of saving accounts (consistent with the fact that those far from banks are less likely
to save using our mobile product than those at intermediate distances). This is a characteristic missing
in most saving devices and warrants further research, especially given its natural trade-off with addressing
behavioral constraints. In general, our modest results suggest that a better understanding of technology’s
role in altering substitutability across saving mechanisms is important in understanding the promise and
limitations of digital finance.

26

References
Ashraf, Nava. 2009. “Spousal control and intra-household decision making: An experimental study in the
Philippines.” American Economic Review, 99(4): 1245–77.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. “Deposit Collectors.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 5(2): 1–24.
Bastian, Gautam, Iacopo Bianchi, Markus Goldstein, and Joao MOntalvao. 2018. “Improving
Access to Savings Through Mobile Money, with and without Business Training: Experimental Evidence
from Tanzania.” Working Paper.
Batista, Catia, and Pedro C. Vicente. 2017. “Improving Access to Savings Through Mobile Money:
Experimental Evidence from Smallholder Farmers in Mozambique.” Working Paper.
Batista, Catia, and Pedro C. Vincente. 2016. “Introducing Mobile Money in Rural Mozambique: Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment.” Working Paper.
Burbidge, John B., Lonnie Magee, and A. Leslie Robb. 1988. “Alternative Transformations to Handle
Extreme Values of the Dependent Variable.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 83(401): 123–
127.
Callen, Michael, Suresh De Mel, Craig McIntosh, and Christopher Woodruff. 2014. “What are
the headwaters of formal savings? Experimental evidence from Sri Lanka.” National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Chakrovorti, Bhaskar. 2017. “One Year After India Killed Off Cash, Here’s What Other Countries Should
Learn From It.” Harvard Business Review.
Cole, Shawn, Thomas Sampson, and Bilal Zia. 2011. “Prices or Knowledge? What Drives Demand
for Financial Services in Emerging Markets?” Journal of Finance, 66(6): 1933–1967.
Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2013. “Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
5(1): 163–92.
Dupas, Pascaline, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson, and Diego Ubfal. forthcoming. “Banking the
Unbanked? Evidence from Three Countries.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Dupas, Pascaline, Sarah Green, Anthony Keats, and Jonathan Robinson. 2012. “Challenges in
Banking the Rural Poor: Evidence from Kenya’s Western Province.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 17851.

27

Flory, Jeffrey A. 2011. “Micro-Savings and Informal Insurance in Villages: How Financial Deepening Affects Safety Nets of the Poor, A Natural Field Experiment.” Working Papers 2011-008, Becker Friendman
Institute for Research in Economics.
Goss, Salah, Ignacio Mas, Dan Radcliffe, and Evelyn Stark. 2011. “The Next Challenge: Channeling
Savings Through Mobile Money Schemes.” Discussion Paper, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
Jack, William, and Tavneet Suri. 2014. “Risk Sharing and Transactions Costs: Evidence from Kenya’s
Mobile Money Revolution.” American Economic Review, 104(1): 183–223.
Jack, William, and Tavneet Suri. 2016. “The Long-run Poverty and Gender Impacts of Mobile Money.”
Science, , (6317).
Mann, H. B., and D. R. Whitney. 1947. “On a Test of Whether one of Two Random Variables is
Stochastically Larger than the Other.” Ann. Math. Statist., 18(1): 50–60.
Prina, Silvia. 2015. “Banking the poor via savings accounts: Evidence from a field experiment.” Journal of
Development Economics, 115(C): 16–31.
Schaner, Simone. 2016. “The Cost of Convenience? Transaction Costs, Bargaining Power, and Savings
Account Use in Kenya.” Journal of Human Resources.
Suri, Tavneet. 2017. “Mobile Money.” Annual Review of Economics, 9(1): 497–520.
The

World

Bank.

2013.

“Financial

Inclusion

financialinclusion/ country/ sri-lanka .

28

Data.”

http: // datatopics. worldbank. org/

A

Variable Appendix

Variable Name: Definition
Female: Indicator for responding female to gender.
Married: Indicator for responding married to marital status.
Present-Biased: Suppose someone was going to pay you Rs. 1500, 6 months from now. He/she offers to
pay you a lower amount in 5 months time. What amount received in 5 months time would make you just as
happy as receiving Rs. 1500 in 6 months time? Indicator for whether reported discount rate in this question
is greater than when asked about the present (above question).
Discount Rate: Suppose someone was going to pay you Rs. 1500 1 month from now. He/she offers to pay
you a lower amount today. What amount today would make you just as happy as receiving Rs. 1500 in 1
month? The discount rate is equal to (1500 − response)/1500.
Willingness to Take Risks: Are you generally a person who is fully prepared to take risks or do you try
to avoid taking risks? Please tick a box on the scale, where the value 0 means:“unwilling to take risks”-a
very careful person and the value 10 means: “fully prepared to take risks”- a careless person. Which point
describes you the best?
Owns Mobile Phone: Does anyone (including you) living in the household have a cellular phone? Indicator for yes.
Phone Savviness: First component of principle component analysis of the following: How often do you
add money to your phone network (indicator for weekly or daily)? What is the approximate distance from
your home to the nearest mobile phone topup card/reload agent (Indicator for 200m or less)? What is the
assessment of the quality of cellular reception (signals) in the place you live (Indicator for excellent or good)?
How often do you use a mobile phone to receive or make calls? How often do you use a mobile phone to send
or receive text messages? Have you ever added or changed a SIM card in a phone? How many SIM cards
do you have in your current phone? What is your assessment of the quality of cellular reception (signals) in
the place you live (On any network)? How often do you add money to your phone network? What is the
approximate distance from your home to the nearest mobile phone topup card/reload agent? Assume that
you needed to purchase topup card or reload from your mobile phone. How much time would it take for you
to go from your home to your agent, complete the transaction, and return back to your home (minutes)?
If you had a technical problem with your cell phone, who would you mainly ask for help? How often do
you change your ringtone? What are other services that you, yourself, obtain via your mobile phone: Phone
camera, Internet access, Phone games, Phone video, listen to phone radio, phone tv, phone mp3/mp4/3gp
(songs), phone calculator, phone alarm/reminder, multimedia message services, data exchange services (e.g.,
Bluetooth), Phone torch, phone dictionary, phone clock, phone calendar, other (specify).
Nearest Bank Btwn 2 and 5 km: Indicator for nearest bank (i.e., distance from the nearest town)
between two and five km.
Willingness to Pay: In many countries a fee is charged for the use of this service. So in order to deposit
29

Rs 100, one might have to incur a fee of about Rs 5-20. Despite the fee, customers are still willing to use this
service due to saving in time and cost and the convenience of being able to deposit money at any time. If you
were being charged a fee for this service, what is the maximum fee that you would be willing to bear in order
to deposit Rs 100? (Missing responses were coded as 0. Results are robust to excluding missing values.)
Bank Experience: First component of principle component analysis of the following: Trust Banks, Has
Bank Account, Used ATM (Yearly Recall).
Has Bank Account: Please tell me about the formal savings product that you use. Do you have
an account with this bank or institution: Private bank, government bank, microfinance organizations,
development banks, national savings banks, samrudhi bank, sanasa bank, development project such as
IDRP/REAP/ABG, Farmers Organization, other (specify).
Trusts Banks: I am going to name a number of organizations. For each one, could you tell me how
much confidence you have in them: is it a great deal of confidence, quite a lot of confidence, not very much
confidence, or none at all? Banks/Financial Institution. Indicator for “a great deal”.
Used ATM (Yearly Recall): How often do you use an ATM card to withdraw money from a bank?
Indicator for at least once a year.
Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Transformation:
Mobile savings: The amount deposited into the partner bank through the mobile-deposit service.
Partner Savings: After deducting the total amount of money given to others from the total amount of
money received, you had Rs (mention total amount from previous question) remaining for saving or spending
in the past month of . Can you tell me how much money you saved using the following methods – Saving in
an institution such as a bank? Money saved in [partner bank]?
Formal Savings: After deducting the total amount of money given to others from the total amount of
money received, you had Rs (mention total amount from previous question) remaining for saving or spending
in the past month of . Can you tell me how much money you saved using the following methods – Saving in
an institution such as a bank? After September 2012, this was replaced by the sum of two questions “Money
saved in [partner bank]?” and “Money saved in bank accounts in your name at banks other than [partner
bank]?”
Total Savings: After deducting the total amount of money given to others from the total amount of
money received, you had Rs (mention total amount in previous question) remaining for saving or spending
in the past month of . Can you tell me how much money you saved using the following methods – total?
Mobile proportion: The observed amount deposited through the mobile-deposit service divided by the
self-reported total amount deposited into the partner bank. 1[Formal Savings]: Indicator for Formal Savings being greater than 0 in the given month.
1[Any Deposit]: Indicator for Total Savings being greater than 0 in the given month.
Annual Sample: Indicator for subjects surveyed only once per year (as opposed to Monthly Survey Sample).

30

Letter Delivered: An indicator for whether enumerators reported providing the offer to the subject.
Account Accepted: An indicator for whether enumerators reported the offer was accepted by the subject
(e.g., accepted phone).
Demonstration Completed: An indicator for whether enumerators reported completing the demonstration for the subject.
Used Service: An indicator for whether the subject made a deposit through the mobile-deposit service as
reported by the partner bank.
Frequent User: An indicator for whether the subject made ten or more deposits through the mobile-deposit
service as reported by the partner bank.
Amount Deposited (through mobile deposit service): The total amount deposited by the subject
through the mobile deposit service as reported by the partner bank (transformed through the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation, unless otherwise noted).
Deposited in Partner Bank, self-reported: Indicator for whether the subject deposited in the partner
bank (Partner Savings > 0) in the given month.
Post: Indicator for December 2011 and onward, after the letters introducing the mobile-deposit service offer
were delivered.

31

B

Online Appendix Tables
Table A.1: Summary Means

Total Sample
(1)

Monthly Sample

Annual Sample

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Control

0%

0%

2%

4%

8%

Female

0.192

0.207

0.175

0.186

0.183

0.195

0.209

Married

0.848

0.813

0.851

0.882

0.867

0.894

0.798∗∗

Present-biased

0.302

0.299

0.308

0.317

0.313

0.253

0.322

Discount rate

0.084

0.074∗∗

0.090

0.082

0.089

0.075

0.094

Willingness to take risks

5.573

5.418

5.552

5.688

5.613

5.575

5.671

Owns mobile phone

0.892

0.905

0.890

0.896

0.900

0.873

0.884

Phone savvy

0.003

0.214

0.340

-0.096

-0.161

-0.470

-0.048

2 to 5 km from bank

0.397

0.413

0.361

0.412

0.407

0.401

0.404

More than 5km from bank

0.165

0.163

0.184

0.140

0.170

0.147

0.168

Bank experience

0.011

-0.048

0.020

0.106

0.017

0.046

-0.037

Observations (Ind)

1908

368

435

221

300

292

292

Variable definitions are provided in Appendix. For any given variable, at most two observations in a given category
were missing a response. Sample is conditional on being in the Panel Sample. Comparisons are made to the 0% fee
of the same survey frequency: Column 2 is compared to Column 3, and Column 5 to 7 is compared with Column
4. Comparisons across sub-samples include variables upon which the random assignment were stratified and uses
robust standard errors. *p<.10, **p<.05, ***p<.01.

32

Table A.2: Attrition

Dependent Variable:

Panel
Sample
(1)

Responds
to Survey
Wave
(2)

Panel
Sample
(3)

Responds
to Survey
Wave
(4)

Panel
Sample
(5)

Responds
to Survey
Wave
(6)

Panel
Sample
(7)

Responds
to Survey
Wave
(8)

-0.0121
(0.0211)

0.00227
(0.0217)

Panel A: Monthly Survey Sample
Free Mobile
Deposit Offer

-0.0124
(0.0134)

Free Mobile
Deposit Offer*Post
Observations
Control Mean
Sample

-0.0138
(0.0117)

-0.0116
(0.0354)

0.00362
(0.0246)

-0.00373
(0.0116)
837
.97
All

21762
.93
All

-0.0179
(0.0231)

-0.0183
(0.0258)
161
.95
Female

4186
.94
Female

-0.0240
(0.0189)
-0.0133
(0.0188)

325
.96
Mid-range
Distance

8450
.94
Mid-range
Distance

-0.0130
(0.0192)
251
.98
PresentBiased

6526
.94
PresentBiased

Panel B: Annual Survey Sample
2% Mobile
Deposit Offer

-0.0240
(0.0164)

2% Mobile Deposit
Offer*Post
4% Mobile
Deposit Offer

-0.0126
(0.0171)
-0.0314∗
(0.0171)

4% Mobile Deposit
Offer*Post
8% Mobile
Deposit Offer

-0.0167
(0.0102)
-0.0165
(0.0179)

-0.0492∗∗∗
(0.0184)

-0.0220∗∗
(0.0106)
-0.0347∗
(0.0183)

8% Mobile Deposit
Offer*Post
Observations
Free Offer Mean

-0.00639
(0.00953)

1168
.97

4672
.96

Panel is an indicator for whether the individual is observed in the panel sample, defined as having at least one survey response in the period
after the mobile deposit offer if rolled out (i.e., after the delivery of initial letters). Responded is an indicator for whether the individual
responded to the survey in the given month (or year for the annual sample) of the survey and is not conditional upon being observed in the
Panel Sample. Panel A is restricted to the monthly surveyed sample and Panel B is restricted to the annually surveyed sample. Post is an
indicator variable for survey rounds after the initial offer letters for the service were delivered (i.e., December 2011 and onward). Mid-range
distance refers to whether the individual lived two to five km from the closest bank. Regressions include variables upon which the random
assignment were stratified. Robust standard errors are used in regressions with Panel as the dependent variable, and standard errors are
clustered at the individual level in regressions with Responded as the dependent variable. *p<.10, **p<.05, ***p<.01.

33

Table A.3: Pre-Treatment Balance

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1[Formal deposit]

Formal savings

1[Any deposit]

Total savings

Panel A: All Subjects Surveyed Monthly
Free Mobile Deposit Offer

Observations

-0.0138

-0.161

-0.00113

-0.00807

(0.0152)

(0.134)

(0.0111)

(0.119)

7787

7787

7787

7787

Panel B: Annual Sample
2% Fee

0.0272

0.225

0.00494

0.0617

(0.0255)

(0.221)

(0.0233)

(0.214)

-0.0144

-0.129

-0.0162

-0.110

(0.0253)

(0.217)

(0.0239)

(0.215)

-0.0206

-0.226

-0.00856

-0.0528

(0.0252)

(0.215)

(0.0234)

(0.212)

Observations

2168

2168

2168

2168

Control Mean

.21

1.77

.87

7.50

4% Fee

8% Fee

Panel A are estimated on the monthly sample and Panel B is estimated on the annual sample. All regressions use
the panel sample, defined as having at least one observation in the post-treatment. Outcomes are monthly flows
over the month prior to the survey wave, and the unit of observation is the individual month. Savings variables
are analyzed using the Inverse Hyperbolic Sine, so the interpretation is as a log (percent impacts). Control Mean
are the mean of all individual-monthly flows in the pre-intervention period for those in the control. All regressions
control for the stratification variables used in the randomization protocol and cluster the standard errors at the
individual level. *p<.10, **p<.05, ***p<.01.

34

Table A.4: Effect of Free Mobile Deposit Offer, LKR

(1)

(2)

(3)

Partner

Formal

Total

savings

savings

savings

Panel A: Post period (December 2011 - November 2013)
Free Mobile Deposit Offer
Deposit Offer

Observations (Ind)

95.14

-801.4

-1533.7

(107.1)

(903.6)

(1571.8)

790

803

803

Panel B: All months with individual fixed effects
Free Mobile
Deposit Offer * Post

Observations (Ind-month)
Control Mean

281

788.3

9784.1

(631.5)

(7445.4)

20028

20028

2,832

8,733

Estimations are conducted on the monthly panel sample. Savings variables are in LKR . Outcomes
are monthly flows over the month prior to the survey wave, and the unit of observation is individual in
Panel A and individual month in Panel B. All regressions control for the stratification variables used
in the randomization protocol and use robust standard errors. Panel A conducts a cross sectional
comparison of treatment and control outcomes using all post-treatment survey waves. Panel B uses
the full set of monthly surveys, includes individual and survey wave fixed effects, and uses inverse
propensity weights for attrition across survey waves to make the results representative of the overall
panel sample. The Control Mean is all the mean of control individuals’ mean across post-treatment
survey waves for the given outcome variable. Standard errors in parentheses.
∗∗∗

p < 0.01

35

∗

p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,

Table A.5: Price Sensitivity by Percentage Point Increase in Fee

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Mobile

Mobile

Partner

1[Formal

Formal

1[Any

Total

savings

proportion

savings

deposit]

savings

deposit]

savings

Panel A: Post period (December 2011 - November 2013)
Fee

Observations (Ind)

-0.00839

-0.000388

0.00945

0.00332

0.0150

-0.00228

-0.0301

(0.106)

(0.528)

(0.661)

(0.346)

(0.620)

(0.272)

(0.147)

1104

1104

1104

1104

1104

1104

1104

Panel B: All months with individual fixed effects
Fee *Post

Observations (Ind-month)

0.00707*

0.0536

-0.000554

-0.0162

(0.086)

(0.123)

(0.863)

(0.571)

4317

4317

4317

4317

Estimation conducted on the annual sample within which mobile transfer fees were randomized. Saving variables are
analyzed using Inverse Hyperbolic Sine, so the interpretation the impact of a percentage increase in the fee on the percent
impact on savings. All regressions control for the stratification variables used in the randomization protocol and use robust
standard errors. Panel A conducts a cross-sectional comparison of treated and control outcomes using all annual posttreatment survey waves. Panel B uses the full set of annual surveys, including individual and survey wave fixed effects, and
uses inverse propensity weights for attrition across rounds to make the results representative of the overall panel sample.
Standard errors in parentheses.

∗

p < 0.10,

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01.

36

Table A.6: Price Sensitivity Weighted by Survey Non-response

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Mobile

Mobile

Partner

1[Formal

Formal

1[Any

Total

savings

proportion

savings

deposit]

savings

deposit]

savings

Panel A: Post period (December 2011 - November 2013)
IHS Fee

Observations (Ind)

-0.0199

-0.000691

-0.0171

-0.00102

-0.0440

-0.00544

-0.100

(0.216)

(0.751)

(0.790)

(0.923)

(0.635)

(0.362)

(0.101)

1100

1100

1100

1100

1100

1100

1100

Panel B: All months with individual fixed effects
IHS Fee*Post

Observations (Ind-month)

0.00730

0.0429

-0.000491

-0.0644

(0.554)

(0.683)

(0.958)

(0.442)

4301

4301

4301

4301

Estimation conducted on the annual sample within which mobile transfer fees were randomized. Saving variables and
fees are analyzed using Inverse Hyperbolic Sine, so the interpretation is as an elasticity (percent impacts). All regressions control for the stratification variables used in the randomization protocol, use robust standard errors, and weight
observations based on predicted likelihood of being observed in the Panel Sample as a function of baseline characteristics.
Panel A conducts a cross-sectional comparison of treated and control outcomes using all annual post-treatment survey
waves. Panel B uses the full set of annual surveys, including individual and survey wave fixed effects. Standard errors in
parentheses.

∗

p < 0.10,

∗∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗∗

p < 0.01.

37

Table A.7: Price Sensitivity by Percentage Point Increase in Fee, LKR

(1)
Mobile
savings

(2)
Partner
savings

(3)
Formal
savings

(4)
Total
savings

Panel A: Post period (December 2011 - November 2013)
Fee

Observations (Ind)

-1.676∗
(0.060)

16.56
(0.683)

-262.2∗
(0.079)

-368.6∗
(0.064)

1104

1104

1104

1104

Panel B: All months with individual fixed effects
Fee *Post

Observations (Ind-month)
Free Treatment Mean

21

578

-166.4
(0.211)

-263.2
(0.130)

4317

4317

4,200

9,338

Estimation conducted on the annual sample within which mobile transfer fees were randomized.
Saving variables are in LKR and fees are in percent charged. Mobile proportion is recorded as
0 for those who did not deposit any partner savings. All regressions control for the stratification
variables used in the randomization protocol and use robust standard errors. Panel A conducts a
cross-sectional comparison of treated and control outcomes using all annual post-treatment survey
waves. Panel B uses the full set of annual surveys, including individual and survey wave fixed effects,
and uses inverse propensity weights for attrition across rounds to make the results representative
of the overall panel sample. Free Treatment Mean is the mean of the mean of those in the annual
sample who received the deposit-service for free across post-treatment survey waves. Standard errors
in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

38

Table A.8: Differential Impacts, by Present Bias

(1)
Mobile
savings

(2)
Mobile
proportion

(3)
Partner
savings

(4)
1[Formal
deposit]

(5)
Formal
savings

(6)
1[Any
deposit]

(7)
Total
savings

Panel A: Post period (December 2011 - November 2013)
Free Mobile
Deposit Offer (β1 )

∗∗∗

0.254
(0.0358)

0.0170∗∗∗
(0.00487)

0.455∗∗∗
(0.0898)

0.0105
(0.0174)

-0.0224
(0.162)

-0.00621
(0.00868)

-0.0637
(0.110)

Free Mobile
Deposit Offer * Present-biased (β3 )

-0.0448
(0.0601)

-0.00265
(0.00718)

-0.0412
(0.169)

0.0477
(0.0319)

0.509∗
(0.295)

0.00274
(0.0172)

0.127
(0.215)

Observations (Ind)
β1 + β3
Prob > F-statistic

803
0.209∗∗∗
0.00

790
0.014∗∗∗
0.007

790
0.4151∗∗∗
0.0038

803
.0564∗∗
0.0284

803
0.4565*
0.0483

803
-0.00515
0.8165

803
0.0279
0.7313

Panel B: All months with individual fixed effects
Free Mobile Deposit
Offer * Post (β1 )

0.0239∗
(0.0124)

0.137
(0.108)

-0.00378
(0.00980)

-0.0329
(0.0860)

Free Mobile Deposit
Offer *Post * Present-biased (β3 )

0.0479∗∗
(0.0228)

0.496∗∗
(0.198)

-0.00452
(0.0174)

0.0147
(0.154)

Observations (Ind-month)
β1 + β3
Prob > F-statistic

20028
.0736∗∗∗
0.0002

20028
.648∗∗∗
0.0001

20028
-0.0109
.5646

20028
-0.0425
.8865

.120
.318
.532
.050

.219
.005
.597
.03

.076
.843
.381
.694

.075
.85
.499
.122

KS Statistic
p-value
SP Statistic
p-value

.231
.002
.232
.004

.083
.759
.079
.124

.229
.003
.36
.013

Estimations are conducted on the monthly panel sample. Savings variables are analyzed using the Inverse Hyperbolic Sine, so the
interpretation is as a log (percent impact). Outcomes are monthly flows over the month prior to the survey wave, and the unit of
observation is individual in Panel A and individual month in Panel B. All regressions control for the stratification variables used in the
randomization protocol and use robust standard errors. Panel A conducts a cross sectional comparison of treatment and control outcomes
using all post-treatment survey waves. Panel B uses the full set of monthly surveys, includes individual and survey wave fixed effects, and
uses inverse propensity weights for attrition across survey waves to make the results representative of the overall panel sample. Mobile
deposits are observed in the institutional data, Mobile proportion is Mobile Deposits (Column 1) relative to total deposits with the partner
bank (Column 3), and the remaining outcomes are self reported in survey data. Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
∗∗∗ p < 0.01

39

2
4
Mean Monthly Savings, IHS

6
-10

-5
0
Change in Mean Monthly Savings, IHS
5

F(X)

1

1

.8

.6

.4

.2

0

2

4
6
Mean Monthly Savings, IHS

8

1
.8
.6
.4
-10

-5
0
5
Change in Mean Monthly Savings, IHS

10

.2
0

0

2

4
6
Mean Monthly Savings, IHS

8

-10

-5
0
5
Change in Mean Monthly Savings, IHS

10

F(X)

F(X)
F(X)

F(X)

F(X)

1

.8

-4

Control

Treatment

.4

.2

0

.6

.4
.2
0

.6

.8

1

-2

0
2
4
Change in Mean Monthly Savings, IHS

-4

-2

0
2
4
Change in Mean Monthly Savings, IHS

-4

-2

2
4
0
Change in Mean Monthly Savings, IHS

Appendix Figure 3: Present-Biased
(a) Left: Mean Monthly Partner Bank Deposits; (b) Center: Change in Mean Monthly Formal Deposits; (c) Right: Change in Mean Monthly Total Deposits

0

F(X)

Appendix Figure 2: Intermediate Distance, 2 to 5 km from nearest bank
(a) Left: Mean Monthly Partner Bank Deposits; (b) Center: Change in Mean Monthly Formal Deposits; (c) Right: Change in Mean Monthly Total Deposits

0

F(X)

Appendix Figure 1: Females
(a) Left: Mean Monthly Partner Bank Deposits; (b) Center: Change in Mean Monthly Formal Deposits; (c) Right: Change in Mean Monthly Total Deposits

F(X)

.8

.6

.4

.2

0

1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0

1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0

1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0

40

6

6

6

