NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC HISTORY AND CONTEMPORARY CHALLENGES TO GLOBALIZATION
Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
Working Paper 25364
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25364

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

This paper has been written as a “Reviews and Reflections” piece for the Journal of Economic
History. I am very grateful to Dan Bogart, Ann Carlos, Bill Collins, Barry Eichengreen, Simon
Evenett, Tim Hatton, Morgan Kelly, Cormac Ó Gráda, and Jeff Williamson for their many
helpful suggestions and comments. The paper was written during a sabbatical year spent in the
School of Economics at University College Dublin and I am deeply appreciative of the School’s
hospitality and practical support. The usual disclaimer applies more than it normally does. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Economic History and Contemporary Challenges to Globalization
Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
NBER Working Paper No. 25364
December 2018
JEL No. F02,N70
ABSTRACT
The paper surveys three economic history literatures that can speak to contemporary challenges to
globalization: the literature on the anti-globalization backlash of the nineteenth century, focused
largely on trade and migration; the literature on the Great Depression, focused largely on capital
flows, the gold standard, and protectionism; and the literature on trade and warfare.

Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
All Souls College
University of Oxford
Oxford OX1 4AL, UK
and NBER
kevin.orourke@all-souls.ox.ac.uk

The growth of world trade slowed sharply after 2011, both in absolute terms and
relative to the growth of world output. Rather than growing faster than world
GDP, it only grew at the same speed; indeed, in 2016 it grew less rapidly.1 These
facts prompted concern on the part of organizations such as the World Trade
Organization (WTO) and International Monetary Fund, and led journalists to ask
whether we were witnessing the end of globalization. In 2015, for example, the
Washington Post suggested that “the phenomenon … may be coming to an end”. 2
During the following year, journalistic speculation regarding the imminent
demise of globalization increased still further, following the UK's Brexit
referendum in June and the election of Donald Trump to the US presidency in
November. Commentators and politicians have debated the causes of both
political upsets, as well as their potential consequences, and now academic
economists and political scientists are entering the fray (e.g. Hunt Alcott and
Matthew Gentzkow 2017; Sascha Becker et al. 2017; Swati Dhingra et al. 2017;
Ronald Inglehart and Pippa Norris 2016). What, if anything, can economic
history contribute to the discussion?

During the 1990s, as the integration of the international economy was deepening
at an accelerating rate, economic historians responded to the commentary of the
time by pointing out that globalization was not a new phenomenon, as did other
scholars such as Paul Hirst and Grahame Thompson (1996). They also argued
that it was not irreversible, since it had been reversed in the past. Paul Bairoch
(1989) had already written about the protectionist trade policy U-turn
1
2

https://www.wto.org/english/news_e/pres17_e/pr791_e.htm
"The End of Globalization?". The Washington Post, September 20 2015.

1

experienced in Europe from the late 1870s onwards. At the very end of his
Presidential Address to the Economic History Association, Jeffrey Williamson
suggested that late nineteenth century globalization might have “seeded its own
destruction”, by creating losers as well as winners (1996, p. 302). That
suggestion was followed up by authors such as Kevin O’Rourke (1997), Ashley
Timmer and Williamson (1998), Williamson (1997, 1998), and Timothy Hatton
and Williamson (1998), and was one of the main themes of O’Rourke and
Williamson (1999). Harold James (2001) continued the story into the interwar
period. The events of 2016 may have come as less of a surprise to authors such
as these.

But just as economic historians’ first instinct was to try to temper some of the
‘globaloney’ of the 1990s (Susan Strange 1998), so their first task today should
perhaps be to calm talk of the imminent demise of globalization. Economic
history has something to say about what deglobalization looks like, and about
whether what we are experiencing today matches that description. Economic
historians, and historians more generally, can speak to the issue of whether the
causes of Brexit and Trump were economic or not. And finally, economic history
has something to say about the political stresses to which globalization may be
subjected in the years ahead.

After a brief discussion of what I mean by "globalization" and "deglobalization",
and of whether we are already experiencing the latter, I consider three economic
history literatures that speak to the state of the world today: the 1990s literature
on the anti-globalization backlash of the late nineteenth century, focused in

2

particular on trade and migration; the literature on interwar protectionism; and
the literature on the links between trade and warfare.

DEFINING GLOBALIZATION

Globalization has many facets, several of which are noneconomic (e.g.,
international criminal justice or the globalization of culture). Economic
historians have, not surprisingly, focused on the economic dimensions of the
phenomenon. In this essay, therefore, when speaking of "globalization" I
primarily mean the integration of international markets for commodities, labor,
and capital. By the integration of markets, I mean reductions in the costs of doing
business internationally – of moving goods, people, or capital between countries
or continents. Those costs could fall because of better technology – such as better
navigation techniques, the discovery of new ocean routes, the construction of
canals, more efficient forms of overland or maritime transport – or because of
political factors promoting international economic integration, such as the
emergence of geopolitical stability or more liberal domestic trade policies.
Technological transfer is another important economic dimension of globalization
that is crucial to the long-run dynamics of economic growth. I will occasionally
allude to it, as well.

As O'Rourke and Williamson (2001) emphasize, globalization thus defined will
be reflected in declining price gaps between markets. Ceteris paribus falling costs
will lead to more trade (or migration, or capital flows, as the case may be), which
is why it makes sense to look at the size of flows as well as price gaps. It seems

3

reasonable on a priori grounds to expect that price gaps between markets that
were closer together fell earlier than price gaps between markets that were
further apart, and that ceteris paribus price gaps fell earlier for more valuable
commodities than for cheaper and bulkier ones. O'Rourke and Williamson
argued, based on the evidence available to them at the time, that intercontinental
price gaps only started to fall systematically in the nineteenth century. The claim
gave rise to an large literature (for a recent survey see Federico 2018). We now
know that while the volume of trade and the speed of price convergence were
indeed much more impressive in the nineteenth century than before, evidence of
price convergence can also be found during the early modern period (see for
example Pim de Zwart (2016) on the trade between the Netherlands and Asia).
O’Rourke and Williamson (2009) themselves argue that Vasco da Gama played
an important role in integrating Eurasian spice markets.

There is, of course, a vast literature on international trade during the early
modern, medieval, and even classical periods: long-distance markets may have
been characterized by large price gaps, but flows of commodities, and perhaps
more importantly of slaves, technology, germs, and specie were sufficient at
times to have transformative effects on economies (see inter alia Janet AbuLughod 1989; Dennis O. Flynn and Arturo Giráldez 2004; Ronald Findlay and
O’Rourke 2007; and Andrew Wilson and Alan K. Bowman (eds.) 2017). And just
as you can find evidence of globalization before the nineteenth century,
depending upon your definition, so also can you find evidence of deglobalization,
often linked to geopolitical upheaval such as the end of the pax Mongolica, the
disintegration of the Timurid Empire, or political crises in Persia or China

4

(Robert S. Lopez 1987, pp. 385-389; Morris Rossabi 1990). But as we will see,
just as the globalization of the nineteenth century and later was different from
what had gone before, so were the backlashes produced by it.

HAS GLOBALIZATION ENDED?

The 1930s remain the canonical example of deglobalization. That decade saw a
worldwide increase in tariffs, as well as widespread resort to quotas, exchange
controls, multiple exchange rates biased against imports, and a variety of
clearing arrangements. In contrast, average tariffs barely rose between 2008 and
2017, although 7.3% of world exports were facing higher tariffs in the latter year
than in the former (O'Rourke 2018a; personal communication from Simon
Evenett). It is true that 2018 saw the introduction of a wide range of tariffs by
the US administration, as well as retaliatory measures by several of its trading
partners. However, despite this fact, as well as the widespread resort to nontariff barriers of various kinds and policies artificially promoting exports,
documented by the Global Trade Alert database, most economic historians
would agree that interwar protection was far more ubiquitous and intrusive than
what we have seen since 2008.3 Figure 1 shows that as of 2017 US tariffs
remained at historically low levels.4 At the time of writing (November 2018), it

The Global Trade Alert database of state interventions affecting trade since
November 2008 is available at http://www.globaltradealert.org.
4 These are weighted average tariffs, and are thus subject to the criticisms
outlined in James E. Anderson and J. Peter Neary (2005). But few would dispute
that the Figure gives an accurate indication of long run trends in US average
tariffs.
3

5

seems entirely possible that Brexit will eventually lead to a serious
disintegration of markets linking the United Kingdom and European Union, and
the implications of President Trump for US trade policy and the WTO appear
increasingly alarming. But to date there has been no return to protectionism in
the aftermath of 2008 comparable to what was experienced after 1929.

[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]

World trade growth accelerated in 2017. But in any event, using trade volumes
alone as evidence of deglobalization is mistaken. These can rise or fall because of
underlying shifts in supply or demand, unrelated to the costs of doing business
across borders. If those costs do not change, and companies decide to slow or
even reverse their outsourcing activities because of changing relative wages, for
example, this hardly counts as “deglobalization”. That is why, as noted earlier,
many economic historians have used price evidence to assess the integration or
disintegration of international markets. Comparatively little work has been done
on the twentieth century, but what there is finds evidence of deglobalization in
the aftermath of the Great Depression. William Hynes, Jacks and O’Rourke
(2012) use prices of agricultural commodities taken from the International
Yearbook of Agricultural Statistics; Chris Hajzler and James MacGee (2015) use
retail food prices in Canada and the United States. Both papers find evidence of
increasing international price gaps during the 1930s.5 I am unaware of any
similar evidence for the period since 2008.

On the other hand, David Chilosi and Giovanni Federico (2015) find little or no
evidence of increasing Euro-Asian price gaps during the interwar period.
5

6

In summary, while the events of 2016 were dramatic, it is inaccurate to suggest
that the world has, to date, experienced extensive deglobalization. That could
still change in the future, however, and even if it does not no-one could deny that
the successful votes for Brexit and Trump, as well as the unsuccessful 2017 vote
for the French National Front, the March 2018 election results in Italy, and
support for populist parties elsewhere in Europe, represent a revolt against the
established order in general, and – at least in part – against globalization in
particular. To what extent does economic history speak to the causes of this
revolt, or help us to understand how to respond to it?

THE LATE NINETEENTH CENTURY

The argument that the populist revolts of 2016 represented, at least in part, a
backlash against globalization rests on three assertions. First, the world
economy became significantly more integrated after 1990, and particularly after
2001 when China entered the WTO. Second, this globalization had significant
distributional effects. And third, those distributional effects ended up having
political consequences. While there is little dispute about the first of these
assertions, the second and third are hotly contested.

During the 1990s, economic historians tried to make precisely the same threestep argument to explain the anti-globalization backlash of the late nineteenth

7

century.6 First, they argued that the late nineteenth century international
economy was integrating at an impressive rate: that globalization, viewed as a
process, was dramatic during this period. Technological change was largely
responsible, notably steamships, railroads, and the telegraph (e.g. Kenneth D.
Garbade and William L. Silber 1978; Knick Harley 1988; O’Rourke and
Williamson 1999; Christopher Hoag 2006; Luigi Pascali 2017; Réka Juhász and
Claudia Steinwender 2018).7 Political and geopolitical factors such as European
imperialism which opened colonies to trade, the imposition of close to free trade
on countries such as China and Japan which remained independent, the pax
Britannica which ensured a relatively peaceful century in Europe (Paul
Schroeder 1994, p. vii), and (until the 1870s) trade liberalization in Europe also
played an important role (Findlay and O’Rourke 2007, Chapter 7).

Following scholars such as Knick Harley (1980), O’Rourke and Williamson
(1994) used price evidence to make the case for trans-Atlantic commodity
markets, and they drew on work by other authors, such as A.J.H. Latham and
Larry Neal (1983) and Collins (1996), to make the case for commodity markets
more generally. Taken in conjunction with the evidence on transport costs
(Harley 1988) and trade volumes, it is clear that the nineteenth century saw a
dramatic integration of commodity markets. It is also clear that international

This three-step argument is perhaps most associated with a group of scholars
associated with Jeff Williamson, including George Boyer, Bill Collins, Tim Hatton,
myself, Alan Taylor, and Ashley Timmer. But several others – such as Michael
Bordo, Barry Eichengreen, Claudia Goldin, Doug Irwin, and Maurice Obstfeld –
were working independently on various aspects of nineteenth century
globalization at the time, and we were able to draw extensively on their research.
7 On the other hand Jacks and Pendakur (2010) argue that falling maritime trade
costs were not the primary driver of the nineteenth-century trade boom.
6

8

markets for labor and capital became much better integrated over the course of
the nineteenth century. By the end of the century, over one million Europeans
were leaving the continent every year, and there were substantial outflows from
China and India, as well. Foreign investments as a share of world GDP rose from
7% in 1870 to almost 20% on the eve of World War I (Hatton and Williamson
1998, Maurice Obstfeld and Taylor 2004).

Trade and income distribution in the late nineteenth century and today

Second, the 1990s literature argued that commodity market integration and
mass migration had significant distributional effects, although these varied
across countries. Let me start with trade. Ceteris paribus, narrowing commodity
price gaps raised New World agricultural prices and European manufactured
goods prices, while they lowered European agricultural prices and New World
manufactured goods prices. O’Rourke and Williamson (1994) used CGE
(computable general equilibrium) techniques to argue that these price shocks
benefited abundant factors and hurt scarce factors, in classic Heckscher-Ohlin
fashion. In particular, falling transport costs hurt British landowners and
benefited British workers, while they had the opposite effects in the United
States.8 The impact was significantly bigger in Britain, reflecting its greater
openness to international trade. O’Rourke et al. (1996) provided econometric
evidence for a small panel of seven “Atlantic economy” countries that relative
goods prices were related to relative factor prices in line with Heckscher-Ohlin

Williamson (1990) had earlier produced broadly consistent estimates of the
distributional impact of early nineteenth century British protection.
8

9

theory. Williamson (2002) broadened the argument to include what in the
twentieth century came to be called the Third World.

Regarding the econometric approach of O’Rourke et al. (1996): a panel
regression with 7 countries and 8 time periods might not strike people
nowadays as providing particularly compelling evidence. On the other hand, it
was at least a theory-consistent econometric test of the Heckscher-Ohlin model,
which is rare enough. Since this is a general equilibrium theory, which predicts a
relationship between a vector of economy-wide goods prices and a vector of
economy-wide factor prices, the appropriate unit of observation is the economy,
rather than regions or industries. As Pinelopi Goldberg and Nina Pavcnik (2007,
p. 58) say, “The general equilibrium nature of the Heckscher-Ohlin model makes
it extremely hard to bring it to the data. Given that the model's predictions refer
to economy-wide factor returns, one has only one observation per year to work
with.” Not surprisingly, therefore, later researchers such as Kris Mitchener and
Se Yan (2014), when revisiting these issues, have established a link between
trade (i.e., traded goods prices) and income distribution using model-based
simulation methods.

The most influential work linking trade and income distribution today is,
deservedly, the work of David Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson. Autor et
al. (2013) show that US regions which were more heavily exposed to rising
Chinese import competition between 1990 and 2007 experienced higher
unemployment, lower labor force participation, and lower wages. Since they
“circumvent the degrees- of-freedom problem endemic to estimating the labor-

10

market consequences of trade” (p. 2124) by focusing on regions, they are not
testing long-run Heckscher-Ohlin theory. On the other hand, their research
suggests that the “short run” regional disequilibria arising from major trade
shocks are much more persistent and severe than previously thought, and that
we need to worry about these more than we once did. That, in turn, suggests an
agenda for future historical research, assuming that the required regional data
are available.

Migration, wages, and employment in the late 19th century and today

When it came to the impact of mass migration on income distribution, the
literature of the 1990s used a similar mixture of techniques. Since the scholars
involved were interested in economy-wide effects, there was the same degrees of
freedom problem as that described above, and similar responses to the problem.
George Boyer et al. (1994), O’Rourke et al. (1994) and O’Rourke and Williamson
(1995) used CGE models. Taylor and Williamson (1997) assumed a three-factor
(land, labor, and capital) production function, and estimated the elasticity of
substitution econometrically using data for a panel of 14 countries. This
elasticity, together with information on factor shares, yielded aggregate labor
demand elasticities, which allowed them to estimate the wage impact of
migration-induced labor supply shocks. For example, the 24% increase in the US
labor force between 1870 and 1910 was estimated to have lowered US wages by
8% (O’Rourke and Williamson 1999, p. 155).

11

Other research tried to circumvent the degrees of freedom problem by using
variation across cities or states, in particular in the US. As in the case of trade,
this approach cannot deal with the issue of whether or not there were economywide effects of immigration on wages. On the other hand, such studies may pick
up a local effect if intra-regional labor market adjustment is sluggish, as the work
of Autor et al. suggests is the case today.

By and large, the literature suggests that nineteenth-century immigration put
pressure on local US labor markets. Hatton and Williamson (1998, Chapter 8)
found that higher rates of immigration were correlated across US states with
higher rates of native-born out-migration, controlling for a variety of other
factors, while Collins (1997) found a negative correlation between foreign-born
and African-American net migration to a sample of northern US states and cities.
Claudia Goldin (1994) found a negative city-level relationship between wages
and the proportion of the population that was foreign-born: a 1% increase in the
latter lowered wages by between 1 and 1.5%, an effect big enough that it cannot
plausibly be attributed to composition effects (as noted by Hatton and Zachary
Ward 2018), and notable in the context of the evidence on intra-regional labor
market adjustment provided by Collins, Hatton, and Williamson.

There is a vigorous debate regarding whether present-day immigration lowers
wages or employment levels. To take some recent examples, Ottaviano and Peri
(2012) find that immigration into the US between 1990 and 2006 had a small
positive effect on native wages, but lowered the wages of previous immigrants;
Manacorda et al. (2012) find broadly similar evidence for immigration into the

12

UK from the 1970s to the 2000s; Dustmann et al. (2013) find that immigration
between 1997 and 2005 lowered the wages of native-born UK workers below
the twentieth percentile of the wage distribution, but slightly increased the
wages of well-paid workers; and Dustmann et al. (2017) find that immigration in
1991 had a moderate negative impact on local native-born German wages, and a
significant negative impact on native employment.

Such mixed evidence stands in contrast to the unambiguous conclusions of the
1990s literature on late nineteenth-century migration. Is this contrast due to
different types of data and research methodologies, or to different historical
contexts? One obvious historical difference concerns the proportional scale of
migration flows: Taylor and Williamson (1997) estimate that immigration raised
labor supply by 24% in the US, 44% in Canada, and 86% in Argentina. It would
be odd if such enormous flows had not had an impact, even if only
counterfactual, on wages. More speculatively, the size of the flows may have
made it easier to identify wage elasticities by shifting labor supply curves to a
greater extent.

Ran Abramitzky and Leah Platt Boustan (2017) list several reasons why the
elasticity of wages with respect to immigration might have been larger in the US
a hundred years ago than today: greater similarity in the labor market
characteristics of immigrants and natives; less employment in the service sector,
where the impact on wages might be muted; or a similar regulatory framework
(involving not much regulation) for both categories of workers, rather than
segmentation between legal and illegal workers. Bin Xie (2017) further suggests

13

that manufacturing jobs may have been more homogenous then than now,
implying less scope for natives to specialize so as to avoid competition from
immigrants; and (citing Joshua Rosenbloom 1996) that inter-regional mobility
within the US may have been less strong in the nineteenth century, implying
greater local impacts for econometricians to find. Modern minimum wage laws
are another reason why wage effects might be smaller today than 100 years ago.

Having said that, Abramitzky and Boustan’s (2017) judgment that immigration
“creates winners and losers in the native population and among existing
immigrant workers, reducing the wages of low-skilled natives, encouraging some
native born to move away from immigrant gateway cities, and spurring capital
investment” seems reasonable. So does the frequent finding that the greatest
negative wage impacts of immigration may be felt by previous immigrants. We
might expect the short- and long-run impacts of immigration to be different, with
accumulation and technological responses to immigration potentially muting its
wage impact (for a survey, see Ethan Lewis 2013). We might also expect the
impact of immigration to vary depending on the nature of the flows and the
institutional and economic context.

Abramitzky and Boustan are surely right to call for more research, using modern
techniques, on the labor market impact of migration during the late nineteenth
century. Recent studies for the interwar and early postwar periods show the
way. Consistent with the 1990s research, Xie (2017) finds that US immigration
restrictions raised manufacturing wages and promoted South to North migration
by African Americans during the 1920s; less consistent are Philipp Ager and

14

Casper Worm Hansen (2017), who also use quotas as an identification strategy,
but rely on occupational data, finding that while quotas boosted the status of
African Americans, they pushed native whites into lower wage occupations; even
less consistent are Alan Green and David Green (2016), who find only small
effects of immigration on Canadian wages during the 1920s, once general
equilibrium adjustments are taken into account; Tabellini (2017), who finds only
very small (and not statistically significant) effects on manufacturing wages of
immigration in a panel of US cities between 1910 and 1930; and Michael A.
Clemens et al. (2018), who find that the exclusion of almost half a million
Mexican farm workers from the US at the end of 1964 failed to substantially raise
the wages of native-born workers. The evidence is thus mixed, as it is for the
modern period.

In summary, the literature on the late nineteenth century found that
globalization created both winners and losers, with the most prominent losers
being European landowners and native-born New World workers. What was the
political impact of this?

Backlash in the late nineteenth century and today

The third step in the argument that late nineteenth-century globalization
undermined itself was that the distributional effects of migration and trade led to
an anti-globalization backlash. When using regional data to test whether trade or
migration are linked to voting behavior at the local level, there is a problem
analogous to the “degrees of freedom” issue discussed earlier. Such exercises

15

will miss any national-level political effects of globalization operating equally
across districts. Despite this, when Goldin (1994) studied 1915 Congressional
voting on the US Literacy Test, she found that higher local wage growth lowered
the likelihood of an anti-immigration vote. Timmer and Williamson (1998)
developed a cross-country index of immigration policy for a panel of countries,
and found that policy became less restrictive the higher were unskilled wages
relative to average incomes. Put these findings together with those on the impact
of immigration on wages, and you have a clear case of a dimension of
globalization (in this case migration) undermining itself.

The 1990s evidence on the determinants of nineteenth-century trade policy was
more qualitative, although it was able to draw on an extensive political science
literature, such as Peter Gourevitch (1977) and Ronald Rogowski (1989).
O’Rourke (1997) argued that the more liberal trade policy responses of the UK
and Denmark to the grain invasion could be explained by the different
distributional effects it had in those two countries, based on CGE evidence.
Another approach is to study election results in settings where trade was the
dominant issue to see whether votes on trade policy are consistent with
economic interests. The typical finding of authors such as Irwin (1994) is that
economic interests matter. He finds a role for sectoral interests in explaining
why the UK did not revert to protectionism in 1906. Sibylle Lehmann (2010)
uses ecological inference methods and concludes that while small farmers
favored free trade in the 1878 German election, large estate owners favored
protection, which is in line with Heckscher-Ohlin theory. On the other hand, the
fact that smaller farmers shifted towards protectionist candidates in Sweden in

16

1887 seems puzzling. Lehmann and Oliver Volckart (2010) interpret that shift as
representing a loss of trust in the incumbent government, a reminder that even
in elections where trade is a major issue votes are cast for many reasons.

The question of whether the electoral upsets of 2016 were due to economic
factors, and in particular whether they represented an anti-globalization
backlash, is fiercely disputed. Some have argued that the causes were cultural,
but if the causes were purely cultural one has to ask what it was that led working
class voters to become more culturally conservative in the UK, US, France, Italy,
and elsewhere over the course of the last 10 or 15 years. As historians, economic
historians are presumably comfortable with complexity. Think of the debate
about why Robert Peel repealed the Corn Laws: was this due to ideas or
interests? A long literature, expertly summarized by Cheryl Schonhardt-Bailey
(2006), has shown that it was much more complicated than that. Yes, there is
evidence that MPs voted in their own economic interests, and in the economic
interests of their constituents. The lobbying of interest groups mattered, as did
the diversification of landlords' portfolios. But Peel's ideas about the
determinants of wages also mattered (Irwin 1989), as did his sense of ethics, and
the ability of the Duke of Wellington to deliver the House of Lords, and the
constitutional reasons why the Duke decided to do so, and so on. Imagine our
successors looking back at our own period in 50 years time, and asking students
whether the turmoil of 2016 was due more to economics or to culture. Is it not
likely that the answer to that question will be the same as it usually is, when
students are given the choice between two pedagogically useful but overly
simplistic alternatives – that it was, in fact, a bit of both?

17

As indicated above, my view is that economic historians have done a reasonable
job of showing that late nineteenth-century globalization undermined itself by
creating both winners and losers, with the latter successfully influencing trade or
migration policies in several countries. But economics was not the only factor at
work even then. Yes, immigration restrictions in the United States were linked to
the impact of immigration on wages, but even a cursory examination of the
relevant legislation shows an obsessive concern with Asian immigration in
particular. No-one reading Avner Offer’s (1989) account of how anti-Asian
racism was ubiquitous throughout the late nineteenth-century Anglosphere
could be in any doubt that “culture” was a powerful factor underlying late
nineteenth-century immigration restrictions. But economics mattered also.

Can you fully understand Brexit without taking account of English nationalism,
or the obsessive hostility towards Obama without reference to the color of his
skin (on the former, see O’Rourke 2018b, Chapter 9)? Surely not, but at the same
time, evidence suggests that economic factors were also important during 2016.
This does not automatically mean that voters were being “rational”, in the sense
that they were voting in their own economic self-interest. Take for example the
evidence presented by Sascha O. Becker et al. (2017) and Thiemo Fetzer (2018)
showing a clear link between austerity policies and the pro-Brexit vote in Britain.
This is a good example of economic factors driving an anti-globalization vote, but
it is not a good example of economically rational voting for the simple reason
that Conservative austerity policies had nothing to do with the European Union.

18

However, other evidence on twenty-first century voting behavior is more
consistent with the late nineteenth-century anti-globalization backlash narrative.
Becker et al. find that migrant inflows from Eastern Europe were correlated with
the pro-Brexit vote, though the effect is small. Autor et al. (2016) find that
increased imports from China were associated with political polarization at the
Congressional district level in the United States from 2000 onwards. Taken in
conjunction with their evidence, cited earlier, on the impact of Chinese imports
on local labor market outcomes, you have a compelling argument linking
globalization to both economic outcomes and political change. The precise
mechanism is unclear, however. Some Trump supporters were presumably
voting in favor of protection, in the manner of nineteenth-century European
landowners. However, as Autor et al. note, populist voters could also have been
voting for politicians promising a greater slice of the public service pie for white
voters at a time of increased competition for government services. Alternatively,
populist politicians could have opportunistically responded to economic hard
times by supplying extremist policies designed to increase voter turnout and
campaign contributions (Autor et al. 2016, p. 4). The literature on the link
between economic distress and populism is too vast to be summarized here, but
a reasonable conclusion is that trade and immigration have contributed to the
surge of populism in Europe and America.

What is to be done?

One shortcoming of O’Rourke and Williamson (1999), in my opinion, is that its
view of the political process was excessively simplistic. Politics was effectively

19

reduced to a binary choice: governments could choose to stay open, or not. They
remained open where the configuration of interests permitted it, and they
erected barriers to trade or immigration otherwise. A practicing politician might
find suggestions regarding how to maintain openness in the face of protectionist
pressures more useful.

This is where the work of Michael Huberman and co-authors comes in. In a series
of articles and a subsequent book (Huberman 2012), Huberman describes the
gradual introduction, during the late nineteenth century, of labor market
regulations and social insurance programs designed to protect workers. In some
cases, notably Belgium, workers’ support for trade liberalization was conditional
on the introduction of this “labor compact”. Importantly, the labor compact was
more advanced in countries more open to trade: there was no sign of
globalization leading to a race to the bottom during this period. This mirrors the
finding of Dani Rodrik (1998) that more open economies had bigger
governments in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Rodrik interprets this
correlation as reflecting a higher demand for the insurance services provided by
the government sector in countries more exposed to trade shocks.

In this view, states and markets are complements rather than substitutes, in that
state action can help to maintain political support for openness. It is possible that
financial globalization and greater competition for mobile direct investment may
today be placing constraints on the ability of states to finance such policies
(Rodrik 2017). On the other hand, there has surely never been a more tightly
integrated group of economies in human history than the 28 – soon to be 27 –

20

member states of the European Union. Despite the hyper-globalization linking its
members, the EU seems to be able to accommodate wildly differing preferences
regarding the share of GDP going to government. Setting aside Ireland, whose
GDP statistics are not comparable with those in other countries, general
government expenditure as a share of GDP ranged in 2016 from a low of 34% in
Romania to a high of 56.4% in France. The ratio was less than 40% in eight
member states, and higher than 50% in five.9 The late nineteenth-century lesson
that globalization and pro-worker state intervention can go hand in hand may
not be out of date yet.

Economic history also suggests that states can directly cooperate with each other
to avoid mutually harmful regulatory races to the bottom that might undermine
support for openness. Huberman and Christopher Meissner (2010) discuss how
countries traded market access in return for promises to strengthen regulatory
standards during the late nineteenth century. The 1904 agreement between
France and Italy also linked regulatory standards and migration: France allowed
Italian immigrants to benefit from the French labor compact, on condition that
Italy bring its own regulatory standards up to international levels. Alan Milward
(2010) emphasized that European integration was an essential part of that
continent's response to the traumas of the interwar period, since it boosted the
capacity of states to deal with the problems facing them. It was important for
countries to be able to reap the benefits of trade, but this could not come at the
expense of broader social and political objectives. “The problem genuinely was
how to construct a commercial framework which would not endanger the levels
9

http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-datasets/-/tec00023
21

of social welfare which had been reached ... The Treaties of Rome had to be also
an external buttress to the welfare state” (Milward 2010, p. 216). And so the
Treaty of Rome (1957) envisaged not just a customs union, but inter alia a
Common Agricultural Policy, regional policy, and the harmonization of social
policies. The supranational elements of the European project were a logical
consequence. These always bothered the British, but they were (and still are)
seen as essential in maintaining popular support for European economic
integration (O’Rourke 2018b).

THE GREAT DEPRESSION

O’Rourke and Williamson suggest that the deglobalization of the interwar period
was not solely the result of an exogenous shock, namely the Great War, but had
its roots in the anti-globalization backlash of the late nineteenth century (1999,
p. 286). We did not discuss in detail the extent to which this was really the case,
but it merits reflection. I think that we were on fairly solid ground when it comes
to US immigration policies, for example. There is a clear continuity between the
gradually tightening restrictions over the course of the late nineteenth century,
the introduction of the US Immigration Act of 1917, and the immigration quotas
of the 1920s. The European agricultural protection introduced before 1914
survived the war intact, and it remains with us today. The late nineteenth
century also saw a shift towards protecting heavy industry in particular, and
manufacturing more generally, from British competition. This phenomenon was
so ubiquitous that Robert Allen (2011) describes it as being part of a

22

developmental “standard model.” It was adopted by countries across the globe
as they regained tariff autonomy in the twentieth century.

On the other hand, it would be wrong to suggest that the outbreak of World War
I, and the onset of the Great Depression, did not represent important
discontinuities that had serious negative consequences for the openness of the
world economy. To what extent could either of these be regarded as examples of
globalization undermining itself, as opposed to exogenous shocks imposed upon
an otherwise robust and open international system?

Let me start with the Depression. We know from Peter Temin (1989) and Barry
Eichengreen (1992) that the gold standard and Great Depression were
inextricably linked. The gold standard was part of the institutional infrastructure
underpinning global capital markets during the late nineteenth century. Going
back on gold in the 1920s was an important part of the attempt to recreate the
highly globalized pre-war world, and was seen by politicians as signaling a
commitment to a generally open international system. To that extent you could
regard the Great Depression that followed as being to some extent caused by
1920s globalization. Perhaps that is a slightly forced argument. A more
compelling reason to view the Depression as having been caused, at least to
some extent, by the globalization that preceded it, is the role played by
international capital flows in transmitting the crisis around the world. This was
presumably always self-evident to scholars of countries such as Germany, and
was a central focus of Charles Kindleberger (1973), but I think that Anglo-Saxon
economic historians have tended, since the work of Eichengreen and Temin, to

23

think about the Depression more in Mundell-Fleming terms, with exchange rates,
interest rates, and monetary and fiscal policy being at the heart of the analysis.
This tendency fits well with Keynes's repeated denunciations of interwar
macroeconomic policy-making. Since 2008, however, and in particular since the
Eurozone crisis of 2010, it has become more natural to once again think of the
Depression in Europe in terms of a sudden stop of capital flows, a perspective
recently exemplified by Olivier Accominotti and Eichengreen (2016). Seen in this
perspective, the Great Depression in Europe appears more clearly as a negative
consequence of a particular dimension of globalization, namely capital mobility:
when the lending stopped countries like Germany found themselves obliged to
cut expenditure, while their financial systems came under strain as foreign
depositors withdrew money from banks (Eichengreen 2015, pp. 137-144). And
perhaps the German historical literature debating whether Chancellor Brüning,
widely criticized for his economically and politically destructive austerity
policies, could have behaved in a less dangerous manner resonates more
strongly today than it once did to observers of the Eurozone periphery.

To the extent that the Depression was caused by malfunctioning international
capital markets, or the gold standard that was thought at the time to underpin
them, we have yet another case of globalization undermining itself, since the
Depression was the major cause of interwar protectionism (Smoot-Hawley,
which had its roots earlier, notwithstanding). Eichengreen and Irwin (2010)
show that protectionism during the 1930s was associated with adherence to the
gold standard, a point that had earlier been noted by, among others, the League
of Nations (1943, p. 31). Staying on gold longer meant balance of payments

24

problems and a more protracted depression, and doing so deprived
policymakers of alternative ways of addressing these problems.

Even worse, the Depression promoted political extremism, notably but not only
in Germany. Gregori Galofré-Vilà et al. (2017) find that austerity was positively
correlated with the Nazi vote in Germany between 1930 and 1933, but there is
econometric evidence linking economic crises with right-wing extremism more
generally. Alan de Bromhead et al. (2013) find evidence that protracted periods
of poor economic performance were associated with higher votes for right wing
political extremists in the interwar period, while Manuel Funke et al. (2016) find,
in a sample of 20 advanced economies between 1870 and 2014, that far-right
parties increased their vote share by 30% on average following financial crises.
Nationalist extremism fuelled even more dramatic deglobalization, as the Nazis
developed a tightly controlled war economy characterized by the search for
strategic self-sufficiency and bilateral trading arrangements (Adam Tooze 2006).

What could have prevented these disasters? Superior macroeconomic policymaking is the obvious answer: countries could have chosen to go off gold earlier,
preferably in a coordinated manner, and used the resultant policy flexibility to
reflate their economies. To that extent, the global policy response after 2008 was
far superior. The experience of the Eurozone periphery after 2010, when
countries found themselves unable to devalue, obliged to engage in procyclical
austerity, and (until Mario Draghi took over the reins of the European Central
Bank) locked into a monetary union pursuing excessively conservative policies,
shows that these basic macroeconomic lessons of the Great Depression still have

25

relevance (O'Rourke and Taylor 2013). That experience surely helps to explain
the election of a populist Italian government in 2017.

WORLD WAR I

Finally, what about World War I? Tooze and Ted Fertik (2014) argue that we
should not regard it as having ended the globalization of the late nineteenth
century, since it was itself a globalised conflict, involving high levels of
international borrowing and lending and the large-scale transfer of military
resources between continents. The point is well made. On the other hand, the
available price evidence suggests an impressive disintegration of international
commodity markets during the war (Findlay and O'Rourke 2007 p. 434), while
the conflict had a host of longer-run consequences, ranging from the creation of
new nation states in Eastern Europe, to structural imbalances affecting
industries and agricultural sectors worldwide, to the Russian Revolution, all of
which helped to ensure that it would be difficult to recreate the cosmopolitan
international economic order that had, by and large, obtained before 1914 (ibid.,
pp. 435-443). Some interwar restrictions on trade and migration had their roots
in the late nineteenth century, but the Great War had an independent
disintegrating impact on the international economy.

To what extent should we think of the war as an exogenous shock hitting the
world economy in 1914? Or did it represent, at least to some extent, an even
more dramatic form of anti-globalization backlash? Tooze and Fertik (2014)
make what is perhaps the most direct connection between globalization and

26

war: capital flows and technology transfer helped Russia converge on the
established powers. This disrupted pre-existing geopolitical equilibria and led
Germany in particular to devise military strategies to counter the threat. They
could have added that the spread of the Industrial Revolution to Germany had
earlier undermined the geopolitical equilibrium in Europe, perhaps to an even
more fundamental extent. Similarly, the spread of modern growth to Japan
undermined Asian stability in the first half of the twentieth century. If there is an
analogy with today it is both obvious and worrying: few would dispute that
Chinese growth has been intimately linked to globalization or that this will have
consequences for the international balance of power.

David Rowe (2005) suggests a more subtle mechanism linking pre-World War I
globalization with the outbreak of that conflict. Globalization raised wages
throughout labor-abundant Europe, raising the financial cost of recruiting
soldiers or the political cost of conscripting them. This made states feel more
insecure militarily and less able to credibly threaten military retaliation. It also
made them worry about the reliability of their military allies. All these factors,
according to Rowe, help to explain the catastrophic series of political decisions
that were made in the run-up to war.

Another mechanism linking late nineteenth-century globalization to geopolitical
instability is suggested by Offer (1989). Structural change, magnified by
international trade which allowed industrializing countries to reap the benefits
of comparative advantage, led first the UK, and later Germany, to become
increasingly dependent on imported supplies of food and raw materials. This

27

dependence made countries feel militarily vulnerable, and made naval
superiority – or, in the case of Germany, as close to naval parity as was feasible –
a matter of vital national strategic interest. The Anglo-German naval rivalry of
the decades prior to 1914 was a logical consequence. Offer shows how naval
strategists were motivated first by purely defensive considerations, but later
began to explore the offensive possibilities of naval warfare (see also Nicholas
Lambert 2012). These considerations were of course not responsible for the
outbreak of World War I, but they were at least in part responsible for the UK’s
decision to enter the war. If Germany defeated France, it would be able to project
continental-scale power directly into the Atlantic, safe from the threat of British
blockade. As Sir Edward Grey said in 1911, if a European power achieved
continental hegemony Britain would permanently lose its control of the sea,
which would in turn mean its separation from the Dominions and the end of
Empire (Michael Howard 1972, pp. 51-52).

Tooze (2006) and Michael Barnhart (1987) have shown how a concern to
achieve strategic self-sufficiency was both a cause and an effect of the drive to
war during the interwar period in Germany and Japan respectively. Roberto
Bonfatti and O'Rourke (2018) show more generally how a follower country’s
strategic dependence on imported raw materials can, in conjunction with the
naval hegemony of an established power, give the follower country an incentive
to launch pre-emptive wars in the hope of gaining strategic self-sufficiency.
Higher costs of war in high-wage globalized economies can also give politicians
an incentive to gamble on rapid offensives, in the hope of striking a knockout
blow (Jari Eloranta and Mark Harrison 2010, p. 137).

28

Again, if there is a contemporary parallel, it is with China. Like Britain and
Germany in the nineteenth century, it has been undergoing rapid
industrialization and structural change, and it has become far more dependent
on international trade. On the import side it relies heavily on foreign oil, much of
which passes through the Straits of Malacca; on the export side it has toyed with
using its near monopoly of rare earths for strategic purposes. The international
state system has a poor record as it is of peacefully accommodating the arrival of
newcomers to the top table, and there is a fascinating theoretical and historical
literature on the topic that is too vast to be summarized here (e.g. Robert Gilpin
1981, Robert Powell 2006). If China started to doubt that it could rely on the
market to provide it with the food and raw materials it requires, the world could
become a much more dangerous place.

One of the features of interwar trade that struck contemporary observers as
particularly dangerous was its decreasingly multilateral nature, with countries
trading more and more with their colonial possessions or spheres of influence.
As Folke Hilgerdt (1935) put it, “As bilateralism particularly renders the supply
of raw materials to certain countries difficult, it threatens to lead to an
intensified fight for influence upon (or the domination of) the undeveloped
countries, and thereby to political controversies, which may adversely affect all
forms of peaceful collaboration between nations”. de Bromhead et al. (2018)
show that discriminatory UK trade policies can explain over 70% of the increase
in the British Empire’s share of UK imports after 1930. And so it is no surprise
that Article 1 of the GATT prohibited discriminatory trade policies, subject to a

29

number of well-known exceptions. The interwar period suggests that the
greatest costs of aggressive and discriminatory trade policies can be political
rather than economic. It is in this context that upholding the international rule of
law is so important, and that the implications of Brexit and Trump become
potentially alarming. In particular, the US refusal to reappoint judges to the
WTO’s Appellate Body threatens to render the work of that body impossible.

CONCLUSION

The world has not yet experienced extensive deglobalization, but it could in the
future, with dangerous geopolitical consequences. What should policy makers
do?

Fortunately, the lessons of the Great Depression influenced macroeconomic
policy after 2008, but they are not the only relevant lessons of history. The
political upsets of 2016 occurred in the US and the UK, where post-crisis
macroeconomic management was far superior to that in the Eurozone, and
where recoveries came correspondingly sooner. This suggests that longer-run
forces, linked to trade and migration, may be having a greater impact on voting
than the post-2008 macroeconomic and financial crisis. Is it a coincidence that
the upsets of 2016 occurred in countries where the twenty-first century
equivalent of Huberman's labor compact has been eroded the most? My reading
of history suggests that if governments push anything too far, including markets
in general, and globalization in particular, a reaction is to be expected. Rather

30

than promoting ever-closer integration in an already highly globalized world,
maybe advocates of openness should declare victory and focus on how to protect
individuals and regions from the risks that markets, both domestic and
international, inevitably give rise to.

There is a final contribution that economic historians, like all historians, can
bring to present-day debates about the political upsets of 2016, the causes of
populism more generally, and the potential implications – some of which are
very worrying – for the international order. As economists, we are trained to
look for patterns and to seek general explanations for entire classes of
phenomena rather than specific explanations for individual historical events. But
as historians we are trained to recognize the uniqueness of individual events and
acknowledge the roles played in them by context, contingency, and the choices
made by individual actors. This is the creative tension that lies at the heart of our
discipline and makes it so fascinating. And the perspective of the historian is
important today, since it reminds us that we and our leaders enjoy free will,
which we can exercise for better or for worse. Nothing is inevitable. In
dangerous times that is a useful thought to bear in mind.

References
Abramitzky, Ran, and Leah Platt Boustan. "Immigration in American Economic
History." Journal of Economic Literature 55, no. 4 (2017): 1311-45.

Abu-Lughod, Janet L. Before European Hegemony : The World System A.D. 12501350. New York ; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.

31

Accominotti, Olivier, and Barry Eichengreen. "The Mother of All Sudden Stops:
Capital Flows and Reversals in Europe, 1919–32." The Economic History Review
69, no. 2 (2016): 469-92.

Ager, Philipp, and Casper Worm Hansen. "Closing Heaven’s Door: Evidence from
the 1920s U.S.Immigration Quota Acts." University of Copenhagen Department of
Economics Discussion Papers 17-22 (2017).

Allcott, Hunt, and Matthew Gentzkow. "Social Media and Fake News in the 2016
Election." Journal of Economic Perspectives 31, no. 2 (2017): 211-36.

Allen, Robert C. Global Economic History : A Very Short Introduction. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2011.

Anderson, James E., and J. Peter Neary. Measuring the Restrictiveness of
International Trade Policy. Cambridge, Mass. ; London: MIT Press, 2005.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. "The China Syndrome: Local
Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States." American
Economic Review 103, no. 6 (2013): 2121-68.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Kaveh Majlesi. "Importing
Political Polarization? The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure."
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 22637 (2016).

32

Bairoch, Paul. "European Trade Policy, 1815–1914." In The Cambridge Economic
History of Europe from the Decline of the Roman Empire, edited by Peter Mathias
and Sidney Pollard, 1-160. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

Barnhart, Michael A. Japan Prepares for Total War : The Search for Economic
Security, 1919-1941. Ithaca ; London: Cornell University Press, 1987.

Becker, Sascha O., Thiemo Fetzer, and Dennis Novy. "Who Voted for Brexit? A
Comprehensive District-Level Analysis." Economic Policy 32, no. 92 (2017): 60150.

Bonfatti, Roberto, and Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke. "Growth, Import Dependence,
and War." Economic Journal forthcoming (2018).

Boyer, George R., Timothy J. Hatton, and Kevin O’Rourke. "The Impact of
Emigration on Real Wages in Ireland." In Migration and the International Labor
Market, 1850-1939, edited by Timothy J. Hatton and Jeffrey G. Williamson, 22139. London: Routledge, 1994.

Chilosi, David, and Giovanni Federico. "Early Globalizations: The Integration of
Asia in the World Economy, 1800–1938." Explorations in Economic History 57
(2015): 1-18.

33

Colantone, Italo, and Piero Stanig. "Global Competition and Brexit." BAFFI
CAREFIN Centre Research Paper Series 2016- 44 (2016).

Collins, William J. "Regional Labor Markets in British India." Unpublished
Manuscript, Department of Economics, Harvard University (1996).

Collins, William J. "When the Tide Turned: Immigration and the Delay of the
Great Black Migration." The Journal of Economic History 57, no. 3 (2009): 607-32.

de Bromhead, Alan, Barry Eichengreen, and Kevin H. O'Rourke. "Political
Extremism in the 1920s and 1930s: Do German Lessons Generalize?" The Journal
of Economic History 73, no. 02 (2013): 371-406.

de Bromhead, Alan , Alan Fernihough, Markus Lampe, and Kevin Hjortshøj
O'Rourke. "When Britain Turned Inward: The Impact of Interwar British
Protection." American Economic Review forthcoming (2018).

de Zwart, Pim. "Globalization in the Early Modern Era: New Evidence from the
Dutch-Asiatic Trade, C. 1600–1800." The Journal of Economic History 76, no. 2
(2016): 520-58.

Dhingra, Swati, Hanwei Huang, Gianmarco Ottaviano, João Paulo Pessoa, Thomas
Sampson, and John Van Reenen. "The Costs and Benefits of Leaving the Eu: Trade
Effects." Economic Policy 32, no. 92 (2017): 651-705.

34

Dustmann, Christian, Tommaso Frattini, and Ian P. Preston. "The Effect of
Immigration Along the Distribution of Wages." The Review of Economic Studies
80, no. 1 (2013): 145-73.

Dustmann, Christian, Uta Schönberg, and Jan Stuhler. "Labor Supply Shocks,
Native Wages, and the Adjustment of Local Employment." The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 132, no. 1 (2017): 435-83.

Eichengreen, Barry J. Golden Fetters : The Gold Standard and the Great Depression,
1919-1939. New York ; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992.

Eichengreen, Barry J. Hall of Mirrors : The Great Depression, the Great Recession,
and the Uses - and Misuses - of History. New York: Oxford University Press, 2016.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Douglas A. Irwin. "The Slide to Protectionism in the
Great Depression: Who Succumbed and Why?" The Journal of Economic History
70, no. 4 (2010): 871-97.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Kevin Hjortshøj O’Rourke. "A Tale of Two Depressions."
VoxEU.org (2009).

Eloranta, Jari, and Mark Harrison. "War and Disintegration, 1914–1950." In The
Cambridge Economic History of Modern Europe: Volume 2: 1870 to the Present,
edited by Kevin H. O'Rourke and Stephen Broadberry, 133-55. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2010.

35

Federico, Giovanni. "Market Integration." In Handbook of Cliometrics, edited by
Claude Diebolt and Michael Haupert, 1-26. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2018.

Feinstein, C. H., Peter Temin, and Gianni Toniolo. The European Economy between
the Wars. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.

Fetzer, Thiemo. "Did Austerity Cause Brexit?" Warwick Economics Research
Papers 1170 (2018).

Findlay, Ronald, and Kevin H. O'Rourke. Power and Plenty : Trade, War, and the
World Economy in the Second Millennium. Princeton, N.J. ; Woodstock,
Oxfordshire England: Princeton University Press, 2007.

Flynn, Dennis O., and Arturo Giráldez. "Path Dependence, Time Lags and the
Birth of Globalisation: A Critique of O'Rourke and Williamson." European Review
of Economic History 8, no. 1 (2004): 81-108.

Funke, Manuel, Moritz Schularick, and Christoph Trebesch. "Going to Extremes:
Politics after Financial Crises, 1870–2014." European Economic Review 88
(2016): 227-60.

36

Galofré-Vilà, Gregori, Christopher M. Meissner, Martin McKee, and David
Stuckler. "Austerity and the Rise of the Nazi Party." National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper Series No. 24106 (2017).

Garbade, Kenneth D., and William L. Silber. "Technology, Communication and the
Performance of Financial Markets: 1840–1975." The Journal of Finance 33, no. 3
(1978): 819-32.

Gilpin, Robert. War and Change in World Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1981.

Goldin, Claudia. "The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the United
States, 1890 to 1921." In The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to
Political Economy, edited by Claudia Goldin and Gary D. Libecap. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1994.

Gourevitch, Peter Alexis. "International Trade, Domestic Coalitions, and Liberty:
Comparative Responses to the Crisis of 1873-1896." The Journal of
Interdisciplinary History 8, no. 2 (1977): 281-313.

Green, Alan G., and David A. Green. "Immigration and the Canadian Earnings
Distribution in the First Half of the Twentieth Century." The Journal of Economic
History 76, no. 2 (2016): 387-426.

37

Hajzler, Chris, and James MacGee. "Retail Price Differences across Us and
Canadian Cities During the Interwar Period." EPRI Working Paper 2015-3 (2015).

Harley, C Knick. "Transportation, the World Wheat Trade, and the Kuznets Cycle,
1850-1913." Explorations in Economic History 17, no. 3 (1980): 218-50.

Harley, C. K. "Ocean Freight Rates and Productivity, 1740-1913 - the Primacy of
Mechanical Invention Reaffirmed." Journal of Economic History 48, no. 4 (1988):
851-76.

Hatton, T. J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. The Age of Mass Migration : Causes and
Economic Impact. New York ; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.

Hilgerdt, Folke. "The Approach to Bilateralism - a Change in the Structure of
World Trade." Index X, no. 8 (1935): 175-88.

Hirst, Paul Q., and Grahame Thompson. Globalization in Question : The
International Economy and the Possibilities of Governance. Cambridge: Polity
Press, 1996.

Hoag, Christopher. "The Atlantic Telegraph Cable and Capital Market Information
Flows." The Journal of Economic History 66, no. 2 (2006): 342-53.

38

Howard, Michael. The Continental Commitment : The Dilemma of British Defence
Policy in the Era of the Two World Wars, Ford Lectures. London: Maurice Temple
Smith Ltd, 1972.

Huberman, Michael. "Ticket to Trade: Belgian Labour and Globalization before
1914." The Economic History Review 61, no. 2 (2008): 326-59.

Huberman, Michael. Odd Couple : International Trade and Labor Standards in
History. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2012.

Huberman, Michael, and Christopher M. Meissner. "Riding the Wave of Trade:
The Rise of Labor Regulation in the Golden Age of Globalization." The Journal of
Economic History 70, no. 3 (2010): 657-85.

Hynes, William, David S. Jacks, and Kevin H. O'Rourke. "Commodity Market
Disintegration in the Interwar Period." European Review of Economic History 16,
no. 2 (2012): 119-43.

Inglehart, Ronald, and Pippa Norris. "Trump, Brexit, and the Rise of Populism:
Economic Have-Nots and Cultural Backlash." HKS Faculty Research Working
Paper Series RWP16-026 (2016).

Jacks, David S., and Krishna Pendakur. "Global Trade and the Maritime Transport
Revolution." The Review of Economics and Statistics 92, no. 4 (2010): 745-55.

39

James, Harold. The End of Globalization : Lessons from the Great Depression.
Cambridge, Mass. ; London: Harvard University Press, 2001.

Juhász, Réka, and Claudia Steinwender. "Spinning the Web: The Impact of ICT on
Trade in Intermediates and Technology Diffusion." National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper Series No. 24590 (2018).

Kindleberger, Charles P. The World in Depression, 1929-1939. London: Allen Lane,
1973.

Lambert, Nicholas A. Planning Armageddon : British Economic Warfare and the
First World War. Cambridge, Mass. ; London: Harvard University Press, 2012.

Latham, A. J. H., and Larry Neal. "The International Market in Rice and Wheat,
1868-1914." The Economic History Review 36, no. 2 (1983): 260-80.

Lehmann, Sibylle H. "The German Elections in the 1870s: Why Germany Turned
from Liberalism to Protectionism." The Journal of Economic History 70, no. 1
(2010): 146-78.

Lehmann, Sibylle, and Oliver Volckart. "The Political Economy of Agricultural
Protection: Sweden 1887." European Review of Economic History 15, no. 1
(2011): 29-59.

40

Lewis, Ethan. "Immigration and Production Technology." Annual Review of
Economics 5, no. 1 (2013): 165-91.

Lopez, Robert S. "The Trade of Medieval Europe: The South." In The Cambridge
Economic History of Europe from the Decline of the Roman Empire: Volume 2:
Trade and Industry in the Middle Ages, edited by Cynthia Postan, Edward Miller
and M. M. Postan, 306-401. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

Manacorda, Marco, Alan Manning, and Jonathan Wadsworth. "The Impact of
Immigration on the Structure of Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain."
Journal of the European Economic Association 10, no. 1 (2012): 120-51.

Milward, Alan S. The European Rescue of the Nation-State. 2nd edition ed.
London: Routledge, 2000.

Mitchener, Kris James, and S. E. Yan. "Globalization, Trade, and Wages: What
Does History Tell Us About China?" International Economic Review 55, no. 1
(2014): 131-68.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. Global Capital Markets : Integration, Crisis,
and Growth. Cambridge, UK ; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

O'Rourke, Kevin H. "The European Grain Invasion, 1870–1913." The Journal of
Economic History 57, no. 4 (1997): 775-801.

41

O’Rourke, Kevin Hjortshøj. "Two Great Trade Collapses: The Interwar Period and
Great Recession Compared." IMF Economic Review 66, no. 3 (2018a): 418-39.

O'Rourke, Kevin Hjortshøj. Une Brève Histoire Du Brexit. Paris: Odile Jacob,
2018b.

O'Rourke, Kevin H., and Alan M. Taylor. "Cross of Euros." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 27, no. 3 (2013): 167-92.

O'Rourke, Kevin H., Alan M. Taylor, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. "Factor Price
Convergence in the Late Nineteenth Century." International Economic Review 37,
no. 3 (1996): 499-530.

O'Rourke, Kevin Hjortshøj, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. "Open Economy Forces and
Late Nineteenth Century Swedish Catch-Up. A Quantitative Accounting."
Scandinavian Economic History Review 43, no. 2 (1995): 171-203.

O'Rourke, Kevin H., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. Globalization and History : The
Evolution of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 1999.

O'Rourke, Kevin H., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. "Did Vasco Da Gama Matter for
European Markets?" Economic History Review 62, no. 3 (2009): 655-84.

42

O’Rourke, Kevin, Jeffrey G. Williamson, and Timothy J. Hatton. "Mass Migration,
Commodity Market Integration and Real Wage Convergence: The LateNineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy." In Migration and the International Labor
Market, 1850-1939, edited by Timothy J. Hatton and Jeffrey G. Williamson, 20320. London: Routledge, 1994.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P., and Giovanni Peri. "Rethinking the Effect of
Immigration on Wages." Journal of the European Economic Association 10, no. 1
(2012): 152-97.

Pascali, Luigi. "The Wind of Change: Maritime Technology, Trade, and Economic
Development." American Economic Review 107, no. 9 (2017): 2821-54.

Persson, Karl Gunnar. "Mind the Gap! Transport Costs and Price Convergence in
the Nineteenth Century Atlantic Economy." European Review of Economic History
8, no. 2 (2004): 125-47.

Powell, Robert. "War as a Commitment Problem." International Organization 60,
no. 1 (2006): 169-203.

Rodrik, Dani. "Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?"
Journal of Political Economy 106, no. 5 (1998): 997-1032.

Rodrik, Dani. "Populism and the Economics of Globalization." National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 23559 (2017).

43

Rogowski, Ronald. Commerce and Coalitions : How Trade Affects Domestic
Political Alignments. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989.

Rosenbloom, Joshua L. "Was There a National Labor Market at the End of the
Nineteenth Century? New Evidence on Earnings in Manufacturing." The Journal
of Economic History 56, no. 3 (2009): 626-56.

Rossabi, Morris. "The “Decline” of the Central Asian Caravan Trade." In The Rise
of Merchant Empires: Long Distance Trade in the Early Modern World 1350–1750,
edited by James D. Tracy, 351-70. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

Rowe, David M. "The Tragedy of Liberalism How Globalization Caused the First
World War." Security Studies 14, no. 3 (2005): 407-47.

Schonhardt-Bailey, Cheryl. From the Corn Laws to Free Trade : Interests, Ideas,
and Institutions in Historical Perspective. Cambridge, Mass. ; London: MIT Press,
2006.

Schroeder, Paul W. The Transformation of European Politics, 1763-1848, Oxford
History of Modern Europe. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994.

Strange, Susan. "Globaloney?" Review of Globalization in Question, P. Hirst, G.
Thompson; The Logic of International Restructuring, W. Ruigrok, R. van Tulder;

44

The Myth of the Global Corporation, P. Doremus, W. Keller, L. Pauly, S. Reich.
Review of International Political Economy 5, no. 4 (1998): 704-11.

Taylor, Alan M., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. "Convergence in the Age of Mass
Migration." European Review of Economic History 1, no. 1 (1997): 27-63.

Temin, Peter. Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT
Press, 1989.

Timmer, Ashley S., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. "Immigration Policy Prior to the
1930s: Labor Markets, Policy Interactions, and Globalization Backlash."
Population and Development Review 24, no. 4 (1998): 739-71.

Tooze, J. Adam. The Wages of Destruction : The Making and Breaking of the Nazi
Economy. London: Allen Lane, 2006.

Tooze, Adam, and Ted Fertik. "The World Economy and the Great War."
Geschichte und Gesellschaft 40, no. 2 (2014): 214-38.

Williamson, Jeffrey G. "Globalization, Convergence, and History." Journal of
Economic History 56, no. 2 (1996): 277-306.

Williamson, Jeffrey G. "Globalization and Inequality, Past and Present." The World
Bank Research Observer 12, no. 2 (1997): 117-35.

45

Williamson, Jeffrey G. "Globalization, Labor Markets and Policy Backlash in the
Past." Journal of Economic Perspectives 12, no. 4 (1998): 51-72.

Williamson, Jeffrey G. "Land, Labor, and Globalization in the Third World, 18701940." The Journal of Economic History 62, no. 1 (2002): 55-85.

Williamson, Jeffrey G. "Explaining World Tariffs,1870–1938: Stolper-Samuelson,
Strategic Tariffs, and State Revenues." In Eli Heckscher, International Trade, and
Economic History, edited by Ronald Findlay, Rolf G. H. Henriksson, Håkan
Lindgren and Mats Lundahl, 199-228. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press,
2006.

Williamson, Jeffrey G. Trade and Poverty : When the Third World Fell Behind.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2011.

Wilson, Andrew, and Alan K. Bowman. Trade, Commerce, and the State in the
Roman World. First edition. ed, Oxford Studies on the Roman Economy. Oxford:
Oxford University Press,, 2017.

Xie, Bin. "The Effects of Immigration Quotas on Wages, the Great Black Migration,
and Industrial Development." IZA Discussion Paper Series 11214 (2017).

46

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Figure 1. US average tariffs (duties collected as a share of total imports), 18912017
Source: US International Trade Commission, data available at
https://www.usitc.gov/documents/dataweb/ave_table_1891_2017.pdf
(accessed November 22, 2018).

47

