ENTREPRENEURIAL SPILLOVERS FROM CORPORATE
R&D
Tania Babina
Sabrina T. Howell
WORKING PAPER 25360

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENTREPRENEURIAL SPILLOVERS FROM CORPORATE R&D
Tania Babina
Sabrina T. Howell
Working Paper 25360
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25360

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018, Revised July 2019
The Kauffman Foundation funded Sabrina Howell’s work on this project. We thank Manuel
Adelino, Julian Atanassov, Pierre Azoulay, Nick Bloom, Shai Bernstein, Patrick Bolton, Alon
Brav, Wes Cohen, Jonathan Cohn, Ryan Decker, Will Gornall, Bronwyn Hall, Wei Jiang, Bill
Kerr, Saul Lach, Josh Lerner, Brian Lucking, Song Ma, Holger Mueller, Ramana Nanda, Stijn
Van Nieuwerburgh, Hernan Ortiz-Molina, Paul Oyer, Tomek Piskorski, John Van Reenen, David
Robinson, David Scharfstein, Philipp Schnabl, Antoinette Schoar, Amir Sufi, Xinxin Wang, Neng
Wang, Ayako Yasuda, and seminar participants at the GSU CEAR Conference, Texas Finance
Festival, Chicago Booth, UBC, SoCal PE Conference, Columbia GSB, the Federal Reserve
Board, the IMF, Duke, Drexel, Toulouse School of Economics, U.S. Census Bureau, NY Fed,
Yale Junior Conference, NBER Corporate Finance, Stanford Financing of Innovation Summit,
LBS Corporate Finance Conference, Stanford SIEPR, and Washington Summer Finance
Conference. We thank Belinda Chen for excellent research assistance, and Chris Galvan and
Shirley Liu for data assistance. Babina was a Special Sworn Status researcher of the U.S. Census
Bureau at the NY Research Data Center. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not represent the views of the Census Bureau. No confidential
information is disclosed. This research uses data from the Census Longitudinal Employer
Household Dynamics Program, which was partially supported by the following NSF Grants
SES-9978093, SES-0339191 and ITR-0427889; National Institute on Aging Grant AG018854;
and grants from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Tania Babina and Sabrina T. Howell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Entrepreneurial Spillovers from Corporate R&D
Tania Babina and Sabrina T. Howell
NBER Working Paper No. 25360
December 2018, Revised July 2019
JEL No. G3,O3
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how corporate research and development (R&D) investment affects labor
mobility. We use employer-employee matched data in ordinary least squares and instrumental
variables analyses to assess four hypotheses. R&D has no effect on worker retention, exit from
employment, or mobility to incumbent firms. Instead, it increases employee departures to
entrepreneurship, leading employees to join the founding teams of startups that are venture
capital-backed, high tech, high wage, and in different sectors than the parent firm. These highgrowth, high-risk startups emerging from R&D benefit from a focused, standalone incentive
structure and have poor complementarities to the parent firm’s assets.

Tania Babina
Assistant Professor of Business
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 814
New York, NY 10027
tania.babina@gsb.columbia.edu
Sabrina T. Howell
NYU Stern School of Business
KMC 9-93
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
showell@stern.nyu.edu

1

Introduction

Corporate research and development (R&D) investment is crucial to economic growth, generating
new knowledge, technology, and skills. R&D is also human capital-intensive, and human capital is
inalienable and portable. Employee mobility is therefore a channel for R&D outputs to leave the firm.
Whether new intellectual assets are exploited within the firm or outside its boundary depends on where
their value is highest and on limits to contracting with employees (Aghion & Tirole 1994, Zingales
2000). The relationship between innovation and human capital reallocation is important to understand,
as these forces are central to productivity growth (Davis & Haltiwanger 1999, Giroud & Mueller 2015,
Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin & Miranda 2018).
This paper offers to our knowledge the first study of how R&D investment affects employee
mobility. We consider four possible effects, not all of which are unambiguously beneficial for
employees. First, R&D could increase worker retention if it leads to more amenities or internal
growth opportunities (Rosen 1986). Second, R&D may lead to automation or other structural changes
that make labor redundant or skills obsolete, leading to layoffs and unemployment (Autor 2015,
Acemoglu & Restrepo 2018). Third, R&D could create new skills or ideas that increase employees’
outside options at other incumbent firms (Herkenhoff, Lise, Menzio & Phillips 2018). Finally, R&D
could generate skills or ideas that are specifically valuable for the founding teams of new firms.
Testing the effect of R&D on labor reallocation requires matching R&D-performing employers
to employees and following the employees’ subsequent career paths. We accomplish this with U.S.
Census data between 1990 and 2008. We consider firm R&D – a measure of innovation input – rather
than patents because while patents are a useful measure of innovation output, they capture only the
subset of innovation outputs that is contractible and over which the firm has chosen to establish property
rights (Sampat 2018). We consider all employees rather than only inventors because the latter comprise
a small fraction of the human capital involved in performing R&D and commercializing its outputs.
Also, this permits considering broader mechanisms for how R&D might affect labor, including skill
obsolescence.
We use two strategies to estimate the effect of R&D increases within publicly traded firms. The

1

first is a regression model with firm, state-year, and granular industry-year fixed effects, as well as timevarying firm characteristics. We find no effects on exits from the employment sample (which mainly
corresponds to unemployment and departures out of the labor force), no effects on employee retention,
and no effects of R&D on employee departures to other incumbent firms. We do find weak positive
effects on employee departures to young firms, which points us in the direction of entrepreneurial
outcomes.
Indeed, we find robust effects of within-firm R&D increases on employee departures to
entrepreneurship, an intuitive and interesting result because startups are known to be important
conduits for commercializing new ideas.1 Specifically, a 100 percent increase in R&D (about one
standard deviation) predicts an 8.4 percent increase in the mean rate of employee departures to
entrepreneurship. We use the term “entrepreneurship” in a broad sense to mean the founding team of a
new firm; the group most likely to contribute ideas and crucial skills to the startup.2 Over the course
of the sample, above- relative to below-median R&D changes within firms yield 8,291 additional
employee-founded startups, which is 7.7 percent of all employee-founded startups in the data. As we
would expect, the effect is higher among high-tech establishments of parent firms. It is not driven by
recent hires (who might, for example, have been hired because of the R&D project). It is robust to
alternative measures of both R&D and entrepreneurship, including the number of startups founded by
recently departed employees.
Despite fine controls, the estimate may be biased if, for example, an unobserved new
technological opportunity increases both the R&D of parents and employee-founded startups. The
second approach is therefore to instrument for R&D using changes in state and federal R&D tax
credits, which affect the firm’s user cost of R&D. The instruments do not permit us to affirmatively
establish causality which would be the case if we could randomly allocate R&D across firms, but they
1

Entrepreneurs play a crucial role in prominent theoretical explanations for economic growth, including
Schumpeter (1911), Lucas (1978), and Baumol (1990). Empirical literature has found that relative to incumbent
firms, new firms have faster productivity and employment growth (Kortum & Lerner (2000), Foster, Haltiwanger &
Syverson (2008), Gennaioli, La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes & Shleifer (2012), Haltiwanger, Jarmin & Miranda (2013)
Decker et al. (2014), and Glaeser, Kerr & Kerr (2015)).
2
Our main entrepreneurship outcome is the share of an establishment’s employees who depart and are among the
top five earners of a firm founded within three years. This captures founders and early employees. Similar variables
are used in Kerr & Kerr (2017), Babina 2017, and Azoulay, Jones, Kim & Miranda (2018).

2

permit a rigorous robustness test of our main results. We follow Bloom, Schankerman & Van Reenen
(2013) and provide new, exhaustive detail on the sources of within-firm variation for both instruments.
The instruments satisfy the relevance condition because there is much evidence that the
elasticity of R&D to tax credits is at least one and does not reflect a relabeling of other expenditure.
We also argue that the instruments are likely to satisfy the exclusion restriction, which is that tax
credits cannot affect employee entrepreneurship except through the employer’s R&D. First, the credits
are not generally useful to startups because they typically do not have taxable income (Bankman &
Gilson 1999). Second, numerous studies, including ours, find no direct association between changes
in federal and state-level R&D tax credits and new firm formation. For example, while Lucking
(2018) shows that state R&D tax credits lead to innovation-induced employment growth in new
establishments of incumbent firms, there is no effect on new firms (see also Wilson 2009 and Curtis &
Decker 2018). In sum, R&D tax credits are not directly useful for startups, but may indirectly affect
new firm formation through the channel of corporate R&D, the outputs of which may depart the firm
from various establishment types, including headquarters, manufacturing plants, and laboratories.
The instrumental variables (IV) analysis also finds that R&D has no effect on other types of
employee departures or on employee retention. The IV effect on employee-founded startups is about
five times larger than the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimate. This could reflect downward bias
in the OLS result. Alternatively, the IV strategy estimates the marginal effect of R&D (the effect of
an additional “last” dollar), while OLS gives the average effect (the effect of increasing the optimal
amount of R&D by one dollar). The causal effect may be higher for the last dollar if it is spent on
projects that are further from the firm’s core focus or have less crucial outputs, and thus are more often
rejected. It is also possible that adjustable R&D, the type sensitive to tax credit changes, has a larger
causal effect. The OLS yields our preferred estimate because we are most interested in the effect of
average increases in R&D.
Our contribution is to show with an empirical approach that points strongly toward a causal
relationship that R&D as an innovation input affects employee mobility to startups. Our finding offers
a dynamic source – changing internal R&D – for the location of the firm boundary around new growth
options.

While the data do not permit us to pin down a precise channel for R&D-induced
3

entrepreneurial departures, we find cross-sectional support for a mechanism where employees take
ideas, skills, or technologies created though the R&D process that are of relatively low value to the
parent firm to startups. The starting point for motivating this mechanism is that the innovation process
is serendipitous, producing unforeseen outputs. The second premise is that innovation effort is hard to
contract ex-ante, and hard to verify ex-post. These information, agency, and contracting frictions
create benefits to allocating control rights to the individuals who are performing innovation
(Grossman & Hart 1986, Aghion & Tirole 1994). Contending with these frictions, the firm may opt
not to pursue all good innovations, enabling employees to take some outside the firm.
Innovation frictions are magnified when an idea is riskier, making high-risk, high-reward
growth options more often best located outside the firm boundary (Gromb & Scharfstein 2002,
Robinson 2008, Frésard, Hoberg & Phillips 2017).

Many risky ventures benefit from the

high-powered incentives that exist in small, focused firms financed through external capital markets or
in entities such as joint ventures (Rhodes-Kropf & Robinson 2008, Phillips & Zhdanov 2012).
Consistent with this, we find that higher parent R&D is strongly associated with venture capital (VC)
backing among employee-founded startups. This finding contributes to the literature on drivers of VC
financing (e.g. Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan & Strebulaev 2019). Among dozens of observable parent
firm characteristics, R&D is by far the strongest predictor of VC for employee-founded startups. Also,
R&D-induced startups are more likely to be incorporated, more likely to be in high-tech sectors, pay
higher wages on average, and are more likely to exit (fail or be acquired). Therefore, the effect
appears to be driven by risky, new-to-the-world ideas, rather than Main Street-type businesses.
We expect the mechanism to be particularly salient when the idea is less valuable to the parent
firm, which may more often be the case when the idea is far from the firm’s core focus and would
impose diversification costs. There is an abundance of evidence that diversification is negatively
related to productivity (Mullainathan & Scharfstein 2001, Schoar 2002, Maksimovic & Phillips 2002,
Seru 2014). From a boundary of the firm perspective, there is less reason for physical assets that are
not complementary to reside within the same firm (Williamson 1975, Hart & Moore 1990,
Rhodes-Kropf & Robinson 2008). Indeed, we find that more parent R&D is negatively associated
with the employee-founded startup being in same broad industry as the parent. We also show using
4

supply chain relationships that R&D-induced, employee-founded startups are more likely to draw
inputs from a broader array of supplier industries.

The types of ideas that employees take to

entrepreneurship seem to be those that benefit from focused, high-powered incentives and that are not
especially complementary with the firm’s existing activities.
Firms may permit employees to depart with R&D outputs as a way to induce retention and
effort, especially if the lost ideas are peripheral. The long-term labor contract with employees may
include some degree of permissiveness towards R&D-induced entrepreneurship. Such a policy could
help the firm to hire the best talent and induce optimal effort. Relatedly, Guiso, Pistaferri & Schivardi
(2012) and Howell & Brown (2019) show that labor contracts can trade off benefits for the worker and
employer over time. A permissive approach to employee entrepreneurship is likely most feasible if the
lost innovations are not ones the firm intends to sell or develop. Consistent with this, R&D outputs over
which the firm does establish explicit property rights do not yield employee-founded startups. There
are no effects of patents or patent citations on employee entrepreneurship.
Alternative channels may play some role, but they are not well-supported by the evidence. For
example, employees may steal an idea that the firm values. If this were the primary driver, the effect
should be smaller in states that strictly enforce noncompete covenants. Instead, those states exhibit
a similar effect to that of states that weakly enforce noncompetes. We also find strong evidence that
employees who depart do not cause the R&D increase, nor are they hired as a result of it. In particular,
our effect is not driven by recent hires and is identified off of within-firm year-to-year changes in R&D
spending.
R&D-induced employee entrepreneurship could be costly to the parent firm, may be priced
into the labor contract, or may be a positive externality of R&D. Quantifying the costs and benefits of
R&D-induced employee entrepreneurship is beyond the scope of this paper, but our finding is related
to research on R&D spillovers (Arrow 1962, Griliches 1992, Jones & Williams 1998). The effect is
a “spillover” in the sense of being a benefit of one firm’s R&D that accrues to another firm. There
would be no spillover only if the startup is a wholly-owned spinout and the parent fully internalizes
its benefits. We present evidence that parent firms do not appear to internalize the benefits of R&Dinduced startups by investing in or acquiring them. That said, we cannot rule out parents sometimes
5

having licensing or investment contracts with R&D-induced startups.
This paper joins the literature on innovation and labor mobility. Perhaps the closest papers
to ours are Balsvik (2011), who shows that knowledge spillovers across countries can occur through
employee movement within multinationals, and Hombert & Matray (2016), who show that a credit
supply shock affects inventor mobility at small firms. Also related is Chatterji (2009), who shows that
in the medical device sector, startups founded by former employees of incumbent firms perform better
than other new entrants. While there are many studies of knowledge diffusion, to our knowledge there
is no work on how innovation investment affects labor mobility.3 Studying R&D investment rather
than patent-based variables permits us to consider a wider range of employees and a wider range of
outcomes, including labor displacement.
We also contribute to the growing literature on the interactions between labor and finance,
which has studied financial mechanisms that affect labor reallocation. Tate & Yang (2015) show that
diversified firms have more active internal labor markets that encourage labor reallocation and human
capital accumulation. Maksimovic, Phillips & Prabhala (2011) and Ma, Ouimet & Simintzi (2016)
find that mergers and acquisitions lead to restructuring of employment, changes in wages, and the
composition of occupations. Babina, Ouimet & Zarutskie (2018) study the implications of going public
for workers. We add to this literature by documenting that R&D investment predicts labor reallocation
to startups, but does not lead to layoffs due to restructuring.
Finally, we contribute to the entrepreneurship literature. The positive effect of R&D on
entrepreneurship that we document is one mechanism for why high-growth startup founders are often
former employees of large incumbent firms (Gompers, Lerner & Scharfstein 2005, Klepper 2009). We
offer corporate R&D as a new source for where ideas for high-growth startups come from, a topic of
considerable recent interest (Aghion & Jaravel 2015, Babina 2017).
3

Other work on knowledge diffusion through employees includes Oettl & Agrawal (2008), Breschi & Lissoni
(2009), Poole (2013), and Tambe & Hitt (2013).

6

2

Hypothesis development

This section presents four not mutually exclusive or exhaustive hypotheses about how innovation
investment interacts with firm boundaries through labor mobility. Specifically, corporate R&D may
have a positive effect on employee (1) Retention; (2) Departures from the labor force; (3) Mobility to
other firms; and (4) Entrepreneurship. As we are focused on how R&D affects accumulation of
exposed human capital, we do not consider new employees, but this is a fruitful avenue for future
research. This section concentrates on (4), as it has the richest theoretical motivation and is the only
one with empirical support. We further offer two predictions about (a) the type of R&D-generated
growth option that is most likely to locate in a startup; and (b) the circumstances under which an idea
may be more valuable in a standalone firm founded by the employee than in the parent firm.

Hypothesis 1: Corporate R&D has a positive effect on employee retention.
The purpose of R&D is to create growth options for the firm. If R&D leads to growth, it is
possible that existing workers are less likely to leave, leading to a causal positive effect of R&D on
employee retention. It could increase job advancement opportunities. R&D could also make the firm a
more interesting place to work; that is, it might increase workplace amenities (Rosen 1986). For
example, R&D may lead to new product development that is stimulating for the employee.

Hypothesis 2: Corporate R&D has a positive effect on departures from the labor force.
R&D may lead to automation or other structural changes that make labor redundant or skills
obsolete, causing layoffs (Brynjolfsson & McAfee 2014, Autor 2015). Even if innovation investment is
associated with new labor-intensive tasks that are complementary with labor-replacing technology, as
in Acemoglu & Restrepo (2018), we may expect that some individuals will not have the requisite skills
to transition to the new tasks, and automation or digitization will lead to an increase in departures to
unemployment. Finding a positive effect of R&D on departures from the labor force among low-wage
workers would shed light on the decline in the low-skill labor share of national income.
However, it may be that automation is reflected in capital expenditure, and does not have a

7

direct relationship to R&D. An alternative mechanism for R&D to increase layoffs is if it is associated
with restructuring. R&D outputs could cause the firm to pursue a new strategic direction, and find
some existing workers no longer useful. For example, GM’s decision to lay off more than 14,000
employees in North America in late 2018 was in part attributed to its new focus on electric vehicles
and autonomous driving technology.4

Hypothesis 3: Corporate R&D has a positive effect on employee mobility to other firms.
It is well known that knowledge diffuses across firms, a phenomenon that is crucial to
explaining economic growth (Arrow 1962, Griliches 1992).

The R&D process is human

capital-intensive, requiring creative effort on the part of employees. This innovation effort is hard or
impossible to contract on ex-ante, and hard or impossible to verify ex-post (Grossman & Hart 1986
and Aghion & Tirole 1994). These contracting frictions could lead R&D to induce more employee
mobility to other incumbent firms. That is, for some employees R&D may create better outside
options at peer firms. This could involve stealing ideas that the firm would prefer to retain in-house,
talent poaching, or it may reflect the firm permitting employees to leave with ideas that it does not find
especially valuable.
To our knowledge, there are no existing tests of whether R&D investment has a causal effect
on labor mobility. However, extensive existing work on labor mobility and knowledge diffusion
motivate this hypothesis. For example, Singh & Agrawal (2011) find that when inventors move
between firms, they make use of their existing inventions, which benefits the hiring firm. Similarly,
Tambe & Hitt (2013) find that productivity spillovers occur when IT workers move between firms.
Other literature on inventor mobility and knowledge spillovers includes Almeida & Kogut (1999),
Agrawal, Cockburn & McHale (2006), Matray (2015), Hombert & Matray (2016), Moretti & Wilson
(2017), and Herkenhoff, Lise, Menzio & Phillips (2018). Finally, individuals are also known to play
an important role in international knowledge flows (Oettl & Agrawal 2008, Docquier & Rapoport
2012, and Poole 2013).
4

See here.

8

Hypothesis 4: Corporate R&D has a positive effect on employee entrepreneurship.
Contracting and verification frictions imply that growth options emerging from R&D may
sometimes be optimally developed outside of the firm’s boundaries in new, standalone firms, because
there are benefits to allocating residual rights of control to the party that performs innovation. As
incentives to invest increase with control rights, integration is not always optimal. If the employee is
responsible for the investment necessary to incubate an idea, he may exert optimal effort only in his
own firm. Frésard, Hoberg & Phillips (2017) model these frictions to innovation explicitly in the
context of vertical integration. They conclude that control rights should be allocated to stand-alone
firms in especially R&D-intensive industries and when the innovation is as yet unrealized; that is,
when innovation requires more unverifiable effort. Acemoglu, Griffith, Aghion & Zilibotti (2010) also
theorize that technology intensity should be associated with less vertical integration.
A slightly different perspective on the contracting problem of innovation suggests that it may be
optimal for the firm to permit some R&D-induced entrepreneurship as part of a long-term contract with
employees. This perspective emerges from the participation and incentive compatibility constraints of
the labor contract. Suppose that corporate innovation requires partially unobservable employee effort,
and innovation serendipitously yields some outputs that are more valuable for the employee to pursue in
a standalone firm than in the R&D-performing firm. The firm can (a) give nothing to the employee, and
perhaps try to sell the idea; (b) try to share the idea with the employee, perhaps through a joint venture;
or (c) permit the employee to leave the firm with the idea. If the firm can commit to allowing employees
to “walk away” with relatively less valuable ideas, this reward may help the firm to hire the right talent
(the participation constraint) and induce optimal effort (the incentive compatibility constraint). Related
to this idea, Kondo et al. (2019) model the importance of trust in the firm-inventor relationship; to
maintain its reputation, the firm enables the inventor to pursue some of his own ideas. In their model,
this long term implicit contract ultimately increases the efficiency of R&D investment.
In sum, in the presence of information asymmetry, agency problems and incomplete
contracting, there are benefits to developing a risky new idea in a new venture rather than within the
parent firm. This may cause R&D to have a positive effect on employee entrepreneurship. Further,
such an allocation of control rights implies that external capital markets, such as venture capital, will
9

be better sources of financing than internal capital markets.

Hypothesis 4a: R&D-induced employee-founded startups are more likely to be risky and potentially
high-growth.
Agency frictions are magnified when an idea is riskier, making high-risk, high-reward growth
options more often best located outside the firm boundaries, because such ventures benefit from the
incentive alignment inherent to small, focused firms. Gromb & Scharfstein (2002) model whether a
new venture should be pursued within the established firm (“intrapreneurship”) or outside the firm.
They note that scientists and executives commonly leave large companies and launch their own
ventures. Their mechanism rests on the higher-powered incentives of the entrepreneur. When the new
venture has potentially large payoffs and high failure risk, the benefits of locating the idea outside the
firm in a new business outweigh the safety net benefits of intrapreneurship.
A different possible mechanism is elucidated in Robinson (2008). When embarking on risky
projects, the firm cannot commit to not divert resources if the project fails. As a result, managers are
unwilling to supply effort ex-ante. This makes it optimal to locate risky projects in a distinct legal
entity outside the firm boundaries. The firm can then contract with the new legal entity, committing
not to “pick winners” ex-post. While our setting does not feature alliances as an outcome (in fact, we
find that parent firms do not appear to benefit from R&D-induced startups), the underlying mechanism
of inadequate effort provision helps explain why risky, diversifying ideas would leave the firm (see
also Lindsey 2008).

Hypothesis 4b: R&D-induced, employee-founded startups are more likely to develop new ideas
or technologies that are far from the parent firm’s core focus and have poor complementarities with its
existing assets.
When a firm rejects a new idea that would diversify the firm’s activities, employee-founded
startups may be a byproduct.

One way this may occur is through the long-term contracting

perspective described above, to motivate Hypothesis 4. The firm is likely to permit employees to
depart with R&D outputs as a way to induce retention and effort if the lost ideas are peripheral to the
10

firm, rather than in its area of core focus. Therefore, we expect that the firm will be most permissive
towards employee entrepreneurship with businesses that would be diversifying if pursued in-house.
As one example of what a diversifying idea might look like, consider the agricultural insurance startup
startup WeatherBill (later renamed The Climate Corporation and ultimately acquired by Monsanto).
Its founders, David Friedberg and Siraj Khaliq, left Google in 2006 to launch the new firm, which
used artificial intelligence insights from Google to better price insurance.5 Google may be more
permissive of employee entrepreneurship in areas such as financial services, which are relatively far
from its main focus.
There is also a boundaries of the firm argument. In the transaction cost-based theory of the firm,
Williamson (1975) and Klein, Crawford & Alchian (1978) theorize that vertical integration reflects
the importance of relationship-specific investments between transacting parties. Specific investments
between separate firms create hold-up problems, or opportunities for one party to threaten to leave.
Hart & Moore (1990) describe the firm as a set of property rights over physical assets, where residual
rights of control (all non-contracted aspects of usage) reside with the owner of the asset. Only when
physical assets are complementary will hold-up problems dictate integration within a single firm.
A more recent literature pushes forward this theory and links it to empirical facts. RhodesKropf & Robinson (2008) demonstrate that when physical assets are more complementary, a merged
firm will have greater surplus than two separate firms. The “picking winners” problem described above
from Robinson (2008) is exacerbated for projects that would diversify the firm. Empirical work finds a
negative correlation between firm performance and diversification (Lang & Stulz 1994, Schoar 2002).6
There is also practitioner evidence that sustained corporate success demands discipline in rejecting
good opportunities that would make the firm’s activities excessively diffuse (Collins 2009, McKeown
2012). Efforts to explain diversification discounts have identified additional mechanisms, including the
role of firm characteristics in the optimal degree of diversification (Campa & Kedia 2002, Maksimovic
& Phillips 2002, Graham, Lemmon & Wolf 2002). These explanations for equilibrium diversification
5

See here.
Relatedly, using data from the laser industry, Klepper & Sleeper (2005) focus on employee-founded startups that
are also in the laser industry. They nonetheless find that these startups tend to target different customer segments than
the parent.
6

11

are consistent with a costly diversification mechanism explaining why a specific project might find
itself optimally located outside the firm boundary.
In sum, if an R&D-generated idea is far from the firm’s core focus and has weak
complementarities, there is less reason for the new product to be integrated with the parent firm.
Permitting the employee to take ownership and thereby residual rights of control may maximize
investment incentives. In this case, we expect that R&D-induced startups would more often be in
different broad industries from their parents.

More generally, a permissive policy towards

employee-founded startups could allow the firm to maintain the benefits of focusing on existing
products and customers and could dynamically incentivize employees to maximize effort.

3

Data

We use data from five sources: Compustat, the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD) and its Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) data,

ThomsonOne

VentureXpert, and the NBER Patent Data Project. This section describes each source of data and
explains the key variables we use in our analysis. It also discusses potential concerns with the data.

3.1

Data sources

Our measure of corporate innovation investment is R&D expenditure as reported in 10-K filings and
provided by Compustat. We restrict the sample of potential “parent” firms to public firms with positive
R&D.7 We primarily use log R&D but show that the results are robust to using R&D divided by
total assets. We merge Compustat to the restricted-access LBD using a Census-provided crosswalk.
The LBD is a panel dataset that tracks all U.S. business establishments with paid employees. An
establishment is a discrete physical location operated by a firm with at least one paid employee. The
7

R&D expenditure is only available for public firms. We use firms with positive R&D for two reasons. First,
firms that report R&D are likely qualitatively different from firms that do not in ways that might affect employee
entrepreneurship, despite rigorous controls and fixed effects (Lerner & Seru 2017). Second, our primary specification
will be focused on the intensive margin; since we use firm fixed effects, firms with zero R&D provide no variation.
However, in a robustness check we include all Compustat firms and find similar results to the main specification.

12

LBD contains a unique firm-level identifier, firmid, which longitudinally links establishments that are
part of the same firm. Incorporated businesses rather than sole proprietorships or partnerships comprise
about 83 percent of the LBD.8 For further details about the LBD, see Jarmin & Miranda (2002). We
use the 1978-2011 LBD for firm-level variables and to identify new firms. We require parent firm
establishments to have at least 10 employees. Following Haltiwanger et al. (2013), we define firm age
using the oldest establishment that the firm owns in the first year the firm is observed in the LBD.
A firm birth is defined when all of its establishments are new, preventing us from misclassifying an
establishment that changes ownership as a startup.
A challenge when studying how R&D affects labor reallocation is that we must observe
employees and track them from firm to firm. We solve this with the LEHD, which provides quarterly
firm-worker matched data. The data contain employees’ wages, gender, race, place and date of birth,
and citizenship status. The LEHD has been widely used in economic research (e.g., Tate & Yang 2015
and Goldin et al. 2017). In covered states, the LEHD includes over 96 percent of all private-sector
jobs (BLS 1997, Abowd et al. 2009). About 12 percent of workers in year t are not in the LEHD in
year t + 3. This is a similar attrition rate to that seen in the U.S. Current Population Survey (CPS).9
Abowd et al. (2009) describe the construction of the LEHD data in detail.
Coverage begins in 1990 for several states and increases over time, ending in 2008. We have
access to 31 states, in which we observe all employee-founded startups.10 These states do not include
the innovation hubs of California and Massachusetts.

Their absence does not compromise the

relevance and importance of our analysis. Our data include research-intensive states such as North
Carolina and Texas; as a point of comparison, in 2017 venture capitalists invested about $1.8 billion in
Texas and $1.9 billion in all five Nordic countries (Sweden, Norway, Finland, Iceland, and Denmark),
which have individually been settings for important past research on entrepreneurship.11 Public
8

This is observable using the publicly available Census County Business Patterns data, which are built from the
same Business Register that is the basis for the LBD.
9
The CPS tracks workers for a maximum of 16 months. In the CPS data, among private sector employees who are
observed 15 months later, about 9 percent drop out of the employment sample (data available here).
10
The states we observe are: Arkansas, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Colorado, Idaho, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana,
Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Missouri, Montana, Minnesota, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina, Nevada,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia,
Washington, and Wisconsin.
11
See NVCA 2018 Yearbook here, and Pitchbook’s European Venture report here.

13

companies with significant R&D headquartered in our states include Amazon, Microsoft,
ExxonMobil, General Dynamics, Red Hat, 3M, and Celgene, among many others. In our states, we
also observe establishments of public firms headquartered in uncovered states. For example, IBM is
headquartered in New York but has a research lab in Austin, Texas. Switzerland-headquartered
pharmaceutical giant Novartis has a large R&D operation in New Jersey.

In sum, we observe

meaningful quantities of innovation and high-growth entrepreneurship.
More systematically, 60 percent of U.S. employment, or about 150 million people, and 52
percent of U.S. inventors are located in our states.12 Using LBD data, we calculate that 10.7 percent
of firms are aged three years or less in our states, compared to 10.6 percent in all states. Our data are
also representative at the industry level, as shown in Appendix Table A.1.13 For example, in the
1990-2001 period, Manufacturing represents 15.4 percent of employment in our sample states, and
15.8 percent of employment in other states. In the 2002-08 period, Professional and Business Services
(which includes information technology companies such as Google) represents 12.3 percent of
employment in our sample states, and 12.8 percent of employment in other states. In Section 5.6
below, we consider external validity. However, a final note on this topic is that our research question
may be especially policy-relevant to states that are not the leading innovation hubs. The effect of
R&D on worker reallocation – especially R&D induced by local tax credits – is important for states
actively seeking to promote innovation and entrepreneurship.
In the LEHD, workers are identified with firms’ state reporting units, or State Employer
Identification Numbers (SEINs). Each SEIN contains state and industry information. We link SEINs
to firms in the LBD using federal employer identification numbers present in both datasets. For ease
of exposition, we term SEINs “establishments.” We do the linkage in the first quarter of each year
since the annual LBD measures employment and payroll in March. We drop establishments with less
12

We use LBD data to calculate the former statistics and comprehensive USPTO patent data between 1990 and 2005
to calculate the latter.
13
Specifically, we compare our data to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Current Employment
Statistics Survey from 1990-2008. According to the BLS, employment data come from a voluntary, state level stratified
sample of firms that is adjusted for population using monthly state unemployment insurance records. First, we divide
state-industry employment by total state employment across all states for each year, and then take the average of this
object across years. We conduct the same calculation for states out of our sample. A second calculation considers the
share of people employed in an industry in our sample states versus the other states. The results are in Appendix Table
A.2. The share of employment for each industry is quite similar to the overall share of employment we observe.

14

than 10 employees, as they tend to have noisy reporting.14 This yields an annual panel of public firm
establishments (i.e., SEINs), in which employees are observed as of the first quarter of each year.
To identify VC-backed startups, we use the Puri & Zarutskie (2012) link from ThomsonOne
VentureXpert to the Census Business Register. We use patent data from the NBER Patent Data Project,
which includes patents linked to Compustat through 2006. We employ several annual, patent-based
variables at both the firm and industry level. These are the number of patent classes a firm or industry
patents in, the number of patents, the number of forward and backward citations, and the average,
maximum, and median patent generality and originality. Generality is higher when forward citations
are in many classes, and originality is higher when backward citations are in many classes.

3.2

Identifying employee outcomes

Our final sample consists of an annual panel of public firm establishments in 31 states between
1990–2005, with employees followed through 2008. We measure departure rates at the establishment
level, rather than the firm level or employee level, for several reasons. First, public firms often have
operations in multiple industries and/or states. Establishment-level analysis permits including as
controls industry-year and state-year fixed effects as well as establishment workforce characteristics
and wages. Second, the more disaggregated data allow cross-sectional tests. For example, Amazon
has warehouses and business service offices. Using establishment-level data, we can test if the effect
of R&D within Amazon is different in business offices than in warehouses. Third, we do not use
employee-level observations in our primary approach as they create an artificially large amount of
power, since variation in R&D occurs at the firm level.

However, the results are robust to

employee-level analysis (Section 5.4).
We begin by observing workers at public firm establishments (denoted e) in the first quarter of
year t, and the quantity of R&D investment in year t

1. Using longitudinally consistent individual

identifiers in the LEHD, we follow employees one, two, and three years after year t. They may move
to other incumbent firms, which we define as firms that exist before year t, stay at the R&D-performing
14

We obtain similar results if we drop establishments with less than five or less than 15 employees.

15

firm, or drop out of the employment sample. About 94 percent of workers in the “drop out” group go to
unemployment or exit the labor force. Only around six percent depart to locations outside our LEHD
data coverage.
Identifying employee-founded startups is challenging because the LEHD does not provide
information on equity ownership. Our aim is to capture members of new firms’ founding teams, who
contribute crucial early stage ideas and skills. The measure is in line with prior research using
executive teams, including Gompers et al. (2005). We focus on the highest earners to identify
founders and early employees with important human capital. Azoulay et al. (2018) find that a firm’s
top three initial earners usually include the firm’s owners. This is because the W-2 data that is the
basis for the LEHD must be filed for all employees, including owners who actively manage the
business and are required by law to pay themselves reasonable wage compensation.15 Our primary
definition of an employee-founded startup is a firm founded between t and t + 3 in which any of the
parent firm establishment’s employees at year t is among the top five earners as of t + 3.16 We show
the effect on a range of other entrepreneurship measures to demonstrate robustness (see Section 5.4).

3.3

Summary statistics

Table 1 Panels 1-3 contain summary statistics at the parent firm-year, parent establishment-year, and
employee-founded startup levels, respectively. We show the mean for indicator variables, as well as
the quasi-median and the standard deviation for continuous variables.17 Our dependent variables are
measured at the establishment-year level as explained above (Panel 2). For all outcome variables, we
divide by e’s employment in year t to give, for example, the establishment rate of employee
entrepreneurship. On average, 26 percent of an establishment’s employees move to other incumbents
(firms that existed before year t employment at a public firm), and 7.2 percent move to firms that are
15

See here.
The lag is motivated by the time necessary to start a firm and to identify the effects of R&D, which might not be
immediate. We examine the timing of departures in Section 5.4.
17
As Census disclosure procedures prohibit the disclosure of percentile values, we approximate the median with
a quasi-median, which is estimated using a 99 percent weight on observations within the interquartile range and a 1
percent weight on the remaining observations. The number of observations and all estimates in the tables are rounded
according to the Census disclosure requirements.
16

16

less than 10 years old. The rate of employee entrepreneurship is 1.3 percent. Similarly, Kerr, Kerr &
Nanda (2015) find in LBD/LEHD matched data that 1.7 percent of workers become entrepreneurs
over a four-year period.

Panel 3 of Table 1 describes the 108,000 employee-founded startups

identified in the LBD. In their first year, the new firms have on average 12 employees, and 70 percent
are incorporated businesses. Two percent ever receive venture capital funding, which is 18 times the
rate of VC backing among the whole population of new employer firms (Puri & Zarutskie 2012).
There may be concern that employees depart the firm and found a startup in an entrepreneurial
hub such as Silicon Valley. This may sometimes occur, but it is likely rare. Guzman (2019) finds
that only 0.2 percent of new firms move to Silicon Valley in their first two years, based on data about
all businesses registered in 26 states between 1988 and 2014. Note that if a startup has at least one
employee in the home state before moving, we observe them. To the degree that former employees
move to an uncovered state before hiring an employee, these individuals are counted in our outcome
variables as having dropped out of coverage. If this phenomenon is important, we should observe a
positive effect of R&D on dropping out of the labor force, but we do not.

4

Empirical approach

The primary estimation strategy, a tightly controlled fixed effects regression, is introduced in Section
4.1. In Section 4.2, we explain our instrumental variables strategy.

4.1

Main model

Our main approach consists of variants on the OLS regression in Equation 1, where e denotes an
establishment, f a firm, and t the year:

Employee outcomee,f,t+3 = ln (R&Df,t

1)

+ Firm FEf + Industry-year FEe,t

+ State-year FEe,t + ⇠Controlsf,t + ⇣Controlse,t + "e,f,t .

17

(1)

Our primary independent variable is log R&D among firms with positive R&D (the results are robust
to including non-R&D performing firms and using R&D/Assets). We employ firm fixed effects to
control for time-invariant differences across firms. This means that we mainly compare the same
employees before and after an R&D change, so effects do not stem from firm-worker matching (we
also find that the effect is not driven by recent hires). Industry-year fixed effects (using SIC three-digit
codes) control for changes in investment opportunities. We also use SIC four-digit codes in some
specifications. State-year fixed effects control for regional shocks, which may affect investment
opportunities at incumbents as well as entrepreneurship. Note that these fixed effects ensure that
proximity to omitted states should not be correlated with any mis-measurement. We cluster standard
errors by firm, following the suggestion in Bertrand et al. (2004) to cluster by the cross-sectional unit
that is the source of treatment variation.
Time-varying establishment and firm controls address other concerns.

We control for

establishment number of employees in case, for example, smaller establishments have more focused
or autonomous cultures and thus lead to more employee entrepreneurship. We also control for the
establishment’s average wage. We further include the following firm-level controls: return on assets,
sales growth, Tobin’s Q, asset tangibility (measured as plant, property and equipment investment
divided by total assets), size (log total assets), cash holdings, age, and diversification (an indicator for
firms having establishments in multiple SIC three-digit industries).

4.2

Instrument for R&D

Endogeneity may bias the OLS estimates of Equation 1. An unobserved demand shock or new
technological opportunity that is not captured by the granular industry-year fixed effects may jointly
engender parent R&D and employee reallocation. This is a version of the Manski (1993) reflection
problem and would bias the estimates upwards. The ideal experiment would randomly allocate R&D
to firms and observe labor reallocation. This is infeasible, so we use the best available instrument:
changes in the tax price of R&D following Bloom et al. (2013). While this IV strategy is imperfect,
we show that it is well-suited to our context and is likely to satisfy the exclusion restriction.

18

4.2.1

Instrument motivation and assumptions

We use two instruments: federal and state tax credit changes, which affect the firm’s cost of R&D
capital. The state tax credit must be aggregated to the firm-level. This is necessary because R&D
is only observable at the firm level, but it is also intuitive in our setting because the outputs from
R&D investment may depart the firm from a variety of establishment types, including headquarters,
manufacturing plants, and laboratories. Where R&D is located for tax purposes need not be the place
where R&D outputs depart the firm via employees. In practice, following Bloom et al. (2013), our state
instrument uses inventor locations to approximate where the R&D occurs.
As with any instrument, causal interpretation rests on assumptions about an underlying
economic model (Kahn & Whited 2017). One assumption is relevance: Firms must react to R&D tax
credits by increasing their R&D investment. The underlying model is one where a lower cost of
capital for R&D leads firms to spend more on R&D. The literature has established that R&D tax
credits have strong effects on corporate R&D in the short and long term. For the federal tax credit, the
elasticity has been estimated to be well below -1, such that reducing the tax price of R&D capital by
one dollar stimulates more than a dollar of additional R&D. This evidence includes Hall (1993),
McCutchen (1993), Mamuneas & Nadiri (1996), Hall & Van Reenen (2000), Billings et al. (2001),
Bloom et al. (2002), Klassen et al. (2004), Clausen (2009), and Rao (2016). The high sensitivity of
expenditure to the R&D tax credit may reflect the fact that firms tend to finance R&D out of free cash
flows (Brown & Petersen 2011).18
There is also evidence that state R&D tax credits increase R&D within the affected state, as
shown by Paff (2005) and Wu (2008), among others. The most conservative finding is in Wilson
(2009), where a one percentage point increase in the state tax credit rate increases R&D by 1.7 percent
in the short term and 3 to 4 percent in the longer term. Wilson (2009) also finds that the tax credits lead
firms to reallocate R&D geographically. Since large, multi-state firms are responsible for most R&D
expenditures, and they may shift R&D across states in response to the tax credits while our independent
variable is firm-wide R&D, we expect the state instrument to be weaker than the federal one.
18

There is similar evidence of large positive elasticities for foreign programs, including in Canada and the UK
(Dechezleprêtre, Einiö, Martin, Nguyen & Van Reenen 2016, Agrawal et al. 2014, and Guceri & Liu 2017).

19

R&D stimulated by tax credits does not simply reflect relabeling of existing related
expenditures. Dechezleprêtre et al. (2016) show that a UK R&D tax credit increases patenting and
citations. Balsmeier, Kurakina & Fleming (2018) find that California’s R&D tax credit increases
patenting, and the additional patents are particularly valuable. Beyond patents, Czarnitzki et al. (2011)
and Cappelen et al. (2012) find positive effects of tax credits on product and process innovation,
respectively.
We discuss the exclusion restriction in the context of entrepreneurship, which is the only
outcome for which we find an effect. The restriction is that tax credits cannot affect employee
entrepreneurship except through the employer’s R&D. Startups do not usually use R&D tax credits
because they typically do not have taxable income (Bankman & Gilson 1999).19 We demonstrate in
Appendix A.1.3 that there is no relation between the state tax credits and startup creation. Curtis &
Decker (2018) show in a border county differences-in-differences model that R&D tax credits have no
effect on new firms. Wilson (2009) and Lucking (2018) also do not find employment effects among
new firms, only existing firms. The fact that R&D tax credit changes do not affect a state’s total
number of startups is consistent with our main result, which uses changes in R&D to suggest that the
overall level of corporate R&D may be an important source of high-growth startups. If R&D tax
credit changes affect startup creation only through marginal corporate R&D changes, tax credit
changes are unlikely to yield a measurable effect on the state’s aggregate number of startups. It is
important to emphasize that this paper is not about the macroeconomic effects of R&D tax credits.
Instead, we are focused on whether corporate R&D yields employee-founded startups.
In sum, while imperfect, R&D tax credits offer the best available source of quasi-exogenous
variation driving corporate R&D. Most importantly, they are plausibly unrelated to technological or
demand shocks that could jointly give rise to parent R&D and employee reallocation. For further
discussion of concerns with the instruments, see Appendix A.1.3.
19

The presence of carryforwards may make the credits somewhat useful to some startups, but our evidence in the
Appendix suggests any effect is not large enough to be measurable.

20

4.2.2

Summaries of the tax credits

Appendix Section A.1 contains details about the credits and their calculations, which are summarized
here. Changes in tax credits affect firm incentives to invest in R&D, because they change the firmspecific user cost of R&D capital. The tax credits are not deductions. Instead, they reduce the firm’s
corporate income tax liability by the value of the credit. The first instrument is the federal tax price
of R&D, which we denote as ⇢Fft . It has annual changes for most firms and is firm-specific for a
number of reasons (Hall 1993). For example, it depends on firm age and past sales, and includes tax
loss carryforwards. It is calculated as a nonlinear function of these and other firm variables, so we
can control for these variables directly in the IV. It is also worth noting that none of the variables on
which the credit depends predict employee departures to entrepreneurship. We find substantial withinindustry variation in the tax price of R&D, as well as the necessary variation within firm over time.
The state instrument requires two objects: the state tax price component of the R&D user cost
of capital (⇢Ss,t ), and a measure of the share of a firm’s R&D that occurs in a given state (✓f,s,t ). We
use the state tax price of R&D from Wilson (2009), which incorporates state level corporate income
taxes, depreciation allowances, and R&D tax credits. These credits vary across states and time. To
build ✓f,s,t , we follow Bloom et al. (2013) and use the share of the firm’s patent inventors located in
P
state s. The firm’s state-level tax price is then ⇢Sf,t = s ✓f,s,t ⇢Ss,t .
4.2.3

First stage estimation

Having constructed the firm-level federal and state tax prices of R&D (⇢Ff,t and ⇢Sf,t respectively), we
estimate the following first stage regression:

ln(R&Df,t ) =

1

ln ⇢Sf,t +

2

ln ⇢Ff,t + Firm FEf + Industry-year FEe,t

(2)

+ State-year FEe,t + ⇠Controlsf,t + ⇣Controlse,t + "e,f,t .
R&D tax credits could have other effects in the state. As in the Equation 1, our IV estimation includes
state-year and industry-year fixed effects. These will absorb any aggregate effects.
The results are in Table 2. The instruments are strong, yielding F-statistics of about 25, well
21

above the rule-of-thumb cutoff of 10. The partial R2 of the two instruments ranges from 2.2 to 3.2
percent, which captures a reasonable amount of variation in R&D (Jiang 2015).20 As expected, the
federal instrument is stronger than the state instrument. Bloom et al. (2013) use only firm and year fixed
effects. This is equivalent to column 1. In column 2, we add firm time-varying controls, which reduce
the magnitude of the effects somewhat but do not affect their statistical significance. Our preferred
specification, with SIC three-digit industry-year and state-year fixed effects, along with firm timevarying controls and firm fixed effects, is in column 5. The results are also robust to using SIC four-digit
industry fixed effects (column 6).21

5

Results

In Section 5.1, we test Hypotheses 1-3. We present the main results for Hypothesis 4 – the effect of
R&D on employee entrepreneurship – in Sections 5.2 and 5.3.

Alternative measures of

entrepreneurship and R&D, as well as heterogeneity in parent firm characteristics, are considered in
Section 5.4 and 5.5. Further robustness tests are in Section 5.6.

5.1

Effects on retention, layoffs, and mobility to incumbents

We begin by testing whether R&D affects retention, departures from the labor force, or mobility to
other incumbent firms. The effects of R&D on these outcomes are reported in Table 3 using the OLS
and IV approaches. We focus on the OLS results, as this is our preferred model for entrepreneurship
(discussed below), though the results are not qualitatively different using the IV.
Columns 1 and 2 show that there is no effect on the share of an establishment’s employees who
remain at the firm. The effect in column 1 of -1.13 implies a decrease of 2.4 percent relative to the mean
of 48 percent. The 95 percent confidence interval is between -5.3 percent and 0.01 percent. Columns
20

We expect that firms without taxable income would benefit less from R&D tax credits. Indeed, when we interact
R&D with profitability (EBITDA/Assets), we find that while the independent effect of R&D remains positive and
significant, the effect is significantly larger for more profitable firms.
21
We find that R&D tax credits do not predict total investment, only R&D investment. We are grateful to Shai
Bernstein for suggesting this placebo test.

22

3 and 4 show no effects on exit from the employment sample; we can rule out effects outside the 95
percent confidence interval bounds of -2.2 percent and 2.1 percent of the mean. This implies that R&D
does not lead to automation or other structural changes that make labor redundant. Columns 5 and 6
show no effects on moves to other incumbent firms. The OLS coefficient in column 5 permits us to
rule out effects outside the 95 percent confidence interval bounds of -6.5 percent and 2.8 percent of the
mean. This null result suggests that either R&D does not increase employees’ outside options at peer
firms, or that the parent prevents such departures (e.g., though labor contracts).
We do find positive effects on moves to young firms. Column 7 of Table 3 indicates that a
100 percent increase in parent firm R&D is associated with an 4.8 percent increase in the employee
departure rate to incumbent firms less than 10 years old, relative to the sample mean. The IV estimate
is larger, but less precise (column 8). When we require the young incumbent firm to be high tech, the
coefficient of 0.23 represents a 5.4 percent increase relative to the sample mean (column 9). The IV
result has no significance (column 10). Together, these results show that R&D has no measurable effect
on labor reallocation except to firms that are close to startups, pointing us toward entrepreneurship.

5.2

Effect on employee entrepreneurship

Estimates of the effect of R&D on employee entrepreneurship using Equation 1 (OLS) are in Table
4. Our preferred specification in column 5 of Panel 1 includes firm, industry-year, and state-year fixed
effects (column 3 replicates the specification reported in Table 3). The coefficient of 0.109 implies that a
100 percent increase in parent firm R&D or approximately one standard deviation in R&D is associated
with an 8.4 percent increase in the mean rate of employee departures to entrepreneurship, relative to
the sample mean of 1.3 percent.22 The result is robust to a wide array of alternative controls and fixed
effects, shown across the eight models in Panels 1 and 2.23 Column 2 employs establishment-level
22
As R&D is in log units, the coefficient means that a 1 percent increase in R&D increases employee
entrepreneurship by .109/100.
23
Some controls are denoted with a lag (t 1) and others are not. This is because firm-level controls are measured
when R&D is measured (year t 1), but establishment-level variables are measured when the employee snapshot
is taken (first quarter of year t). We do not report them in further results because the Census Bureau strictly limits
the number of coefficients we may disclose. The controls are at the firm level, except for employment and payroll
which are at the establishment level. The only control with consistent predictive power is employment; employee
entrepreneurship is negatively associated with the establishment’s number of employees.

23

controls. Establishments with a higher share of white workers or foreign-born workers are associated
with more employee entrepreneurship. The results do not attenuate with wage controls, so the effect is
not driven by an increase in employee wages. The result is robust to using SIC four-digit industry fixed
effects (Panel 1 column 4 and Panel 2 column 1).
To shed light on which employees depart to entrepreneurship, we compare them with employees
who depart to incumbent firms. We are particularly interested in wages at the parent firm as a measure
of human capital. Table 1 Panel 4A shows that movers to startup founding teams and to incumbents
are similar by employee age, tenure, and education. Future founders are somewhat more likely to be
male and white. Founders’ wages, however, are almost 50 percent higher. Table 1 Panel 4B shows
that the parent (R&D-performing) employing firm has similar characteristics across the two groups,
and Panel 4C compares the startup and incumbent destination firms. In sum, workers who depart to
entrepreneurship have much higher wages than those who depart to incumbents, despite otherwise
similar observable characteristics, suggesting that they are either managers, highly skilled, or both.

5.3

Instrumented effect on employee entrepreneurship

The results from the instrumented second stage are in Table 5. We repeat the main specifications from
Table 4. The coefficients are statistically significant and larger than the OLS results.24 Our preferred
specification, in column 5, is about five times the OLS estimate. The larger IV effect indicates that the
subset of R&D expenditures affected by the tax credits leads to greater employee entrepreneurship
than the average increase in R&D. This could reflect endogeneity that biases the OLS result
downward. Alternatively, the local average treatment effect for compliers with the instrument may be
larger than the population average treatment effect. As Angrist & Imbens (1995) and Jiang (2015)
explain, this can lead to a larger IV effect even if the exclusion restriction is satisfied. Firms with
R&D that is more sensitive to the tax price of R&D may have a higher causal effect of R&D on
employee entrepreneurship.
24

It may initially seem inconsistent that the state instrument uses patent locations to proxy for the location of R&D,
yet patenting does not predict employee entrepreneurship (see Table 4 Panel 2 column 3). The firms responsible for the
IV result are patenting in general, but changes in their number of patents produced do not predict employee departures
to entrepreneurship. It is also worth noting that the IV effect persists when using only the federal instrument.

24

There are two closely related explanations for such a phenomenon. The first is a correlation
between propensity to generate employee-founded startups and adjustable R&D. Adjustable R&D
may be more general or inventive, and thus more often yield innovations best suited to development
outside the firm. It is not obvious why adjustable R&D would be more inventive, but we cannot rule it
out. More plausibly, adjustable R&D is less crucial to the firm. The loss of the innovation output to
employee-founded startups would then be less costly, implying lower ex-ante incentives to prevent
employee entrepreneurship.

That is, suppose the firm expects R&D to lead to some

employee-founded startups. When the loss of these employees and ideas is expected to be costlier, the
firm should increase R&D less in response to the tax price shock. The second and perhaps more
straightforward explanation is that the marginal effect of R&D is higher than the average effect. OLS
estimates the effect of an additional dollar of average R&D. The IV strategy, which uses additional
R&D tax subsidies to approximate increased R&D expenditure on the margin, better captures the
effect on employee entrepreneurship of the “last” R&D dollar. The output from marginal R&D may
be less costly to lose, perhaps because it is less predictable or farther from the firm’s core focus.
We take the OLS result as our preferred model, both because it gives the average effect of
increasing R&D, which is the economic object we are most interested in, and because it is more
conservative. However, the IV analysis has a policy implication. It shows in a partial sense that R&D
tax credits lead to employee entrepreneurship (note we do not assess the net effect of R&D on
entrepreneurship, so we cannot speak to welfare effects). In an assessment of business tax incentives,
Glaeser (2001) writes that “externalities are more likely to be associated with small start-ups than with
large established companies....Chicago’s subsidy for Boeing can be best understood if the Boeing
employees are likely to start their own start-ups after they leave Boeing.” This applies to our context
in the following way: The firm cannot fully capture the benefits of R&D because some outputs depart
with entrepreneurial employees. This leads the firm to invest less in R&D than it would have
otherwise. Such underinvestment is one justification for the government subsidy of corporate R&D
(Feldman & Kelley 2006, Howell 2017).

25

5.4

Alternative employee entrepreneurship measures

To demonstrate that our entrepreneurship result is not sensitive to a particular construction of the
outcome variable, we consider alternative measures of employee entrepreneurship in Table 6. First,
we consider the number of employee-founded startups rather than the number of departing employees.
This is because team exits, where multiple employees depart together to a new firm, could explain the
results. The dependent variable in Panel 1 columns 1-2 is the number of employee-founded startups
from an establishment, normalized by employment at t = 0. The coefficient implies that a 100 percent
increase in R&D leads to a 5.8 percent increase relative to the mean, indicating that team exits do not
explain the main results.

Second, the effect is robust to including only incorporated

employee-founded startups (Table 6 Panel 1 columns 3-4).
We also find a similar result using only the top three earners at the new firm rather than the
top five (Table 6 Panel 1 columns 5-6). The result is further robust to restricting employee-founders
to those employed at the new firm in the first year it appears in the LBD with positive employment
(Panel 2 columns 1-2). In Panel 2 columns 3-4, we consider only startups founded by year t + 2.
We continue to find a positive, significant coefficient using this more immediate measure. We then
consider one-year-old startups in year t + 2. The effect of R&D remains significant (Panel 2 columns
5-6). When we consider one-year-old startups in year t + 3, the effect is positive but insignificant (not
reported). Therefore, R&D-induced departures to entrepreneurship occur in the first two years after the
investment in R&D.
Last, we find similar results at the employee level. Appendix Table A.3 shows OLS and IV
effects of R&D on the probability an individual worker transitions to entrepreneurship, defined as being
among the top five earners at a new firm within three years. We use two models of fixed effects, and
include employee controls, specifically age, age squared, education, total experience in years, tenure
at the firm, log earnings as of t = 0, and indicators for being female, white, foreign-born, and born
in state. The result in column 1 implies that a 100 percent increase in R&D leads to a 5.3 percent
increase in employee entrepreneurship at the worker level. (The mean of the dependent variable is
0.0091 percent.) As in our main estimates, the IV effect is larger (columns 3 and 6).

26

5.5

Parent heterogeneity and alternative R&D measures

We look for evidence that the effect is driven by establishments where R&D-generated ideas are likely
to come from. R&D is observed at the firm level, but entrepreneurship is measured at the establishment
level. We therefore implicitly assume that R&D is evenly distributed across establishments. A new idea
or technology need not leave the firm at its earliest stage; the firm may reject the new idea while it is
in development or early commercialization. Therefore, R&D-induced employee entrepreneurs may
emerge from various places in the firm. In general, however, we expect that R&D-generated ideas
are more likely to be located in high-tech establishments. Industry is coded at the establishmentlevel, and there is substantial within-firm variation in establishment industries.25 Using an interaction
between R&D and an indicator for the establishment being high tech, we find that that the effect
comes from high-tech establishments (Table 7 column 1).26 There is no significant effect for non-hightech establishments (the independent coefficient on R&D). The fact that high-tech establishments are
responsible for the effect is consistent with its source being employees engaged in the R&D process. It
fits the Franco & Filson (2006) prediction that employee entrepreneurship is more likely to come from
technologically advanced firms. This result also suggests that if the effect is different in California and
Massachusetts, it is likely higher.
Patenting activity provides a second source of confirmation. General-purpose patents are used
in a wider array of fields (specifically, future cites are from a wider array of patent classes). We interact
R&D with an indicator for the firm having above-median patent generality and find a significantly
higher effect for these firms (Table 7 column 2). Also firms that patent in more classes tend to have
higher employee entrepreneurship rates (Table 4 Panel 2 column 5). Thus, firms doing broader research
have more employee-founded startups per dollar of R&D.
Our results are robust to alternative measures of R&D, as shown in Appendix Table A.4.
When the independent variable is an indicator for an above median change in R&D, the effect is .089,
significant at the .01 level (column 1). This implies that moving from the bottom to the top half of
25

Among firms in our sample, the quasi-median firm has establishments in five industries (measures using threedigit SIC codes). We define an establishment as “high tech” if its industry is in biotech, chemicals, software and
business services, or high-tech manufacturing & R&D.
26
We do not use the IV estimator in this table because there is insufficient power to identify the interaction term of
interest.

27

R&D changes increases the rate of employee entrepreneurship by seven percent. We find a similar
effect on the number of new employee-founded startups (column 2).

This permits a

back-of-the-envelope calculation that above-median relative to below-median R&D changes lead to
8,291 additional employee-founded startups over the sample period, which is is 7.7 percent of all
employee-founded startups in the data.27 Appendix Table A.4 columns 3 and 4 use indicators for high
and low changes in firm R&D. Column 3 implies that moving from the bottom 90 to the top 10
percentiles increases the employee entrepreneurship rate by 12 percent. The effect turns negative for
the bottom 10 percentiles of R&D change (column 4). We also find that the effect is robust to using
R&D divided by total assets, rather than the change in R&D (column 5). This confirms that the effect
is not an artifact of small changes in R&D.28

5.6

Robustness

If the effect is causal, employee entrepreneurship should not predict R&D. To test this, we project
R&D in year t on past employee entrepreneurship in Appendix Table A.5. In column 1, we include
one year of employee entrepreneurship, from year t
two years (t

3 to t

1) and three years (t

4 to t

2 to year t

1. In columns 2 and 3, we include

1), respectively. In all cases, the coefficient

is insignificant. This helps to allay the primary endogeneity concern, which is that an unobserved
technological opportunity jointly causes R&D and employee entrepreneurship. Since the nature of a
startup is to be adaptable and responsive to new opportunities, we expect startup founding to respond
to such an unobserved new opportunity faster than corporate R&D. In contrast, we find that employee
entrepreneurship occurs after R&D.
Another possible source of endogeneity is that R&D may lead the firm to hire new employees,
who are inherently more likely to start their own ventures than the average worker. In this case, workers
with relatively short tenures would drive the effect. In fact, our effect is not driven by employees with
27

The calculation is as follows. As there are 329 employees in an establishment-year on average, the coefficient
implies an increase of 0.23 employee-founded startups per establishment-year, which we multiply by the 36,000
establishment-years to arrive at 8,291 new firms.
28
Another concern is that because some firms have multiple SEINs per state-year, our results could be driven by
variation within firm-state-year that we are not capturing. Our effects are robust to excluding these firms.

28

short tenure. Further, R&D has no effect on entrepreneurship among employees hired within a year
of when R&D is measured, and a positive effect (in both OLS and IV) among employees who were at
the firm for at least three years before R&D is measured.29 Therefore, hiring related to the increase in
R&D does not drive the effect.

6

Mechanisms

This section considers evidence for Hypotheses 4a (Section 6.1) and 4b (Section 6.2), as stipulated in
Section 2. In Section 6.3, we discuss how our patent results reflect incomplete contracting, which is
crucial to our proposed mechanism. Evidence against alternative mechanisms is in Section 6.4, though
we do not claim that these are entirely non-operative.

6.1

High-risk high-growth

Our first test of Hypothesis 4a concerns VC backing. VC-backed startups are widely known to be
risky, associated with new-to-the-world ideas, and potentially high growth (Kaplan & Lerner 2010,
Gornall & Strebulaev 2015). In Table 8 we examine whether parent R&D is associated with certain
startup characteristics.30 The dependent variable in Table 8 Panel 1 column 1 is one if the employeefounded startup receives VC. The coefficient on R&D is 0.007, which is significant at the .01 level.
This implies that a 100 percent increase in R&D predicts a 35 percent increase in the chances that an
employee-founded startup is VC-backed. Among parent firm observables, R&D is by far the strongest
predictor of VC-backed, employee-founded startups.
Levine & Rubinstein (2017) show that incorporation is a good indicator of high-growth intent
in the sense of “business owners engaged in non-routine, innovative activities.” R&D-induced startups
are more likely to be incorporated (Table 8 Panel 2 column 1). We also expect high-risk, high-growth
ventures emerging from R&D to be high tech, which is the case (Table 8 Panel 2 column 2). Further,
29

These results are unreported due to disclosure limitations.
These regressions do not include firm fixed effects. As a relatively rare event, entrepreneurship provides limited
variation for within-firm comparisons. The regressions should, therefore, be interpreted as well controlled associations.
To the degree the results have pointed toward a causal relationship, this is appropriate for exploring mechanisms.
30

29

R&D induces employee-founded startups with higher wages than the average employee-founded
startup, suggesting that they employ higher skilled labor (Table 8 Panel 2 column 3). Finally, we
consider the rate of exit, which we view as a proxy for risk, comprised primarily of firm failures. In
column 4, the dependent variable is one if the startup exits within five years (starting from year t + 3,
where t is the year in which we measure R&D). We find a positive, significant association with R&D.
In sum, relative to the average employee-founded startup, those induced by R&D are more likely to be
high impact, high tech, and high risk, consistent with Hypothesis 4a.

6.2

Costly diversification

Hypothesis 4b of a costly diversification mechanism fits well with the interpretation of the IV results in
which ideas leading to employee entrepreneurship are more likely to come from the last dollar of R&D
than the first. In this light, the IV strategy isolates the driving mechanism: marginal R&D more often
generates ideas far from the firm’s core focus, some of which spill into employee-founded startups.
The following subsections consider cross-sectional and supply chain evidence.
6.2.1

Cross-sectional evidence

We begin by comparing parent and startup industries. In column 5 of Table 8 Panel 2, the dependent
variable is one if the employee-founded startup is in the same two-digit SIC classification as its
parent. Two-digit industries are quite broad; examples are Business Services, Health Services, and
Coal Mining. We find that more parent R&D reduces the chances that the startup is in the same
industry as its parent; a 100 percent increase in R&D makes it 4.2 percent less likely that the
employee-founded startup is in the same industry as its parent.
It may initially seem counter-intuitive that R&D leads employees to found firms in different
industries. However, consider three examples. First, in 1894, Henry Ford left Thomas Edison’s
Illuminating Company to launch his own venture.

Two years later, he produced the first Ford

Quadricycle with the help of a local angel investor (Glaeser 2011). Edison would be in SIC 49
(Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services), while Ford is in SIC 37 (Transportation Equipment). Yet Ford

30

relied on mechanical and electrical engineering advances made at Edison’s company. Second, in the
1990s, Michael Rosenfelt worked for the computer memory company Micron Electronics, where he
helped to revitalize its PC business. He left in 1999 to found Powered Inc., a successful online
education company that exploited marketing innovations from Micron.31 Micron Technology is in
SIC 36 (Electronic and other Electrical Equipment), while Powered, Inc. would be in either SIC 73
(Business Services), or SIC 82 (Educational Services). Finally, consider the example of WeatherBill
from Section 2. Founded by former Google employees, WeatherBill would be in SIC 63 (Insurance
Carriers). Google’s parent company Alphabet is in SIC 73 (Business Services). In all three examples,
an R&D-intensive parent spawned a new firm in a different two-digit SIC sector, but the underlying
idea or skill was related to the parent’s intellectual capital. These examples highlight how SIC
assignments reflect the firm’s market more than its technology. It seems likely that R&D-induced
startups employ innovation related to the parent’s technology but apply them to a different market.
Seru (2014) proposes that information asymmetries between headquarters and divisional
management helps to explain why conglomerates perform less productive R&D. We expect such
information asymmetries to be more acute in large firms. We find that large firms, defined as having
above-median total assets in a given year, drive the effect (Table 7 column 3). We do not find
significant interactions between R&D changes and measures of firm diversification, but this may
reflect the fact that there is little variation in diversification measures within R&D-performing firms.
These results are consistent with Hypothesis 4b.
6.2.2

Supply chain relationships

To explore links between the startups and their parents, we consider supply chain relationships. We use
the U.S. BEA annual input-output tables to create annual measures of supply chain closeness between
the parent firm’s industry and the startup’s industry. The measures assign one party to be upstream and
the other to be downstream. The first measure is “downstream closeness,” which is the downstream
industry’s share of the upstream industry’s product. The second measure is “upstream closeness,”
31

For evidence of success, see here, here, and here.

31

which is the upstream industry’s share of what the downstream industry uses.32 For both measures, a
higher value means they are closer.
The results are in Table 8 Panel 3. We first assign the parent to the upstream industry, and
the employee-founded startup to the downstream industry. There is a positive association with the
“downstream closeness” measure (column 1). This means that R&D-induced startups tend to buy a
relatively larger share of the parent’s product than the average employee-founded startup.33 The effect
of “upstream closeness” is negative, which means that the parent’s product tends to make up a relatively
smaller share of the R&D-induced startups’ inputs (column 2). Therefore, R&D-induced startups tend
to be downstream from the parents but require a broad array of inputs – not just from the parent, but
from other industries as well. When we assign the employee-founded startups to the upstream industry,
and the parent to the downstream industry, we find no effect of downstream closeness (column 3). We
find a weak positive effect of upstream closeness (column 4), implying that the R&D-induced startup’s
product tends to make up a somewhat larger share of the parent’s inputs.
Together, the results demonstrate a tie between R&D-induced startups and their parents.
Relative to the average employee-founded startup’s industry, the R&D-induced startup’s industry buys
a larger share of the parent industry’s product and also supplies a larger share of the parent industry’s
inputs. Personal ties to the supplier firm may be part of what makes the employee’s new human
capital more valuable outside the firm. However, the R&D-induced startup departs from the parent in
that it requires more inputs from other industries.

With diverse required inputs, many of the

transactions required for commercialization would be outside the parent firm anyway, helping to
explain why vertical integration might not be optimal. This is consistent with the R&D-generated new
venture being farther from the parent’s core focus.
32

Downstream closeness is built using the BEA “Make table,” which contains the production of commodities by
industries, where industries are in rows, and the columns represent commodities (products) that the industries produce.
Given industry pair A and B, if A is the “industry” and B is the “commodity,” downstream closeness is B’s share of A’s
row. Upstream closeness is built using the BEA “Use table,” which contains the use of commodities by intermediate
and final users, where commodities are in rows, and the columns represent the industries that use them. Given industry
pair A and B, if A is the “industry” and B is the “commodity,” upstream closeness is B’s share of A’s column. We use
two-digit NAICS codes. Data are available here.
33
To the degree the spawn purchases from the parent, this does not imply that the parent benefits from the spawn.
For example, if both industries are competitive, the spawn can presumably buy the input from alternative suppliers at
the market price.

32

6.3

Incomplete contracting

R&D investment yields innovations in a highly uncertain, serendipitous manner. Sometimes, the
outputs will not be useful to the firm. One indicator of this is if the effect of R&D on employee
entrepreneurship emerges from those innovation outputs over which the firm does not establish
explicit, contractible ownership (Kim & Marschke 2005). Patents measure R&D outputs that the firm
has chosen to appropriate. We find that neither the number of patents nor the number of patent
citations have an effect on employee entrepreneurship (Table 4 Panel 2 column 3). We also find no
significant interaction between parent R&D and the number of patents or patent citations.
To explore whether the employee-founded startups and parents are in sectors that tend to share
knowledge, we create two measures of patent citation flows between industries. The first measure is
inflows: for patent classes A and B, this is B’s cites of A as a share of the total cites to A. The second
measure is outflows: A’s cites of B as a share of all the citations from A. We create this measure at
the class-year level, and then assign patent classes to industries using the patent-to-SIC concordance
developed by Kerr (2008).34 When we interact R&D with these measures of knowledge sharing, we
find no effects. This supports the conclusion that our results reflect R&D output that is not patented.
Ellison, Glaeser & Kerr (2010), who also use this knowledge-sharing measure, find weak effects, and
suggest that “knowledge sharing. . . may be captured more by input-output relationships than by these
citations.” We view these null results for contractible outputs (patents) as important evidence of the role
of incomplete contracting in innovation. Theoretically, it is natural that innovation spillovers – those
R&D outputs that cross the firm boundary – are primarily composed of non-contractible outputs.

6.4

Alternative mechanisms

6.4.1

Project management skills

It may be that exposure to R&D makes employees more productive as entrepreneurs because they
gain experience managing new projects. This channel may play a role. However, three pieces of
cross-sectional evidence suggest that it seems unlikely to be the primary driver. First, we expect that
34

We are especially grateful to Bill Kerr for his help with this exercise.

33

capital expenditure would have a similar effect on employee entrepreneurship if the channel were skills,
because it is likely to create project management skills. Instead, Table 4 Panel 1 shows that there is
no effect of total investment or PPE investment on employee entrepreneurship. We would also expect
R&D-induced startups to come from small parents. This is because small firm employees tend to have
a broader scope of work (Stuart & Ding 2006, Sørensen 2007). Instead, large firms drive the effect
(Table 7 column 3). We might also expect that there is more opportunity for entrepreneurial learning
at young firms. However, we find no effect of an interaction between R&D and firm age (unreported).
A related mechanism is whether firms that have recently gone public drive the effect. In this
case, it may reflect employees “cashing out” their stock options rather than R&D (Babina, Ouimet &
Zarutskie 2018). In Table 7 column 4 we interact R&D with an indicator for having had an IPO within
the last three years. The interaction is insignificant.
6.4.2

Idea stealing

With perfect information, the parent firm could appropriate all good skills and innovations that emerge
from R&D and contract with the employee ex-ante so that he will not depart to start his own firm. The
mechanism of costly diversification – precisely because of contracting and information frictions – is
almost certainly accompanied by some costs to the parent of employee entrepreneurship. Our finding
may highlight a “dark side” to R&D investment from the firm’s perspective. We cannot calculate the
magnitude of costs to the parent firm. However, several pieces of evidence suggest that costly stealing
of ideas is not the main mechanism.
First, we expect a costly stealing effect to attenuate in states that enforce noncompete
covenants. Noncompetes restrict employees from working for a competing firm within the state for a
specified period of time.

It has been found that noncompete enforcement reduces local R&D

spillovers (Belenzon & Schankerman 2013, Matray 2015) and within-state inventor mobility (Marx,
Singh & Fleming 2015). The main result persists in states that enforce noncompetes, and there is no
significant effect on an interaction between R&D and an indicator for being in a weak enforcement
state (unreported). Second, a costly effect should attenuate when intellectual property is easier to
protect. This makes it easier to contract on innovation effort. We do not find that the effect varies with
34

a measure of industry patentability.
Finally, there is a revealed preference argument. By virtue of observing the robust phenomenon
of R&D-induced employee entrepreneurship, the parent either chose not to develop the idea in-house
or chose not to take ex-ante steps to prevent the employee-founded startup. Such steps could include
increasing the employee’s compensation to retain him, or not conducting the R&D at all (see also
Anton & Yao 1995).
6.4.3

Employee interaction with R&D change

There is concern that the employee who departs for entrepreneurship causes the R&D increase or is
hired as a result of it. The first possibility is obviated by the IV strategy, where we identify the effect
of R&D on employee-founded startups using only variation in R&D explained by its tax price, which
the employee does not control. The second possibility is unlikely because we find a significant result
using only workers with above-median tenure, as discussed earlier.
6.4.4

Internalization of startup benefits

It may be that the parent captures some of the startup’s benefits, perhaps through a licensing or
investment contract. If the parent wholly owns the spinoff and captures all its benefits, then the effect
we observe is not an R&D spillover in the sense of being a benefit of R&D that accrues to a firm
besides the R&D-performing firm. The data do not support full internalization. First, we expect
parent-supported spinoffs to start at a larger scale than a typical bootstrapped startup. We find no
relation between initial employee-founded startup size and parent R&D (unreported).

Second,

spinoffs or parent reorganization should sometimes maintain the same establishment. Startups are
defined in our data as firms with no prior activity at any of their establishments.
We also look for internalization in an out-of-sample test based on the underlying data in
Gompers et al. (2005). This exercise is described in detail in Appendix Section A.2. We examine what
share of the 6,499 unique VC-backed startups in the Gompers et al. (2005) data was acquired by
startup executives’ previous employers. This should yield an upper bound on internalization. Just 2.3
percent of the 9,152 unique parents match to an investor or acquirer, providing evidence that parents
35

rarely invest in or acquire employee-founded startups.
Consistent with the out-of-sample test, there is no effect of an interaction between R&D and
the parent having a corporate VC program (see Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan & Strebulaev 2018). This
is related to the Ma (2016) finding that public firms tend to launch corporate VC programs when
internal innovation is poor and tend to invest in startups in their own industries. That is, corporate VC
is a way to outsource innovation. This is the opposite of the environment that yields R&D-induced
employee entrepreneurship. An alternative is that patents jointly held or otherwise licensed across the
parent and the startup permit a degree of internalization. Since patenting has no effect on employee
entrepreneurship, this seems unlikely.

7

Conclusion

Human capital is central to modern theories of economic growth (Romer 1990, Jones 2014). Though
the literature has focused on schooling (Card 2001, Cunha & Heckman 2007), firms also play a role
in human capital formation. Corporate research effort yields ideas that are first embodied in people
and then ultimately in new types of capital inputs (Mankiw, Romer & Weil 1992, Jones 2002). In
this way, R&D imparts new skills and ideas to employees. This paper shows that a share of these
outputs are reallocated to startups through employee mobility. We find a positive effect of R&D on
labor reallocation to startups, but not to other incumbent firms or to departures from the labor force.
Much of the innovation literature focuses on innovation outputs, especially patents and patent
citations. This paper takes a novel approach by examining a likely unintended consequence of
innovation input, measured as R&D investment. Its outcomes are uncertain, serendipitous, and
difficult to contract on. Employees, with their inalienable and portable human capital, create a
porousness to the firm’s boundary, providing an avenue for R&D outputs to leak to other firms.
Consistent with influential theories of the firm, R&D-induced startups are more likely to be high risk
and potentially high growth. They seem to reflect projects rejected by the firm because they are far
from existing activities and the firm faces costs to diversifying.

36

References
Abowd, J. M., Stephens, B. E., Vilhuber, L., Andersson, F., McKinney, K. L., Roemer, M. & Woodcock,
S. (2009), The LEHD infrastructure files and the creation of the Quarterly Workforce Indicators, in
‘Producer dynamics: New evidence from micro data’, University of Chicago Press, pp. 149–230.
Acemoglu, D., Griffith, R., Aghion, P. & Zilibotti, F. (2010), ‘Vertical integration and technology: Theory
and evidence’, Journal of the European Economic Association 8(5), 989–1033.
Acemoglu, D. & Restrepo, P. (2018), ‘The race between man and machine: Implications of technology for
growth, factor shares, and employment’, American Economic Review 108(6), 1488–1542.
Adelino, M., Ma, S. & Robinson, D. (2017), ‘Firm age, investment opportunities, and job creation’, The
Journal of Finance .
Aghion, P. & Jaravel, X. (2015), ‘Knowledge spillovers, innovation and growth’, The Economic Journal
125(583), 533–573.
Aghion, P. & Tirole, J. (1994), ‘The management of innovation’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
109(4), 1185–1209.
Agrawal, A., Cockburn, I. & McHale, J. (2006), ‘Gone but not forgotten: Knowledge flows, labor mobility,
and enduring social relationships’, Journal of Economic Geography 6(5), 571–591.
Agrawal, A., Rosell, C. & Simcoe, T. S. (2014), Do tax credits affect R&D expenditures by small firms?
Evidence from Canada, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Almeida, P. & Kogut, B. (1999), ‘Localization of knowledge and the mobility of engineers in regional
networks’, Management science 45(7), 905–917.
Angrist, J. D. & Imbens, G. W. (1995), ‘Two-stage least squares estimation of average causal effects in
models with variable treatment intensity’, Journal of the American statistical Association 90(430), 431–
442.
Anton, J. J. & Yao, D. A. (1995), ‘Start-ups, spin-offs, and internal projects’, JL Econ. & Org. 11, 362.
Arrow, K. (1962), Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention, Technical report, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Autor, D. (2015), ‘Why are there still so many jobs? The history and future of workplace automation’,
Journal of economic perspectives 29(3), 3–30.
Azoulay, P., Jones, B., Kim, J. D. & Miranda, J. (2018), Age and high-growth entrepreneurship, Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Babina, T. (2017), ‘Destructive creation at work: How financial distress spurs entrepreneurship’. Working
Paper.

37

Babina, T., Ouimet, P. P. & Zarutskie, R. (2018), ‘Going entrepreneurial? IPOs and new firm creation’.
Working Paper.
Balsmeier, B., Kurakina, M. & Fleming, L. (2018), ‘R&D tax credits: Mechanisms of private and public
value’. Working Paper.
Balsvik, R. (2011), ‘Is labor mobility a channel for spillovers from multinationals?
Norwegian manufacturing’, The review of economics and statistics 93(1), 285–297.

Evidence from

Bankman, J. & Gilson, R. J. (1999), ‘Why start-ups?’, Stanford Law Review 51, 289, 293–95.
Baumol, W. J. (1990), ‘Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, and destructive’, Journal of Political
Economy 98(5, Part 1), 893–921.
Belenzon, S. & Schankerman, M. (2013), ‘Spreading the word: Geography, policy, and knowledge
spillovers’, Review of Economics and Statistics 95(3), 884–903.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E. & Mullainathan, S. (2004), ‘How much should we trust differences-in-differences
estimates?’, The Quarterly journal of economics 119(1), 249–275.
Billings, A., Glazunov, S. & Houston, M. (2001), ‘The role of taxes in corporate research and development
spending’, R&D Management 31(4), 465–477.
Bloom, N., Griffith, R. & Van Reenen, J. (2002), ‘Do R&D tax credits work? Evidence from a panel of
countries 1979–1997’, Journal of Public Economics 85(1), 1–31.
Bloom, N., Schankerman, M. & Van Reenen, J. (2013), ‘Identifying technology spillovers and product
market rivalry’, Econometrica 81(4), 1347–1393.
BLS (1997), BLS Handbook of Methods, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Washington DC. U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Division of Information Services, Washington D.C.
Breschi, S. & Lissoni, F. (2009), ‘Mobility of skilled workers and co-invention networks: an anatomy of
localized knowledge flows’, Journal of Economic Geography p. lbp008.
Brown, J. R. & Petersen, B. C. (2011), ‘Cash holdings and R&D smoothing’, Journal of Corporate Finance
17(3), 694–709.
Brynjolfsson, E. & McAfee, A. (2014), The second machine age: Work, progress, and prosperity in a time
of brilliant technologies, WW Norton & Company.
Campa, J. M. & Kedia, S. (2002), ‘Explaining the diversification discount’, The Journal of Finance
57(4), 1731–1762.
Cappelen, Å., Raknerud, A. & Rybalka, M. (2012), ‘The effects of R&D tax credits on patenting and
innovations’, Research Policy 41(2), 334–345.
Card, D. (2001), ‘Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent econometric problems’,
Econometrica 69(5), 1127–1160.

38

Chatterji, A. K. (2009), ‘Spawned with a silver spoon? entrepreneurial performance and innovation in the
medical device industry’, Strategic Management Journal 30(2), 185–206.
Chirinko, R. S. & Wilson, D. J. (2008), ‘State investment tax incentives: A zero-sum game?’, Journal of
Public Economics 92(12), 2362–2384.
Chirinko, R. S. & Wilson, D. J. (2011), ‘Tax competition among US states: Racing to the bottom or riding
on a seesaw?’, Working Paper .
Clausen, T. H. (2009), ‘Do subsidies have positive impacts on R&D and innovation activities at the firm
level?’, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics 20(4), 239–253.
Collins, J. C. (2009), How the mighty fall: And why some companies never give in, Random House.
Cunha, F. & Heckman, J. (2007), ‘The technology of skill formation’, American Economic Review
97(2), 31–47.
Curtis, E. M. & Decker, R. (2018), Entrepreneurship and state taxation, Technical report, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US).
Czarnitzki, D., Hanel, P. & Rosa, J. M. (2011), ‘Evaluating the impact of R&D tax credits on innovation: A
microeconometric study on canadian firms’, Research Policy 40(2), 217–229.
Davis, S. J. & Haltiwanger, J. (1999), ‘On the driving forces behind cyclical movements in employment and
job reallocation’, American Economic Review 89(5), 1234–1258.
Dechezleprêtre, A., Einiö, E., Martin, R., Nguyen, K.-T. & Van Reenen, J. (2016), Do tax incentives
for research increase firm innovation? An RD design for R&D, Technical report, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Decker, R. A., Haltiwanger, J. C., Jarmin, R. S. & Miranda, J. (2018), Changing business dynamism and
productivity: Shocks vs. responsiveness, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Decker, R., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. & Miranda, J. (2014), ‘The role of entrepreneurship in us job creation
and economic dynamism’, The Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(3), 3–24.
Docquier, F. & Rapoport, H. (2012), ‘Globalization, brain drain, and development’, Journal of Economic
Literature 50(3), 681–730.
Ellison, G., Glaeser, E. L. & Kerr, W. R. (2010), ‘What causes industry agglomeration? Evidence from
coagglomeration patterns’, The American Economic Review 100(3), 1195–1213.
Feldman, M. P. & Kelley, M. R. (2006), ‘The ex ante assessment of knowledge spillovers: Government
R&D policy, economic incentives and private firm behavior’, Research Policy 35(10), 1509–1521.
Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J. & Syverson, C. (2008), ‘Reallocation, firm turnover, and efficiency: Selection on
productivity or profitability?’, American Economic Review 98(1), 394–425.
Franco, A. M. & Filson, D. (2006), ‘Spin-outs: knowledge diffusion through employee mobility’, The RAND
Journal of Economics 37(4), 841–860.

39

Frésard, L., Hoberg, G. & Phillips, G. (2017), ‘Vertical acquisitions, integration and the boundaries of the
firm’.
Gennaioli, N., La Porta, R., Lopez-de Silanes, F. & Shleifer, A. (2012), ‘Human capital and regional
development’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(1), 105–164.
Giroud, X. & Mueller, H. M. (2015), ‘Capital and labor reallocation within firms’, The Journal of Finance
70(4), 1767–1804.
Glaeser, E. (2011), Triumph of the city: How urban spaces make us human, Penguin Press. p. 47.
Glaeser, E. L. (2001), ‘The economics of location-based tax incentives’.
Glaeser, E. L., Kerr, S. P. & Kerr, W. R. (2015), ‘Entrepreneurship and urban growth: An empirical
assessment with historical mines’, Review of Economics and Statistics 97(2), 498–520.
Goldin, C., Kerr, S. P., Olivetti, C., Barth, E. et al. (2017), ‘The expanding gender earnings gap: evidence
from the lehd-2000 census’, American Economic Review 107(5), 110–14.
Gompers, P., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S. N. & Strebulaev, I. A. (2018), ‘How do corporate vcs differ from
institutional vcs and each other?’, Working Paper .
Gompers, P., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S. N. & Strebulaev, I. A. (2019), ‘How do venture capitalists make
decisions?’, Journal of Financial Economics .
Gompers, P., Lerner, J. & Scharfstein, D. (2005), ‘Entrepreneurial spawning: Public corporations and the
genesis of new ventures, 1986 to 1999’, The Journal of Finance 60(2), 577–614.
Gornall, W. & Strebulaev, I. A. (2015), ‘The economic impact of venture capital: Evidence from public
companies’, Working Paper .
Graham, J. R., Lemmon, M. L. & Wolf, J. G. (2002), ‘Does corporate diversification destroy value?’, The
Journal of Finance 57(2), 695–720.
Griliches, Z. (1992), ‘The search for R&D spillovers’, The Scandinavian Journal of Economics pp. S29–
S47.
Gromb, D. & Scharfstein, D. (2002), Entrepreneurship in equilibrium, Technical report, National bureau of
economic research.
Grossman, S. J. & Hart, O. D. (1986), ‘The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical and lateral
integration’, Journal of Political Economy 94(691), 693–95.
Guceri, I. & Liu, L. (2017), ‘Effectiveness of fiscal incentives for R&D: Quasi-experimental evidence’. IMF
Working Paper.
Guiso, L., Pistaferri, L. & Schivardi, F. (2012), ‘Credit within the firm’, Review of Economic Studies
80(1), 211–247.
Guzman, J. (2019), ‘Go west young firm: Agglomeration and embeddedness in startup migrations to silicon
valley’.

40

Hall, B. H. (1993), ‘R&D tax policy during the 1980s: Success or failure?’, Tax policy and the economy
7, 1–35.
Hall, B. & Van Reenen, J. (2000), ‘How effective are fiscal incentives for R&D? A review of the evidence’,
Research Policy 29(4), 449–469.
Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S. & Miranda, J. (2013), ‘Who creates jobs? small versus large versus young’,
Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2), 347–361.
Hart, O. & Moore, J. (1990), ‘Property rights and the nature of the firm’, Journal of Political Economy
98, 1152–53.
Herkenhoff, K., Lise, J., Menzio, G. & Phillips, G. (2018), ‘Worker mobility and the diffusion of
knowledge’.
Hombert, J. & Matray, A. (2016), ‘The real effects of lending relationships on innovative firms and inventor
mobility’, The Review of Financial Studies 30(7), 2413–2445.
Howell, S. & Brown, D. J. (2019), ‘Do cash windfalls affect wages? Evidence from R&D grants’.
Howell, S. T. (2017), ‘Financing innovation: Evidence from R&D grants’, American Economic Review
107(4), 1136–64.
Jarmin, R. S. & Miranda, J. (2002), ‘The longitudinal business database’.
Jiang, W. (2015), ‘Have instrumental variables brought us closer to the truth’, The Review of Corporate
Finance Studies .
Jones, B. F. (2014), ‘The human capital stock: a generalized approach’, American Economic Review
104(11), 3752–77.
Jones, C. I. (2002), ‘Sources of us economic growth in a world of ideas’, American Economic Review
92(1), 220–239.
Jones, C. I. & Williams, J. C. (1998), ‘Measuring the social return to R&D’, Quarterly Journal of Economics
pp. 1119–1135.
Kahn, R. & Whited, T. M. (2017), ‘Identification is not causality, and vice versa’, Review of Corporate
Finance Studies 7(1), 1–21.
Kaplan, S. N. & Lerner, J. (2010), ‘It ain’t broke: The past, present, and future of venture capital’, Journal
of Applied Corporate Finance 22(2), 36–47.
Kaplan, S. N. & Lerner, J. (2016), Venture capital data: Opportunities and challenges, in ‘Measuring
Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges’, University of Chicago Press.
Kerr, S., Kerr, W. R. & Nanda, R. (2015), House money and entrepreneurship, Technical report, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Kerr, S. P. & Kerr, W. R. (2017), ‘Immigrant entrepreneurship’, Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses:
Current Knowledge and Challenges p. 187.

41

Kerr, W. R. (2008), ‘Ethnic scientific communities and international technology diffusion’, The Review of
Economics and Statistics 90(3), 518–537.
Kim, J. & Marschke, G. (2005), ‘Labor mobility of scientists, technological diffusion, and the firm’s
patenting decision’, RAND Journal of Economics pp. 298–317.
Klassen, K. J., Pittman, J. A., Reed, M. P. & Fortin, S. (2004), ‘A cross-national comparison of R&D
expenditure decisions: Tax incentives and financial constraints’, Contemporary Accounting Research
21(3), 639–680.
Klein, B., Crawford, R. G. & Alchian, A. A. (1978), ‘Vertical integration, appropriable rents, and the
competitive contracting process’, The journal of Law and Economics 21(2), 297–326.
Klepper, S. (2009), ‘Spinoffs: A review and synthesis’, European Management Review 6(3), 159–171.
Klepper, S. & Sleeper, S. (2005), ‘Entry by spinoffs’, Management science 51(8), 1291–1306.
Kondo, J. E., Li, D. & Papanikolaou, D. (2019), ‘Trust, collaboration, and economic growth’.
Kortum, S. & Lerner, J. (2000), ‘Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation’, The Rand
Journal of Economics 31(4), 674.
Lang, L. H. & Stulz, R. M. (1994), ‘Tobin’s q, corporate diversification, and firm performance’, Journal of
Political Economy 102(6), 1248–1280.
Lerner, J. & Seru, A. (2017), The use and misuse of patent data: Issues for corporate finance and beyond,
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Levine, R. & Rubinstein, Y. (2017), ‘Smart and illicit: who becomes an entrepreneur and do they earn
more?’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(2), 963–1018.
Lindsey, L. (2008), ‘Blurring firm boundaries: The role of venture capital in strategic alliances’, The Journal
of Finance 63(3), 1137–1168.
Lucas, R. E. (1978), ‘On the size distribution of business firms’, The Bell Journal of Economics pp. 508–523.
Lucking, B. (2018), ‘Do R&D tax credits create jobs?’. Stanford Working Paper.
Ma, S. (2016), ‘The life cycle of corporate venture capital’. Working Paper.
Ma, W., Ouimet, P. & Simintzi, E. (2016), ‘Mergers and acquisitions, technological change and inequality’,
European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI)-Finance Working Paper (485).
Maats, F., Metrick, A., Yasuda, A., Hinkes, B. & Vershovski, S. (2011), ‘On the consistency and reliability
of venture capital databases’, Unpublished working paper .
Maksimovic, V. & Phillips, G. (2002), ‘Do conglomerate firms allocate resources inefficiently across
industries? theory and evidence’, The Journal of Finance 57(2), 721–767.
Maksimovic, V., Phillips, G. & Prabhala, N. R. (2011), ‘Post-merger restructuring and the boundaries of the
firm’, Journal of Financial Economics 102(2), 317–343.

42

Mamuneas, T. P. & Nadiri, M. I. (1996), ‘Public R&D policies and cost behavior of the US manufacturing
industries’, Journal of Public Economics 63(1), 57–81.
Mankiw, N. G., Romer, D. & Weil, D. N. (1992), ‘A contribution to the empirics of economic growth’, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(2), 407–437.
Manski, C. F. (1993), ‘Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem’, The Review of
Economic Studies 60(3), 531–542.
Marx, M., Singh, J. & Fleming, L. (2015), ‘Regional disadvantage? employee non-compete agreements and
brain drain’, Research Policy 44(2), 394–404.
Matray, A. (2015), ‘The local innovation spillovers of listed firms’, Working Paper .
McCutchen, W. W. (1993), ‘Estimating the impact of the R&D tax credit on strategic groups in the
pharmaceutical industry’, Research Policy 22(4), 337–351.
McKeown, G. (2012), ‘The disciplined pursuit of less’, Harvard Business Review .
Miller, C. R. & Richard, B. (2010), ‘The policy diffusion of the state R&D investment tax credit’, State and
Local Government Review 42(1), 22–35.
Moretti, E. & Wilson, D. J. (2017), ‘The effect of state taxes on the geographical location of top earners:
Evidence from star scientists’, American Economic Review 107(7), 1858–1903.
Mullainathan, S. & Scharfstein, D. (2001), ‘Do firm boundaries matter?’, The American Economic Review
91(2), 195–199.
Oettl, A. & Agrawal, A. (2008), ‘International labor mobility and knowledge flow externalities’, Journal of
International Business Studies 39(8), 1242–1260.
Paff, L. A. (2005), ‘State-level R&D tax credits: A firm-level analysis’, The BE Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy 5(1).
Phillips, G. M. & Zhdanov, A. (2012), ‘R&D and the incentives from merger and acquisition activity’, The
Review of Financial Studies 26(1), 34–78.
Poole, J. P. (2013), ‘Knowledge transfers from multinational to domestic firms: Evidence from worker
mobility’, Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2), 393–406.
Puri, M. & Zarutskie, R. (2012), ‘On the life cycle dynamics of venture-capital-and non-venture-capitalfinanced firms’, The Journal of Finance 67(6), 2247–2293.
Rao, N. (2016), ‘Do tax credits stimulate R&D spending? The effect of the r&d tax credit in its first decade’,
Journal of Public Economics 140, 1–12.
Rhodes-Kropf, M. & Robinson, D. T. (2008), ‘The market for mergers and the boundaries of the firm’, The
Journal of Finance 63(3), 1169–1211.
Robinson, D. T. (2008), ‘Strategic alliances and the boundaries of the firm’, Review of Financial Studies
21(2), 649–681.

43

Romer, P. M. (1990), ‘Endogenous technological change’, Journal of Political Economy 98(5, Part 2), S71–
S102.
Rosen, S. (1986), ‘The theory of equalizing differences’, Handbook of labor economics 1, 641–692.
Sampat, B. N. (2018), ‘A survey of empirical evidence on patents and innovation’, NBER Working Paper
(w25383).
Schoar, A. (2002), ‘Effects of corporate diversification on productivity’, The Journal of Finance
57(6), 2379–2403.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1911), Theorie Der Wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, Duncker & Humblot, Leipzig.
Seru, A. (2014), ‘Firm boundaries matter: Evidence from conglomerates and R&D activity’, Journal of
Financial Economics 111(2), 381–405.
Singh, J. & Agrawal, A. (2011), ‘Recruiting for ideas: How firms exploit the prior inventions of new hires’,
Management Science 57(1), 129–150.
Sørensen, J. B. (2007), ‘Bureaucracy and entrepreneurship: Workplace effects on entrepreneurial entry’,
Administrative Science Quarterly 52(3), 387–412.
Stuart, T. E. & Ding, W. W. (2006), ‘When do scientists become entrepreneurs? The social structural
antecedents of commercial activity in the academic life sciences’, American Journal of Sociology
112(1), 97–144.
Tambe, P. & Hitt, L. M. (2013), ‘Job hopping, information technology spillovers, and productivity growth’,
Management science 60(2), 338–355.
Tate, G. & Yang, L. (2015), ‘The bright side of corporate diversification: Evidence from internal labor
markets’, The Review of Financial Studies 28(8), 2203–2249.
Williamson, O. E. (1975), ‘Markets and hierarchies’, New York 2630.
Wilson, D. J. (2009), ‘Beggar thy neighbor? The in-state, out-of-state, and aggregate effects of R&D tax
credits’, The Review of Economics and Statistic .
Wilson, D. J. et al. (2005), ‘The rise and spread of state R&D tax credits’, FRBSF Economic Letter .
Wu, Y. (2008), ‘State R&D tax credits and high-technology establishments’, Economic Development
Quarterly 22(2), 136–148.
Zingales, L. (2000), ‘In search of new foundations’, The Journal of Finance 55(4), 1623–1653.

44

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Panel 1: Firm-year level variables
Mean

Made corporate VC investmentst (%)
Had 1 patentt 10,t (%)
Diversifiedt 1 (%)
R&D/Total Assetst 1
Log R&Dt 1
Tobin’s Qt 1
Aget 1
Total Assetst 1 (’000s)
Employmentt 1

3.8
60.1
78.9
0.085
2.53
2.12
20.03
3,483
6,107

Quasimedian

Standard
deviation

0.052
2.45
1.65
21.03
529
1,987

0.102
2.25
1.59
6.18
12,630
12,690

Quasimedian

Standard
deviation

0.008
0.78
0.523
0.225
0.020
0.056
0.031
0.111
122

0.024
1.91
0.260
0.181
0.052
0.076
0.059
0.078
1,698

Panel 2: Establishment-year level variables
Mean

Weak non-compete enforcement (state) (%)
In high-tech industry (%)
Employee entrepreneurshipt+3 (%)
# employee-founded startupst+3
Stayerst+3 (%)
Movers to incumbent firms ( 4 yrs old)t+3 (%)
Movers to new firms (3 yrs old)t+3 (%)
Movers to young firms (<10 yrs old)t+3 (%)
Movers to high-tech young firms (<10 yrs old)t+3 (%)
Depart employment datat+3 (%)
Number of employeest

61.3
64.1
1.3
1.15
47.8
26.3
3.2
7.2
4.3
12.4
329

Note: Panel 1 shows summary statistics at the firm-year level (10,500 observations), and Panel 2 at the establishmentyear level (36,000 observations). We do not show the median or standard deviation for indicators. Since Census
disclosure procedures prohibit disclosure of percentile value, we approximate median with a quasi-median, which
is estimated using a 99% weight on observations in the interquartile range and a 1% weight on the remaining
observations.

45

Panel 3: Employee-founded startup level variables
Mean
Quasimedian
Incorporated (%)
High-tech industry (%)
Startup exit in 5 years (%)
Ever received VC (%)
Startup employment (in the first year)
Startup payroll (in the first year; ’000s)

69.8
49.4
52.5
2.0
11.83
394

5.41
119

Standard
deviation

29.85
1,157

Panel 4: Comparison between employees who depart to entrepreneurship and those who depart to incumbents
Workers who join founding
teams of startups (3 yrs old)

Workers who move to
incumbents ( 4 yrs old)

Female (%)
White (%)
Foreign (%)
Educationt
Aget
Tenure (at public firm; years)t
Wages (at public firm; ’000s)t

A. Employee characteristics
33
80
7.7
13.7
35.2
2.07
57.8

41
70
7.0
13.5
34.8
1.99
39.7

Log R&Dt 1
ROAt 1
Tobin’s Qt 1
Firm Aget 1
Total Assetst

B. Public firm characteristics
3.80
0.17
2.19
21.7
11.2

3.71
0.17
2.08
22.3
11.4

C: Future employer characteristics
1.59
14.6
511

20.9
1,340
44,520

1

(’000s)

Firm Aget+3
Employmentt+3
Payroll (’000s)t+3

Note: Panel 3 shows summary statistics at the employee-founded startup level. All variables have 108,000
observations. Variables through “Ever received VC” are indicators, and the rest are continuous. Payroll is in thousands
of dollars. Panel 4 shows means of variables at the employee level. “Workers who join founding teams of startups
(3 yrs old)” refers to individuals who left the parent firm to join the startup’s founding team (108,000 observations).
“Workers who move to incumbents ( 4 yrs old)” refers to individuals who left the parent firm to join already existing
firms (2,900,000 observations). Wages are in thousands of real 2014 dollars.

46

Table 2: First Stage IV Results
Dependent variable: Log R&Dt

Federal R&D tax pricet
State R&D tax pricet

1

Controls
Year FE
Firm FE
State FE
Industry (SIC3) FE
Industry (SIC3)-year FE
State-year FE
Industry (SIC4) FE
N
R2 (partial for the IV
instruments)
F-test (instruments)

1

1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-2.020***
(0.295)
-1.158*
(0.691)

-1.504***
(0.231)
-0.950**
(0.476)

-1.504***
(0.231)
-0.956**
(0.476)

-1.470***
(0.225)
-0.978**
(0.471)

-1.363***
(0.168)
-0.303
(0.375)

-1.424***
(0.199)
-0.947**
(0.420)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

36,000
0.032

36,000
0.027

36,000
0.026

36,000
0.026

36,000
0.022

36,000
0.025

24.70

22.23

22.25

22.37

34.11

27.64

Note: This table shows the first stage of the instrumental variables analysis. The sample is an establishment-year
panel of public firms. We predict parent firm R&D using firm-level federal and state tax prices of R&D, which are
partially determined by tax credits that change across time, states, and depending on firm age. The federal R&D tax
price is the log firm-level tax price of R&D, based on the federal tax credit, and following Hall (1993) and Bloom et al.
(2013). The state R&D tax price is the log state-level tax price of R&D, following Bloom et al. (2013). See Section
4.2 and Appendix Section A.1 for details. Establishment controls are size and average wage. Firm controls are return
on assets, sales growth, Tobin’s Q, asset tangibility (PPE investment/total assets), size (log total assets), cash holdings,
age, and an indicator for being diversified (having establishments in more than one SIC three-digit industry). Standard
errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

47

Table 3: Effect of R&D on Non-entrepreneurial Employee Outcomes
Dependent variable:

Log R&Dt

1

Controls
Year FE
Firm FE
State FE
Industry (SIC3) FE
N
Adj. R2
Dependent variable:

Log R&Dt

1

Controls
Year FE
Firm FE
State FE
Industry (SIC3) FE
N
Adj. R2

Stayerst+3

Depart employment
datat+3

Movers to incumbent
firmst+3

OLS
(1)

IV
(2)

OLS
(3)

IV
(4)

OLS
(5)

IV
(6)

-1.13
(0.72)

-0.39
(3.54)

-0.004
(0.133)

0.46
(0.87)

0.49
(0.61)

-2.22
(2.36)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

36,000
0.385

36,000
-

36,000
0.222

36,000
-

36,000
0.356

36,000
-

Movers to young
firms (<10 yrs old)t+3

Movers to high-tech
young firms (<10 yrs old)t+3

OLS
(7)

IV
(8)

OLS
(9)

IV
(10)

0.35**
(0.17)

1.50*
(0.79)

0.23*
(0.13)

0.76
(0.61)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

36,000
0.294

36,000
-

36,000
0.253

36,000
-

Note: This table shows the effect of R&D on alternative employee outcomes. The sample is an establishment-year
panel of public firms. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is the percent of an establishment’s workers in the
1st quarter of year zero who remain at the firm in the 1st quarter of year 3. In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable
is the percent of an establishment’s workers in the 1st quarter of year zero who drop out of the employment sample
by the 1st quarter of year three. Note, workers mainly depart the employment data coverage due to unemployment
and departures out of the labor force (around 94 percent of workers in this group). Departures outside of the LEHD
data coverage comprise around 6 percent of this group. In columns 5 and 6, the dependent variable is the percent of
an establishment’s workers in the 1st quarter of year zero who move to a firm that is more than 3 years old by the 1st
quarter of year three. In columns 7 and 8, the dependent variable is the percent of an establishment’s workers in the
1st quarter of year zero who move to a firm that is less than 10 years old by the 1st quarter of year three. In columns 9
and 10, the dependent variable is the percent of an establishment’s workers in the 1st quarter of year zero who move to
a firm that is 10 or more years old and also high-tech by the 1st quarter of year three. Controls are the same as in Table
4 Panel 1. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

48

Table 4: Effect of R&D on Employee Entrepreneurship
Panel 1
Dependent variable: Employee entrepreneurshipt+3

Log R&Dt

1

Log employmentt

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.096**
(0.045)

0.105**
(0.050)
-0.217***
(0.018)
-0.147***
(0.054)
-0.036
(0.036)
-0.123
(0.095)
0.126
(0.089)
0.131
(0.261)
0.888
(0.543)
0.022
(0.066)
-0.011
(0.070)
-0.177
(0.382)
-0.526*
(0.308)
-0.016
(0.227)

0.106**
(0.051)
-0.181***
(0.019)
-0.057
(0.054)
-0.033
(0.033)
-0.130
(0.095)
0.130
(0.090)
0.127
(0.260)
0.811
(0.543)
0.032
(0.067)
-0.033
(0.069)
-0.058
(0.385)
-0.502
(0.307)
0.052
(0.220)

0.099*
(0.052)
-0.174***
(0.018)
-0.082
(0.056)
-0.021
(0.028)
-0.135
(0.095)
0.124
(0.091)
0.155
(0.261)
0.731
(0.553)
0.027
(0.067)
-0.054
(0.070)
-0.050
(0.393)
-0.506
(0.315)
0.069
(0.225)

0.109*
(0.060)
-0.179***
(0.019)
-0.033
(0.054)
-0.003
(0.030)
-0.141
(0.100)
0.129
(0.099)
-0.112
(0.294)
0.508
(0.617)
0.044
(0.077)
-0.001
(0.066)
-0.063
(0.424)
-0.521
(0.320)
0.187
(0.203)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Log payrollt
Firm aget

1

Firm diversifiedt
Sales growtht
EBITDAt

1

1

1

Investment/Total assetst
Log Tobin’s Qt

1

1

Log Total Assetst

1

PPE investment/Total assetst
Casht

1

1

Leveraget

1

Year FE
Firm FE
State FE
Industry (SIC3) FE
Industry (SIC4) FE
Industry (SIC3)-year FE
State-year FE
N
Adj. R2

36,000
0.156

36,000
0.167

49

36,000
0.176

Yes

36,000
0.184

Yes
Yes
36,000
0.180

Panel 2
Dependent variable: Employee entrepreneurshipt+3

Log R&Dt

1

Average employee aget

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.102**
(0.052)

0.104**
(0.051)
-0.036***
(0.007)
-0.084
(0.165)
0.713***
(0.169)
0.508**
(0.251)
-0.055
(0.043)
-0.023*
(0.013)
0.004
(0.017)

0.101**
(0.051)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

36,000
0.179

36,000
0.176

Share employees femalet
Share employees whitet
Share employees foreignt
Average employee educationt
Average employee tenuret
Average employee experiencet
Log patent classest
Log patentst

1

1

Log forward citationst

1

Log backward citationst

1

Controls
Year FE
Firm FE
State FE
Industry (SIC3) FE
Industry (SIC4) FE

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

N
Adj. R2

36,000
0.181

0.227*
(0.120)
-0.137
(0.091)
-0.006
(0.022)
-0.005
(0.038)

Note: This table shows the effect of corporate R&D on employee entrepreneurship. The sample is an establishmentyear panel of public firms. The dependent variable is the percent of an establishment’s workers as of 1st quarter of
year zero who are entrepreneurs as of 1st quarter of year three. An entrepreneur is defined as a member of a firm’s
founding team: a person at a firm no more than 3 years old who is among the top 5 earners at that new firm. In Panel
2, controls are the same as in Panel 1. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** denote significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

50

Table 5: Instrumented Effect of R&D on Employee Entrepreneurship
Dependent variable: Employee entrepreneurshipt+3

Instrumented log R&Dt
Controls
Year FE
Firm FE
State FE
Industry (SIC3) FE
Industry (SIC3)-year FE
State-year FE
Industry (SIC4) FE
N

1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.577***
(0.207)

0.719***
(0.274)

0.659**
(0.271)

0.648**
(0.270)

0.587*
(0.317)

0.598**
(0.276)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

36,000

36,000

36,000

36,000

Yes
Yes
Yes
36,000

Yes
36,000

Note: This table shows the effect of instrumented R&D on employee entrepreneurship. The sample is an
establishment-year panel of public firms. The first stage predicting R&D is shown in Table 2. The dependent variable
is the percent of an establishment’s workers as of 1st quarter of year zero who are entrepreneurs as of 1st quarter of
year three. An entrepreneur is defined as a member of a firm’s founding team: a person at a firm no more than 3 years
old who is among the top 5 earners at that new firm. We do not display controls because Census limits the number of
coefficients we may disclose. Establishment controls are size and average wage. Firm controls are return on assets,
sales growth, Tobin’s Q, asset tangibility (PPE investment/total assets), size (log total assets), cash holdings, age, and
an indicator for being diversified (having establishments in more than one SIC three-digit industry). Standard errors
are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

51

Table 6: Effect of R&D on Alternative Measures of Employee Entrepreneurship
Panel 1
Dependent variable:

Log R&Dt

1

Controls
Year FE
Firm FE
State FE
Industry (SIC3) FE
N
Adj. R2

# Employee-founded
startupst+3

Employee entrepreneurshipt+3
Incorporated
Top 3 earners
startups only
(rather than top 5)

OLS
(1)

IV
(2)

OLS
(3)

IV
(4)

OLS
(5)

IV
(6)

0.067*
(0.037)

0.324
(0.200)

0.083**
(0.042)

0.464**
(0.234)

0.099**
(0.040)

0.507**
(0.226)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

36,000
0.154

36,000

36,000
0.183

36,000

36,000
0.154

36,000

-

-

-

Panel 2
Dependent variable:

Log R&Dt

1

Controls
Year FE
Firm FE
State FE
Industry (SIC3) FE
N
Adj. R2

Employee entrepreneurship if
present at startup foundingt+3

Employee entrepreneurshipt+2
1-yr old startups only

OLS
(1)

IV
(2)

OLS
(3)

IV
(4)

OLS
(5)

IV
(6)

0.082*
(0.048)

0.595**
(0.254)

0.076*
(0.042)

0.472**
(0.240)

0.057*
(0.033)

0.175
(0.166)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

36,000
0.171

36,000
-

36,000
0.131

36,000
-

36,000
0.097

36,000
-

Note: This table shows the effect of R&D on alternative measures of employee entrepreneurship. The sample is
an establishment-year panel of public firms. For a detailed description of the dependent variables, see Section 5.4.
Controls are the same as in Table 4 Panel 1. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** denote significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

52

Table 7: Parent Variation in Effect of R&D on Employee Entrepreneurship
Dependent variable: Employee entrepreneurshipt+3

Log R&Dt

1

Log R&Dt

1 ·High

tech

Log R&Dt

1 ·High

patent generalityt

Log R&Dt

1 ·Larget 1

Log R&Dt

1 ·IPOt 3,t 1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.048
(0.057)
0.083***
(0.029)

0.099*
(0.052)

0.016
(0.062)

0.103**
(0.052)

1

Controls
Year FE
Firm FE
State FE
Industry (SIC3) FE
N
Adj. R2

0.027*
(0.016)

0.130**
(0.056)

0.072
(0.057)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

36,000
0.176

36,000
0.176

36,000
0.176

36,000
0.176

Note: This table shows how the effect of corporate R&D on employee entrepreneurship varies by parent firm
characteristics. The sample is an establishment-year panel of public firms. High Tech is 1 if the parent establishment
is in a high-tech industry, and 0 if it is not. Large is 1 if the parent has above-median total assets (calculated at the
firm-year level), and 0 if assets are below median. Old is 1 if the parent is of above-median age (calculated at the firmyear level), and 0 if it is below median. High patent generality is 1 if the parent has above-median patent generality
(calculated at the industry-year level), and 0 if it is below median. IPO equals 1 if the firm went public in the past
three years, and 0 otherwise. The dependent variable is the percent of an establishment’s workers as of 1st quarter
of year zero who are entrepreneurs as of the first quarter of year three. An entrepreneur is defined as a member of a
firm’s founding team: a person at a firm no more than 3 years old who is among the top 5 earners at that new firm. All
specifications include the indicator variables that are used to interact with R&D (not reported). Controls are the same
as in Table 4 Panel 1. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels.

53

Table 8: Effect of R&D on Employee Entrepreneurship by Startup Characteristics
Panel 1: Predictors of VC-backed, employee-founded startups
Dependent variable: Employee-founded startup ever received VC
(1)
Log R&Dt

1

Employee aget
Employee age2 t
Employee female
Employee white
Employee foreign
Employee born in state
Employee education
Employee experiencet
Employee tenuret
Employee log earningst
Employee-founded startup
aget+3
Employee-founded startup
initial employment
Continued...

0.007***
(0.001)
0.001**
(0.000)
-0.000**
(0.000)
-0.013***
(0.002)
0.003**
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.007***
(0.001)
0.001***
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.008***
(0.002)
0.007***
(0.001)
0.008***

...Continued
Establishment log employmentt
Establishment average employee waget
Firm Aget

1

Firm Diversifiedt

1

Firm Sales growtht
Firm EBITDAt

1

1

Firm Investment/Totalt
Firm Log Tobin’s Qt

1

1

Firm Log Total Assetst

1

Firm PPE Investment/Total Assetst
Firm Casht

1

Firm Leveraget

1

(0.002)

1

0.001
(0.001)
0.012***
(0.003)
-0.002***
(0.001)
-0.003
(0.006)
0.004
(0.006)
-0.008
(0.016)
-0.013
(0.041)
0.002
(0.004)
-0.006***
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.012)
0.076***
(0.015)
0.009
(0.007)

Year-state FE
Year-industry (SIC3) FE
N
Adj. R2

Yes
Yes
108,000
0.079

Note: This table shows the effect of R&D on characteristics of employee entrepreneurship. The sample is at the
employee-founded startup level. Based on the main variable used in Table 4, we identify whether the new firm
associated with the departing employee has a given characteristic. The dependent variable in Panel 1 is 1 if the
employee-founded startup ever received VC backing (either before or after the employee-founded startup is identified
in year t + 3), and 0 if not. The “Employee...” controls in Panel 1 column 1 refer to the employee who left the parent
to found a new firm. Standard errors are clustered by parent firm. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels.

54

Panel 2: Employee-founded startup characteristics
Dependent variable:

Log R&Dt

1

Controls
Year-state FE
Year-industry FE
N
Adj. R2

Employee-founded startup...
log
exitt+5
in same
wagest+3
industry
(SIC2)
as parent

is
incorp.

in hightech
industry

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.008***
(0.003)

0.009***
(0.004)

0.028***
(0.006)

0.007**
(0.003)

-0.007**
(0.003)

0.002
(0.002)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

108,000
0.080

108,000
0.102

108,000
0.318

108,000
0.083

108,000
0.206

108,000
0.053

in same
state as
parent

Note: This table shows the effect of R&D on characteristics of employee entrepreneurship. The sample is at the
employee-founded startup level. Based on the main variable used in Table 4, we identify whether the new firm
associated with the departing employee has a given characteristic. The dependent variable in Panel 2 column 1 (2)
(4) (5) (6) is 1 if the employee-founded startup is an incorporated business (is in a high-tech industry) (the employeefounded startup exited by year 5) (in the same two-digit SIC code as the parent establishment) (is in the same state as
the parent establishment), and 0 if not. In column 3, the dependent variable is the departing employee entrepreneur’s
log wages at the new firm in the 1st quarter of year three. An entrepreneur is defined as a member of a firm’s founding
team: a person at a firm no more than 3 years old who is among the top 5 earners at that new firm. Controls in Panel
2 are the same as in Panel 1, except that we include the indicator for being VC-backed as an additional control in
Column 4. Standard errors are clustered by parent firm. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels.

55

Panel 3: Input-output relationship between parent firm and startup industries
Dependent variable: Indicator for being in top 5% of closeness distribution
Parent upstream, employee-founded
startup downstream
Supply chain closeness
measure:

Log R&Dt

1

Controls
Year-state FE
Year-industry (SIC3)
FE
N
Adj. R2

Parent downstream,
employee-founded startup upstream

Downstream
closeness

Upstream
closeness

Downstream
closeness

Upstream
closeness

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.008**
(0.003)

-0.003**
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

0.006*
(0.003)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

108,000
0.195

108,000
0.115

108,000
0.035

108,000
0.157

Note: This table shows the effect of R&D on employee entrepreneurship based on the supply chain relationship
between the parent and the employee-founded startup. The sample is at the employee-founded startup level. The
dependent variable is an indicator for the parent-startup pair having a measure of supply chain industry closeness that
is in the top 5% of the overall closeness distribution across all parent-startup pairs. In columns 1 and 3, the measure is
downstream closeness (downstream industry’s share of upstream industry’s product). In columns 2 and 4, the measure
is upstream closeness (the upstream industry’s share of what the downstream industry uses). In columns 1 and 2, the
parent is assigned to the upstream industry and the employee-founded startup to the downstream industry (vice versa
for columns 3 and 4). Controls are the same as in Table 8 Panel 1. Standard errors are clustered by parent firm. *, **,
and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

56

Internet Appendix

A.1 Instrumental variables calculation and discussion
A.1.1 The Federal R&D tax credit
The first instrument is the federal tax price of R&D, which we denote ⇢f t F . Implemented in 1981,
the federal “Research and Experimentation” (R&E) tax credit permits firms to reduce their corporate
income tax liability by the value of the credit. The credit was extremely complex to calculate (leading
to a substantial simplification in 2009), and has changed over time. In the early 2000s, the total value
of the federal credits was about $5 billion per year (Wilson et al. 2005). In this description, we focus
on the calculation of the credit between 1990 and 2005, which is the period during which we seek to
predict public firm R&D.35
Our approach closely follows Hall (1993) and Bloom et al. (2013). Calculating ⇢f t F requires
first identifying a firm’s effective R&D tax credit. This depends on a categorical variable derived
from the qualified research expenditure (QRE) in that year; in particular, credit relies on the difference
between actual QRE and a firm-specific “base.” QRE is research that occurs in the U.S., and is in one
of three categories: salaries and wages, supplies, and contract research. The law is quite specific about
what counts and what does not count as QRE. For example, QRE must be technological in nature and
relate to new or improved function, performance, reliability, or quality. Among other excluded types,
research after commercial production of a component, survey research, and social science research do
not count.36 The firm-specific base is the average of the ratio of QRE to sales between 1984 and 1988
multiplied by current sales, with a maximum of 16 percent. Firms defined in the law as “startups” have
a different treatment. Their base is three percent, and the base then changes each year.
35

The calculation was quite different before 1989. In practice, we draw heavily from code originally written for
Hall (1993).
36
The complete legal text is here.

Internet Appendix

A final consideration is that starting in 1996, firms could elect the alternative incremental credit
(AIC), in lieu of the R&E tax credit. This has three tiers depending on R&D intensity (QRE relative
to sales); if intensity is 1-1.5% (1.5-2%) [>2%], the AIC rate is 2.65% (3.2%) [3.75%], respectively.
These rates have varied over time; they were lower in the late 1990s, and have increased in recent years.
The firm chooses the AIC if it is larger than the effective R&D tax credit.
The next step is to deduct the credit from the firm’s corporate tax liability. As part of this
process, there are two adjustments for carry-backs/forwards, and for an R&D/GDP deflator. After
these adjustments, we arrive at a federal tax price of R&D, which we denote ⇢f t F . The credit is firmspecific, depending on age, sales, when the firm first had QRE, and the status of QRE spending this
year. Also, the credit lapsed in 1995-96, which generates additional within-firm variation. ⇢f t F can
take values between zero and one. If ⇢f t F = 1, then the firm should not treat R&D differently than
other expenditures. If ⇢f t F < 1, R&D is less expensive than other expenditures. A cheaper user cost
of capital should incentivize the firm to invest more in R&D. As expected, we show in Appendix Table
A.6 that when the tax price is below one, R&D increases as ⇢f t F decreases.
There is substantial within-industry variation in ⇢f t F , especially in manufacturing and
services. The median tax price is well below 1 on average, so that R&D is cheaper than other
spending. Within industries, the distributions have a negative skew (i.e., a longer right tail). In
regressions, we verify substantial firm-level variation in the tax price of R&D. Firms in high tech
areas such as pharmaceuticals and electronics, tend to have the most variation.
In the first stage, firm R&D does not mechanically pick up variation in the tax price that depends
on past values of R&D. This obviates concern that, because historical firm variables are included in
the tax price calculation, the tax price of R&D may somehow be a function of past R&D, which
might then predict current R&D. Appendix Table A.7 shows that the instrument remains strong after
controlling for past R&D. Columns 1 and 2 include firm fixed effects, and columns 3 and 4 add year
fixed effects. Columns 1 and 2 use a fourth degree polynomial in the previous year’s R&D. Columns 3
and 4 include three lags of R&D. In all cases, the federal tax price of R&D significantly predicts R&D
with a minimum t-statistic of 12.3. Because the tax price is calculated using highly non-linear function
of firm age and sales variables, we can control for them not only in linear fashion, but also using higher

Internet Appendix

order polynomials. Appendix Table A.7 shows that firm R&D is robustly dependent on the tax price
even after we include third polynomials of sales and firm age (columns 5-6).

A.1.2 State R&D tax credits
State R&D tax credits have been generally modeled on the federal one. The first state R&D tax credit
was implemented in 1982 by Minnesota; by the end of our sample period, 40 states had some sort of
R&D tax credit. The calculation of the base amount, and the definition of qualified R&D, can vary
across states (Wilson et al. 2005). According to Miller & Richard (2010), manufacturing-intensive
states, and those with one-party political control, are more likely to pass R&D tax credits. They argue
that the tax credits primarily support incumbent R&D-conducting firms. To the best of our knowledge,
the state credits are not refundable during the sample period.
The state instrument requires two objects: the state tax price component of the R&D user cost
of capital, and a measure of the share of a firm’s R&D that occurs in a given state. For both, we follow
Bloom et al. (2013). First, we use the state tax price of R&D in Wilson (2009). He incorporated
state level corporate income taxes, depreciation allowances, and R&D tax credits into this tax price
component, which we call ⇢Sst .37 These credits vary across states and time. They allow a firm to offset
its state-level corporate tax liabilities, and they are calculated by weighting total firm profits according
to the location of the firm’s sales, employment, and property. Thus firms with R&D activities in the
state will likely both have tax liability and R&D tax credit eligibility there.
The second object, ✓f st , is a proxy for a firm’s R&D share in a given state-year. It is the 10-year
moving average of the share of the firm’s patent inventors located in state s.38 The firm’s state-level tax
P
price is then ⇢Sft = s ✓f st ⇢Sst .
37
38

allowances)
Specifically, it is roughly: 1 (tax credits+depr.
.
1 tax rate
The data is from NBER patent data, available here.

Internet Appendix

A.1.3 Concerns
There are five potential concerns. Most importantly, the exclusion restriction is that tax credits cannot
affect employee entrepreneurship. In a rigorous border county differences-in-differences model,
Curtis & Decker (2018) show that R&D tax credits have no effect on startup formation. We also show
empirically that there is no relation between the state tax credits and state-level startup creation, or the
federal tax credit and national startup creation. We do this using two data sources, each of which have
limitations. The first is the Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS), which contains firm entry by state for
our entire sample period, but does not have state-industry data.39

The second is the Quarterly

Workforce Indicators (QWI), a publicly available dataset derived from the LEHD. While the QWI has
state-industry level data, its coverage is poor in the early years of our data, with states being added
over time.40
At the state level we regress either the log number of new firms or the change in firm entry rates
year to year on the tax price of R&D, as well as state and year fixed effects. The results are in Appendix
Table A.8 Panels 1-2. We consider only R&D-intensive industries and cluster errors by state.41 We find
that the tax credits have no correlation with startup entry (BDS data) or new firm employment growth
(QWI data). This is true regardless of whether we use year and/or state fixed effects, and regardless of
the standard error assumptions. At the federal level, we regress either the log number of new firms or
the change in firm entry rates on the statutory federal R&D tax credit. This is, of course, very different
from the firm-specific tax price of R&D that is calculated per the description in Section 7. This reflects
baseline changes in the rate, which is then applied to a firm’s specific situation. There are very few
observations, and we do not use robust standard errors. The results, in Appendix Table A.8 Panel 3,
again show no correlation.
More generally, the legal literature has argued that R&D tax credits are not useful to startups,
because these firms have no or little taxable income against which to offset losses from failed R&D
efforts. For example Bankman & Gilson (1999) note that “the U.S. tax code subsidizes R&D by
existing successful companies by allowing losses from failed attempts at innovation to offset otherwise
39

This public version of the LBD is available here.
We used a transformed version of the data used in Adelino et al. (2017), courtesy of Song Ma.
41
NAICS codes 31-33, 51, and 54.
40

Internet Appendix

taxable income from other activities. Since startups have no other income against which their losses
from a particular project may be set off, the government in effect gives established companies with
a stable source of income an R&D tax subsidy that is not available to a startup entity.” Perhaps in
response to this, a few states have recently made their R&D tax credits transferable, so that firms
without revenue can potentially derive value from them. However, these policies occurred after the end
of our sample period.
The second concern is that changes in state-level R&D tax credits may lead firms to
geographically reallocate R&D (or misreport it such that it appears reallocated).

For studies

evaluating how a state-level R&D tax credit affects national R&D, this is a central concern. In our
case, however, such reallocation will simply reduce the power of the instrument. As long as the
combined instruments have adequate power, some degree of reallocation should not bias our findings.
It does lead us to expect that the federal instrument will have more power than the state instrument,
which is indeed what we find. This is because the federal instrument should have a larger effect on
firms that only operate in the affected state, but most firms with positive R&D operate in multiple
states.
The third concern is that the tax credits may not be large enough to affect R&D. The above
sections pointed to substantial literature finding R&D responses to R&D tax credits that are large in
economic magnitude and quite robust, especially for the federal instrument. The literature examining
the state instrument finds large within-state elasticities, but also finds evidence of reallocation across
states.
The fourth concern is that changes to the R&D tax credits may be anticipated by firms, which
may then behave strategically to maximize their value. The federal tax credit formula is exceedingly
complicated, as explained above, and it seems implausible that firms will optimize on all of the
variables (especially firm age) in order to maximize the tax credit value. Strategic behavior around
state tax credit changes would require firms in one state to respond by moving states. The tax credits
are not large enough to merit such a response from many firms.

For firms in multiple states,

reallocation across states should attenuate the effect of the instrument. Beyond these points, note that
the goal is to predict changes in R&D. Suppose that in order to maximize the tax credit benefit, firms

Internet Appendix

choose to conduct less R&D in the years immediately preceding the tax credit change and more in the
years after. This does not obviously bias our main result, which is that changes to R&D affect
employee entrepreneurship.
Finally, the fifth concern is that state decisions to adopt R&D tax credits could be endogenous,
reflecting recent declines in R&D. Bloom et al. (2013) consider this possibility at length, and show that
the results are robust to lagging the tax credit instruments for one and two periods. They also point out
that cross-sectional variation in the state R&D tax credit rates is very large relative to the average rate
within states, and also large relative to the secular increase in the tax credit generosity that has occurred
over time. Finally, Chirinko & Wilson (2008), Chirinko & Wilson (2011), and Bloom et al. (2013) show
that the level and timing of R&D tax credit adoption is uncorrelated with local economic observables
like state R&D expenditure or per capita GDP, once year and state fixed effects are included.
In sum, we believe that R&D tax credits offer the best available quasi-exogenous source of
variation driving corporate R&D that is plausibly unrelated to technological opportunities that could
jointly give rise to parent R&D and employee entrepreneurship.

A.2 Out-of-sample test for benefit internalization
We directly assess the possibility that parents internalize employee-founded startups’ benefits using an
out-of-sample test based on the underlying data in Gompers et al. (2005). They connected all venture
capital-backed startup executives in the VentureOne database to their prior employers.42 This sample
should give an upper bound on possible internalized employee-founded startups because as these
startups by definition received external investment, they are more likely than the average
employee-founded startup to have received investment from their former employer. We begin with
13,612 entrepreneur-parent pairs. The entrepreneurs are founders of 6,499 unique startups. There are
9,152 unique parents, which we linked to VentureXpert acquisition and investment data.43
Seventy-four percent of the unique startups matched to at least one investor or acquirer, yielding
42

Their time period, 1986 to 1999, overlaps with our primary Census data (1990 to 2005).
In many cases, employee-founded startups have multiple parents (that is, there are multiple executives with prior
jobs).
43

Internet Appendix

20,478 unique startup-investor pairs.44
Finally, among the unique investors and acquirers in these pairs, only 208 match to parents.
This is just 2.3 percent of the 9,152 unique parents in the original Gompers et al. (2005) data, providing
evidence that parents do not usually internalize employee-founded startups by investing in or acquiring
them. There are 266 unique startups where the parent matches an investor or acquirer, 5.6 percent of the
startups matched to VentureXpert.45 Of these, 192 are investment deals, and 74 are acquisitions. Some
parents have multiple startups, such as IBM and Highland Capital Partners, so the parent and startup
numbers do not match. Some parents that invested in or acquired their employee-founded startups are
corporates, including Seagate, Xerox, Monsanto, Johnson & Johnson, and Microsoft. Others are asset
managers, including Accel Partners, SoftBank Vision Group, and Equus Capital. Still others are noncorporates, including Boston University. We identified 41 parent firms that are clearly venture funds or
other asset managers. This leaves 167 parents that are potentially R&D-investing companies.
One concern may be that many corporate parents may not be covered as investors or acquirers
in VentureXpert. We match 2,617 of the parents to investors or acquirers in VentureXpert. The most
conservative framing of our results, then, restricts the parent population to firms that ever invested in
or acquired a startup in VentureXpert. In this case, 7.9 percent of parents (208 out of 2,617) invest in
or acquire their employee-founded startups. This extreme upper bound is still small and confirms that
it is unlikely that parents generally internalize the benefits of their employee-founded startups.
The parent could also appropriate the employee-founded startup’s benefits through technology
licensing deals. We cannot assess this possibility with our data, but we think it unlikely that the parent
can fully internalize the employee-founded startup’s social benefits through such arms-length contracts.
Consistent with the out-of-sample test, in our data we find that the interaction between R&D
44

Note that the underlying dataset, from Dow Jones Venture Source, is of venture capital-backed startups. In theory,
if we used VentureSource, we should match 100 percent to initial investors. However, as Kaplan & Lerner (2016)
and Maats et al. (2011) explain, VentureXpert’s coverage is much better than Venture Source (it contains more than
40 percent more investments). VentureXpert also has superior acquisition data, and Venture Source’s data quality
has declined over time. We are most interested in whether parents ultimately invested in (and especially acquired)
employee-founded startups, so VentureXpert seems like the optimal data set to use. If there is any bias, it should
be the case that the employee-founded startups that do not match have lower rates of subsequent investment and
acquisition, since the commercial databases often backfill based on exit events.
45
We matched on the company’s first word, which yielded 275 matches. This enables successful matches such as
“Xerox Venture Capital” to “Xerox.” We then manually removed obviously wrong matches, erring on the side of
leaving the match to be conservative in ambiguous cases.

Internet Appendix

and the parent having a corporate venture capital program has no effect on employee entrepreneurship.
These results are consistent with Ma (2016), who finds that public firms launch corporate venture
capital programs when internal innovation is poor, invest in startups in their own industries, and invest
in geographically distant startups. That is, corporate venture capital is a way to outsource innovation.
This is the opposite of the corporate environment that yields R&D-induced employee entrepreneurship.
Instead, when corporate R&D increases at innovative firms, it seems to serendipitously produce “extra”
growth options, and employee entrepreneurship is an unintended consequence.

Internet Appendix

Table A.1: Sample Composition by Industry

Panel 1: 1990 -2001
In Sample

Out of Sample

4.8%
5.6%
15.4%
0.6%
27.9%
16.4%
23.7%
5.5%

4.1%
6.3%
15.8%
0.4%
28.8%
17.2%
22.6%
4.8%

In Sample

Out of Sample

5.6%
1.9%
5.9%
16.3%
10.9%
2.2%
9.9%
10.6%
0.6%
4.0%
12.3%
11.6%
3.4%
0.4%
4.4%

4.8%
2.4%
6.3%
17.0%
11.6%
2.5%
9.1%
10.7%
0.3%
3.9%
12.8%
11.1%
2.8%
0.4%
4.2%

Construction
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate
Manufacturing
Mining
Services
Total Government
Trade
Transportation and Public Utilities
Panel 2: 2002-2008

Construction
Educational Services
Financial Activities
Government
Health Care and Social Assistance
Information
Leisure and Hospitality
Manufacturing
Mining and Logging
Other Services
Professional and Business Services
Retail Trade
Transportation and Warehousing
Utilities
Wholesale Trade

Note: This table compares the data in our sample (from 31 states) to national data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS) Current Employment Statistics (CES) Survey from 1990-2008. This is done separately for the pre-2002 and
post-2002 periods because before 2002, the BLS used SIC codes, while after 2002, it used NAICS codes. Panel 1
shows the pre-2002 industries, and Panel 2 the post-2002 industries. We divide state-industry level employment by
total state employment across all states in our sample. We do this for each year, and then average across years. We
compare this to the analogous figure for states that are not in our sample (right column).

Internet Appendix

Table A.2: Industry Composition by Sample

Panel 1: 1990 - 2001
In Sample

Out of Sample

Construction
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate
Manufacturing
Mining
Services
Total Government
Trade
Transportation and Public Utilities

63.7%
57.4%
59.4%
69.4%
59.2%
58.8%
61.1%
63.2%

36.3%
42.6%
40.6%
30.6%
40.8%
41.2%
38.9%
36.8%

Total Observations

60.0%

40.0%

In Sample

Out of Sample

Construction
Educational Services
Financial Activities
Government
Health Care and Social Assistance
Information
Leisure and Hospitality
Manufacturing
Mining and Logging
Other Services
Professional and Business Services
Retail Trade
Transportation and Warehousing
Utilities
Wholesale Trade

64.5%
55.0%
59.6%
59.9%
59.5%
57.5%
62.7%
60.6%
71.9%
61.6%
59.9%
61.8%
65.3%
59.6%
62.3%

35.5%
45.0%
40.4%
40.1%
40.5%
42.5%
37.3%
39.4%
28.1%
38.4%
40.1%
38.2%
34.7%
40.4%
37.7%

Total Observations

62.3%

37.7%

Panel 2: 2002-2008

Note: This table compares the data in our sample (from 31 states) to national data from the BLS Current Employment
Statistics (CES) Survey from 1990-2008. This is done separately for the pre-2002 and post-2002 periods because
before 2002, the BLS used SIC codes, while after 2002, it used NAICS codes. Panel 1 shows the pre-2002 industries,
and Panel 2 the post-2002 industries. Each percent is the share of people employed in an industry in our sample states
(left column) versus the other states (right column).

Internet Appendix

Table A.3: Effect of R&D on Employee Entrepreneurship at the Employee Level
Dependent variable: Employee entrepreneurshipt+3
OLS

(1)
Log R&Dt

0.00048**
(0.00)

1

Federal R&D tax pricet
State R&D tax pricet

1

1

IV

OLS

IV

First stage

Second
stage

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.003**
(0.00)

0.00039**
(0.00)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

11.9
0.01

11.9

11.9

-1.429***
(0.21)
-0.152
(0.56)

Employee controls
Firm FE
State FE
State-year FE
Industry (SIC3)-year FE

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

N (millions)
Adj. R2
R2 (partial for the IV instruments)
F-test (instruments)

11.9
0.00

11.9

11.9

0.02
23.10

First stage

Second
stage

(5)

(6)

-1.488***
(0.20)
-0.233
(0.53)

0.003**
(0.00)

0.02
26.80

Note: This table shows the effect of R&D on employee entrepreneurship. The sample is an establishment-year panel of
public firms. The dependent variable equals 1 if an employee as of first quarter of year zero becomes an entrepreneur
as of 1st quarter of year three, and 0 otherwise. An entrepreneur is defined as a member of a firm’s founding team: a
person at a firm no more than 3 years old who is among the top 5 earners at that new firm. The mean of the dependent
variable is 0.0091. We do not display controls because we are limited by Census in the number of coefficients we may
disclose. Employee controls are age, age squared, education, total experience in years, tenure at the firm, log earnings
in year 0, and indicators for being female, white, foreign, and born in state. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *,
**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

Internet Appendix

Table A.4: Effect of Alternative Measures of R&D on Employee Entrepreneurship
Dependent variable:

Above median
Top 10 pct

R&Dt

R&Dt

Bottom 10 pct

Controls
Year FE
Firm FE
Industry (SIC3) FE
State FE

1

(1)

(2)

0.089***
(0.033)

0.070***
(0.024)

1

R&Dt

R&D/Total Assetst

N
Adj. R2

Employee
# Employee-founded
entrepreneurshipt+3
startupst+3

Employee entrepreneurshipt+3
(3)

0.132**
(0.067)

1

(4)

-0.105**
(0.053)

1

(5)

0.887*
(0.529)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

36,000
0.176

36,000
0.154

36,000
0.176

36,000
0.176

36,000
0.180

Note: This table shows the effect of alternative measures of R&D on employee entrepreneurship. The sample is an
R&Dt 1 R&Dt 2
. Top 10 pct
establishment-year panel of public firms. Change ( ) in R&D is defined as: .5·(R&D
t 1 +R&Dt 2 )
R&Dt 1 is 1 if the firm had a change in R&D that is in the top 10 percentiles in that year, and 0 if it is in the bottom 90
percentiles. Bottom 10 pct R&Dt 1 is defined analogously. In columns 1, 3, 4 and 5, the dependent variable is the
percent of an establishment’s workers as of the first quarter of year zero who are entrepreneurs as of the first quarter
of year three. An entrepreneur is defined as a member of a firm’s founding team: a person at a firm no more than
3 years old who is among the top 5 earners at that new firm. In column 2, the the dependent variable is the number
of unique startups associated with entrepreneurs in the column 1 definition normalized by the pre-period employment
and expressed in percentage points. Controls are the same as in Table 4 Panel 1. Standard errors are clustered by firm.
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

Internet Appendix

Table A.5: Reverse Causality Test (Effect of Employee Entrepreneurship on R&D)
Dependent variable: Log R&Dt
(1)
One-year employee entrepreneurshipt

2, t 1

Two-year employee entrepreneurshipt

3, t 1

Three-year employee entrepreneurshipt

0.008
(0.005)

(2)

0.001
(0.006)

4, t 1

Controls
Year FE
Firm FE
State FE
Industry (SIC3) FE
N
Adj. R2

(3)

-0.005
(0.003)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

36,000
0.879

36,000
0.879

36,000
0.879

Note: This table shows that past employee entrepreneurship does not predict current corporate R&D. The sample
is an establishment-year panel of public firms. The independent variables are lagged variations on our main
employee entrepreneurship rate measures used as the dependent variable in Tables 4 and 5. The one-year employee
entrepreneurshipt 1 rate is the percent of an establishment’s workers as of the first quarter of year t 1 who are
entrepreneurs as of the first quarter of year t, which is the year that R&D is measured (the dependent variable). The
two-year employee entrepreneurshipt 2 rate is the percent of an establishment’s workers as of the first quarter of year
t 2 who are entrepreneurs as of the first quarter of year t. The three-year employee entrepreneurshipt 3 rate is the
percent of an establishment’s workers as of the first quarter of year t 3 who are entrepreneurs as of the first quarter
of year t. An entrepreneur is defined as a member of a firm’s founding team: a person at a firm no more than 3 years
old who is among the top 5 earners at that new firm. Controls are the same as in Table 4 Panel 1. Standard errors are
clustered by firm. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

Internet Appendix

Table A.6: Relationship Between Federal Tax Price Regions and R&D
Dependent variable: Log R&Dt
(1)
1 |Federal R&D tax pricet < 0.99
1 |0.95 Federal R&D tax pricet < 0.99

0.18***
(0.016)

1 |Federal R&D tax pricet < 0.95
1 |0.90 Federal R&D tax pricet < 0.95

(2)

(3)

0.15***
(0.016)
0.22***
(0.017)

0.15***
(0.017)

1 |Federal R&D tax pricet < 0.90
Year FE
Firm FE
N
R2

0.21***
(0.018)
0.24***
(0.02)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

53,151
0.92

53,151
0.92

53,151
0.92

Note: This table shows the relationship between dummy variables for the federal tax price of R&D in a given region
and log R&D. Observations are at the firm-year level. The tax price can take values between 0 and 1; the minimum
value is 0.845 in our sample. If the tax price is close to 1, then the firm should not treat R&D differently than other
expenditure. If tax price is below 1, R&D is less expensive than other expenditure because of the tax credit. In column
1, within-firm R&D is 18 percent higher when the firm’s tax price is below 0.99 relative to the values close to one.
Note, we use a 0.99 cutoff instead of 1 because there is a large mass of observations arbitrarily close to 1, which are
unlikely to incentivize a large increase in R&D. Columns 2 and 3 show that in regions in which the tax price is below
1, R&D is monotonically increasing with the decrease in the tax price. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **,
and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

Internet Appendix

Table A.7: First Stage IV Results Controlling for Past R&D
Dependent variable: Log R&Dt

Federal R&D tax pricet
Log R&Dt

1

Log R&D2 t

1

Log R&D3 t

1

Log R&D4 t

1

Log R&Dt

2

Log R&Dt

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-1.3***
(0.083)
0.67***
(0.011)
0.023***
(0.002)
-0.003***
(0.0006)
0.0002***
(0.00006)

-1.4***
(0.084)
0.65***
(0.011)
0.021***
(0.002)
-0.003***
(0.0006)
0.0002***
(0.00006)

-1.1***
(0.089)
0.65***
(0.013)

-1.2***
(0.091)
0.64***
(0.014)

-1.4***
(.18)

-1.5***
(.19)

0.027*
(0.014)
0.0026
(0.0099)

0.027*
(0.014)
-0.014
(0.01)

0.11***
(0.009)
-0.008***
(0.002)
0.0003***
(0.00009)
0.034***
(0.0062)
-0.0002***
(0.00004)
2.6e-07***
(6.5e-08)
Yes

0.098***
(0.014)
-0.006***
(0.002)
0.0003***
(0.00009)
0.034***
(0.0063)
-0.0002***
(0.00004)
2.6e-07***
(6.5e-08)
Yes
Yes

34,987
0.94

34,987
0.94

Salest
Sales2 t
Sales3 t
Aget
Age2 t
Age3 t
Year FE
Firm FE
N
R2

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

56,697
0.95

56,697
0.95

41,630
0.96

41,630
0.96

Note: This table shows that the federal tax price of R&D predicts R&D after controlling for past R&D or polynomials
in age and sales. This tests the robustness of the first stage of the instrumental variables analysis (Table 2). Sales are
in millions of dollars. Age is defined according to the R&D tax credit legislation, where it is defined as the number
of years from the first time the firm reported positive R&D. The requirement of positive age reduces the sample size
for columns 5 and 6. The sample is an establishment-year panel of public firms. The federal R&D tax price is the
log firm-level tax price of R&D, based on the federal tax credit, and following Hall (1993) and Bloom et al. (2013).
Standard errors are clustered by firm. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

Internet Appendix

Table A.8: Relationship Between State Tax Price of R&D and State New Firm Formation
Panel 1: Quarterly Workforce Indicator (LEHD) data
Dependent variable

Log 2-year
employment growth

Change in 2-year-old
firm total employment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.74
(0.59)

0.33
(0.36)

-117
(7912)

-6.5
(57677)

State FE
Year FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
No

N
R2

449
0.44

449
0.43

448
0.11

447
0.11

State tax price of R&D

Panel 2: Business Dynamics Statistics Data
Dependent variable

Log 2-year
employment growth

Change in 2-year-old
firm total employment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

State FE
Year FE

-0.11
(0.37)
Yes
Yes

0.04
(0.08)
Yes
No

188
(1619)
Yes
Yes

-583
(981)
Yes
No

N
R2

1530
0.24

1530
0.00

1529
0.02

1529
0.00

State tax price of R&D

Note: This table shows estimates of the relationship between last year’s state tax price of R&D (from Wilson 2009),
and employment growth at new firms. Panel 1 uses data from the QWI, courtesy of Song Ma. Firms are limited to
R&D-intensive (high tech) sectors. Panel 2 uses data from the BDS, where all firms are used because the data do not
include industry information. Errors are clustered at the state level.

Internet Appendix

Panel 3
Data source:
Dependent variable

Quarterly Workforce Indicator
(LEHD) data

Business Dynamics Statistics Data

Log 2-year
employment
growth

Change in
2-year- old firm
total
employment

Log 2-year
employment
growth

Change in
2-year-old firm
total
employment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Federal R&D credit

4.4
(7.3)

-39912
(885697)

-0.19
(0.16)

-377227
(274243)

N
R2

16
0.03

15
0.00

30
0.05

37
0.05

Note: This panel shows estimates of the relationship between last year’s federal tax price of R&D, and employment
growth at new firms.

Internet Appendix

