NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL SECURITY INCENTIVES IN BELGIUM:
AN ANALYSIS OF FOUR DECADES OF CHANGE
Anne-Lore Fraikin
Alain Jousten
Mathieu Lefebvre
Working Paper 25375
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25375

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Fraikin acknowledges financial support through a
Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship from FNRS/FRESH contract.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Anne-Lore Fraikin, Alain Jousten, and Mathieu Lefebvre. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Social Security Incentives in Belgium: An Analysis of Four Decades of Change
Anne-Lore Fraikin, Alain Jousten, and Mathieu Lefebvre
NBER Working Paper No. 25375
December 2018
JEL No. H55,J26
ABSTRACT
The paper traces labor market reforms over the last four decades. It provides estimates of
retirement incentives for a selected set of typical worker profiles across time and socioeconomic
groups and links these series to the labor market performance in Belgium. The results show that
the numerous retirement and social security program reforms have had a marked impact on
incentives at the micro level. At the aggregate level, results are less clear-cut given the extreme
diversity of programs and features in the Belgian institutional context.

Anne-Lore Fraikin
University of Liege
and UNU-MERIT/Maastricht University
alfraikin@ulg.ac.be
Alain Jousten
University of Liege
Law Faculty, HEC-ULg and Tax Institute
Place des Orateurs 3
4000 Liege 1
BELGIUM
and IZA
ajousten@ulg.ac.be

Mathieu Lefebvre
BETA University of Strasbourg
CREPP - Universite de Liege
Bvd du Rectorat 7 (B31) - B4000 Liège
mathieu.lefebvre@ulg.ac.be

Social security incentives in Belgium: an analysis of four
decades of change
Anne-Lore Fraikin, University of Liege (Faculty of Law, Tax Institute and HEC-Liege) and
UNU-MERIT/Maastricht University1
Alain Jousten, University of Liege (Faculty of Law, Tax Institute, and HEC-Liege), IZA and
NETSPAR
Mathieu Lefebvre, University of Strasbourg and BETA
12/03/2018

1. Introduction
Belgium has long been characterized by low employment and labor force participation rates of
the elderly. In the nineties, the country was known for having one of the lowest average
effective retirement ages in the European Union and – with employment of the age group 5564 falling to 22 percent. Since then, there has been a continuous increase in these numbers
reaching 25.1 percent in 2001, 31.8 percent in 2005 and 45.4 percent in 2016.
Previous studies have pointed the decisive role of public social security schemes in explaining
the retirement patterns and low labor force participation of the elderly in Belgium (see among
others Pestieau and Stijns, 1999; Dellis et al, 2004 or Jousten and Lefebvre, 2013). A common
feature of these studies has been that they relied on a cross-sectional, micro-based and supply
side approach. Relying on detailed modeling of individual retirement incentives in a given
reference period, the papers documented the presence of strong retirement incentives and their
importance in explaining observed labor supply and retirement patterns.
The cross-sectional design of the research question of these papers however limits their ability
to explain observed labor supply and retirement patterns of Figure 1. Since the start of
standardized collection of labor force data by the Labour Force Survey (LFS) in 1984, cohorts
of older women have seen a steady upward trend in their employment rates; male employment
has gone through a U-shaped pattern, with a first period of decreased employment (up to the
early 1980’s) being followed by a period of stagnation (late 1980’s to late 1990’s) before finally
1
Fraikin acknowledges financial support through a Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship from FNRS/FRESH contract.
The paper was written while Jousten was on sabbatical leave with ISM (Vilnius), whose hospitality is gratefully
acknowledged. Financial support was provided by FNRS and the University of Liège. This paper uses data from
the European Union Labour Force Survey (Eurostat, European Union) under contract 122/2015. Eurostat has no
responsibility for the results and conclusions which are the authors’ only. Comments welcome at
ajousten@uliege.be.

1

contributing to the previously mentioned significant increase in employment rates of older
cohorts since the early 2000’s.
Figure 1: Employment rate of older workers (ages 55-64)

Employment rate
50

100

Women

0

0

Employment rate
50

100

Men

1983

1990

1997
55-59

2003

2009

2015

1983

60-64

1990

1997

2003

55-59

2009

2015

60-64

Source : Eurostat Labour Force Survey (2017)

The respective importance of individual incentives and institutional changes in explaining
observed labor supply and retirement patterns over the last decades remains unclear. Expressed
differently, the decomposition into age and year effects remains an important and so far
understudied research question in the Belgian context. Jousten and Lefebvre (2016) delivered
a first step towards filling this gap in the literature. First, they provided a summary of
institutional changes over the last decades – with a focus not only on pension and early
retirement schemes, but also unemployment, disability and time credit (a part-time retirement
scheme). Second, they provided a detailed macro-analysis of observed employment and
retirement patterns, looking not only at trends in employment and labor force participation rates,
but also at the changing intensity (e.g., more part-time work) and sectoral composition (e.g., a
shift to service sectors) of employment in light of institutional changes.
This paper goes further as we systematically calculate the financial incentives to exit
employment for typical workers, by age, year and sex – integrating changes both in benefits
and the tax system. More specifically, we construct a simulation model aimed at assessing the
2

incentives to retire for different subgroups of the population and link these incentives with their
labor outcomes. The model allows us to separate age and year effects, incidentally also
permitting us to take phased reforms and grandfathering provisions into account. The model
also permits the study of an array of scenarios in terms of earnings level, earnings growth,
mortality, as well as simulation of modified system parameters.
We focus our attention on the population of wage-earners, leaving aside self-employed and civil
servants. We further focus our attention on single workers, hence staying clear of issues of joint
or spousal retirement decisions (see Jousten and Lefebvre 2017 for a study of the role of spousal
retirement incentives in the Belgian case), as well as interactions between individuals
participating in different schemes. The reasons for these restrictions are linked to the overall
complexity of social insurance and retirement programs in Belgium combined with a lack of
structured historical information on some of them. The wage earner scheme is by far the most
important scheme in terms of enrolments and scope of coverage – encompassing all private
sector workers and also contractual workers in the public sector. Furthermore, it is the scheme
with the most time-series information available on the applicable institutional setting and on
the characteristics of participants. It is also the scheme that has been most extensively studied
so far (see Jousten et al, 2012; 2016 and Jousten and Lefebvre; 2016 and 2017).2
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a description of the pathways to
retirement. After a summary of key programs and program changes over time, the section
documents the changes in observed retirement patterns in Belgium. Section 3 introduces the
retirement incentive indicator, with a focus on singles. Section 4 explores the link between
observed retirement patterns and incentives using a common standardized earnings profile
combined with standardized tax parameters across time and countries. The common earnings
profile and time-invariant tax parameters are chosen to allow for an easy international
comparison of results. Section 5 deviates from this common profile by introducing specificities
that are more relevant for understanding the Belgian case by using different and more realistic
assumptions in terms of earnings levels, career profiles and taxation. It also discusses how
benefit floors and ceilings affect incentives given these earnings histories. Section 6 concludes.

The Civil servant schemes display a large heterogeneity, with only limited historical information available both
on institutional details as well as participants. The self-employed scheme is the least well documented, as the
(substantially more limited) information on participants’ earnings histories has only recently been the subject of
centralization efforts.

2

3

2. Pathways to retirement
This section summarizes the main retirement pathways for the wage earners in Belgium and
surveys the major changes/reforms that have been implemented since the early 1980’s. There
are four main components of the wage-earner social protection scheme that are of relevance
when considering employment and retirement behavior: the Old Age Pension system (OAP),
the Unemployment Insurance system (UI), the Conventional Early Retirement system (CER)
and the Disability Insurance system (DI).3
Figure 2 presents the time line of reforms implemented in each one of these pathways since the
early 1980’s. It documents a rather sustained reform activity over the last decades.
Before proceeding, a few words of caution are in place. The figure should be seen as a stylized
view on reforms of the headline retirement and early retirement schemes, with no claim of
completeness. First, Belgium’s retirement landscape is characterized by a rather extreme degree
of institutional complexity – with some derogatory rules still in place for mine-workers, pilots,
etc. Second, the main legal and regulatory references are laid down in laws and in Royal decrees
(implementing by-laws) – the border between the two not always being clear from an economic
point of view with core policy choices relegated to Royal decrees, and implementing aspects in
laws. Third, beyond laws and bylaws, national, sectoral and company-wide collective
bargaining agreements play a core role in the implementation and the design of social protection
schemes. Collective bargaining agreements are often compulsory for companies and workers
in individual sectors (or even nationwide) and can sometimes substantially deviate from the
headline rules laid down by the laws and bylaws. In the discussion below we focus on the
headline system only, e.g. leaving aside some special early retirement conditions allowing labor
force exits at ages well below the headline exit age. Fourth, employer-trade union comanagement of the social security system, the outsourcing of some operational tasks (payment
of unemployment benefits by the trade unions, payments of sick pay and disability insurance
by health insurance funds, often having privileged links to the trade-unions, etc.) and the
increasing splitting of competencies across government levels (federal government, social
security, regional, community and local) further complicate the landscape. The below

3
Contrary to Jousten and Lefebvre (2017), we do not consider the time-credit system, as participation does not
lead to retirement at the individual level but rather a reduction of work intensity of the worker combined with some
benefit claiming – and this irrespectively of whether in aggregate the scheme leads to higher or lower employment
than in its absence. We also do not consider the separate compulsory programs for workplace accident and
professional disease insurance: though conceptually relevant, they remain quantitatively more limited in
importance.

4

discussion completely leaves aside any and all changes in program implementation and
management, be they country-wide or regional. Finally, as already indicated in the introduction,
the present paper focuses on single wage-earners. The summary of reforms thus leaves aside
any changes and reforms to the benefits of spouses and survivors, as well as those changes
affecting individual with mixed careers between different systems.

2.1.

Old-age Pension system

The Old-age pension (OAP) system is the main public social security scheme covering the
elderly. It is financed by tax-deductible employer and employee contributions but also by
transfers from the federal budget. The program runs on a pay-as-you-go basis.
The statutory eligible age (SEA) to full benefits is currently 65 and is scheduled to increase to
age 66 for pensions first payable on or after 2/1/2025 and to 67 for pensions first payable on or
after 2/1/2030. While an SEA of 65 has been applicable to men for several decades, the female
SEA has undergone substantial changes. Before 1997, the SEA for women was age 60. It was
then increased by one year steps every three years starting in 1997 and finishing in 2009 –
reaching full alignment with the male SEA in that last step.
Early retirement is possible at an early eligibility age (EEA). Since 1987, the male and female
EEA have been perfectly aligned, whereas before that date women had an EEA of 55 and men
of 60. Until 2012, the EEA for men and women was 60. As of the year 2013, the headline EEA
is on an upward path increasing by half a year every calendar year until it reaches age 63 for
pensions being first payable on or after 2/1/2018. However, the recent stepped increase in the
EEA since 2013 has been accompanied by the creation of a special EEA for individuals with
long careers, e.g. currently still allowing early claiming at 60 for careers longer than 44 years.4
Figure 3 and 4 present the evolution of the EEA and SEA in the OAP for men and women
separately.

4

See http://www.onprvp.fgov.be/FR/profes/benefits/retirement/age/Pages/default.aspx for details.

5

Figure 2: Reforms – 1980-2016

Source: ONEM-RVA, ONP-RVP, Moniteur Belge

6

Figure 3: Early and statutory retirement ages – men
70
65

Age

60
55
50
45

2012

2014

2016

2014

2016

CER

2010

2008

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

SEA OAP

2012

EEA OAP

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

40

OAU

Source: ONEM-RVA, ONP-RVP, Moniteur Belge
Figure 4: Early and statutory retirement ages - women
70
65

Age

60
55
50
45

EEA OAP

SEA OAP

CER

2010

2008

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

40

OAU

Source: ONEM-RVA, ONP-RVP, Moniteur Belge

The EEA effectively also plays the role of a full rate age (FRA), i.e. an age at which an
individual can obtain unreduced benefits by satisfying both a minimum contribution history and
the EEA. Two rules drive this equivalence between EEA and the FRA: First, the Belgian oldage pension system no longer applies actuarial adjustments in case of claiming before the SEA
(beyond the effect of the shorter working history). A pre-existing actuarial penalty mechanism
of 5 percent per year of anticipation was abolished in 1991. In 2007, a lump-sum pension bonus
was introduced per day of continued work after 62 or beyond a career of 44 years, but the
7

mechanism was again abolished in 2015.5 Second, claiming before the SEA has always been
subject to career conditions. The career condition for early claiming between the EEA and the
SEA has undergone substantial changes. Whereas in the early 1980’s, a career of 20 (10) years
was required for men and women, between 1997 and 2005 the career condition was increased
to 35 years. Since 2013, in line with the progressive increase in the EEA, career conditions for
retirement are further tightened: 38 years in 2013, 39 in 2014, 40 in 2015 and 2016, 41 in 2017
and 2018 and 42 in 2019 – with special early exit provision still applying to individuals with
longer careers. Though early claiming generally corresponds to reduced benefits, a worker with
a full career condition (see below) upon claiming is entitled to unreduced benefits.
Combining old age pension receipt with work is in principle possible under the old age pension
legislation, but generally subject to an earnings test.6 The earnings test is categorical – with
benefits completely suspended if surpassing a pre-determined level. While the structure of the
earnings test itself has not undergone major reform, it is now waived for those with careers of
minimum 45 years or having reached the SRA.
Benefits depend on career earnings histories, on the marital status and on income. Both benefits
and past earnings are indexed across time using the health index, which is essentially a sloweddown variant of the consumer price index (CPI) applicable as of 1996. Effectively, this indexing
past earnings exposes individuals to a double systematic loss: First, they are exposed to as
erosion of past earnings as the defined benefit formula is not reflecting real wage growth.
Second, inflation-protection is not fully covered both for past earnings and benefits in payment
as the health index grows less than the true cost of living summarized by the CPI.7
Full benefits nowadays require 45 years of earnings or assimilated periods for both males and
females.8 Assimilated periods correspond to periods of the life spent on replacement income
(e.g., unemployment benefits, disability benefits, career breaks) or other forms of paid or unpaid
leave. Numerous such periods fully count as years worked and at the full (last) wage in the
computation of the pension benefit. Since 2012, a more restrictive policy is applicable to some
types of absences from work: though the periods still count towards fulfilling the career

5
The bonus was flat-rate until 2013, and in 2014 it was progressive as a function of the delay in claiming (but
remained independent of the wage).
6
Under labor legislation it requires the explicit consent of the employer.
7
In addition to these systematic biases, more ad hoc elements apply. Until 2004, ad hoc adjustments were applied
to past wages to adjust them (partially) for real wage growth. In 1984, 1985 and 1987 yearly indexing was frozen
on 3 occasions for budgetary reasons – de facto lowering benefits on a lifetime basis.
8
The female full career condition was increased between 1997 and 2009 from 40 to 45 years in line with the
increase in the SEA.

8

condition, they nowadays only enter at a minimum lump-sum amount and no longer at the full
last wage.9
The pension benefit corresponds to 60 percent of average lifetime earnings over the best 45
years of career. 10 There are ceilings and floors, applicable both to pensionable earnings and
pensions. Both pensions and ceilings are indexed to consumer prices. Pension floors are further
proportionately adjusted by a ratio depending on the completeness of the career. In addition,
numerous ad hoc discretionary increases of both the ceilings for pensionable earnings and the
pension floors are applied –with the stated dual aim of (i) correcting for the lack of real wage
indexation and (ii) increasing minimum pensions at a faster pace than average pensions. 11 De
facto, the faster growth of minimum pensions progressively makes the old-age pension system
tend towards a flat-rate benefit structure.

2.2.

Unemployment Insurance

Next to the OAP scheme, the unemployment insurance (UI) system is an important pathway to
retirement. The regular UI system is available to workers of all ages under the condition of
having paid contributions during at least 12 months in employment or having been in
assimilated status (sickness, etc.) in the last 18 months. The unemployment benefits are also a
function of unemployment duration and household status. At the beginning of the
unemployment spell, the benefits represent 60 percent of the last gross wage for unemployed
with dependents, 55 percent for single unemployed and 40 percent for individuals that are
sharing their household with others (effective cohabitation). These benefits are not limited in
time with payments ending upon re-employment or reaching the SEA – in the latter case the
person is then rolled over into the OAP program. However, benefits are generally decreasing
as a function of benefit duration with exceptions prevailing for unemployed workers who are
either aged more than 55, have worked as a wage-earner for at least 25 years or can prove a
disability of more than 33 percent. There are minimum and maximum unemployment benefits
that also vary by household status and are decreasing in unemployment duration. Under the
regular system, individuals have to be available for the job market and actively look for

For details see http://www.onprvp.fgov.be/FR/profes/calculation/career/inactivity/Pages/default.aspx.
For married individuals, a higher household benefit rate of 75 percent is applicable (subject to a pension test of
the spouse), and survivor benefits also apply.
11
Certain increases in the pensionable earnings ceilings were more important than others, most notably in 1968,
1969, 1973 and 1981, when it increased by a real growth rate of 31.6%, 13.4%, 30.8% and 15.9%, respectively.
The two most important discretional increases in the pension floor occurred in 2001 and 2004, with a real growth
rate of 3.5% and 3.8%, respectively.
9

10

9

employment; the amount of benefits is decreasing according to the length in the unemployment
status.
In 1989, a seniority supplement was introduced for those aged 50 or more and who have been
employed for at least 20 years. The amount of the seniority supplement was added to the regular
unemployment benefit and depended on the household status and the age. The age condition
was increased to 55 in 2012 and the measure was finally abandoned in 2015.
A specific feature of the Belgian UI system is the status of old-age unemployed (OAU). Under
OAU rules, the unemployed is exempted from both actively looking for a job and from an
availability condition for the labor market. He or she can stay unemployed until reaching the
SEA of OAP with unreduced benefits. The OAU system was introduced in 1985 and was
initially limited to those people aged 55 and above who were unemployed for at least two years
or to those aged 50 who could prove of a permanent incapacity. In 1996 the eligibility age was
lowered to 50 for everyone by removing the permanent incapacity requirement before age 55.
In 2004, the government introduced more stringent conditions to benefit from the job search
and availability waiver. Only workers aged 58 and above or with long careers still benefit from
a full waiver. In 2012, the eligibility age for the waiver has been increased again to 60. Figures
3 and 4 show the timeline of changes in the eligibility age of men and women.
Any time spent on unemployment benefits is fully credited towards pensionable periods in the
earnings history as assimilated. Until 2012, such periods were fully credited at the last real wage
before entering unemployment. Since 2012, the wage crediting is limited to a lower flat-rate
amount for periods of unemployment going beyond two years.

2.3.

Conventional Early Retirement

Conventional early retirement (CER) is a parallel system of early retirement benefits that was
created in the early 1970’s. Benefits are composed of two elements. First, the early retiree is
entitled to benefits from the unemployment insurance that are more generous than the ones of
the simple UI system – particularly because of the absence of degressivity with respect to
benefit duration and more favorable testing on household composition. Second, these baseline
UI benefits are topped up by a complementary benefit paid by the former employer—equal to
half the difference between the last net wage and the UI benefit.
Up until 2015, CER beneficiaries were fully exempted from job search and did not have to be
available for the labor market. Since 2015, a new notion of “adapted availability” has been

10

introduced in the applicable rules, essentially making numerous early retirees subject to an
availability condition up until the SEA – though it remains less stringent than for regular UI.12
Before 2012—as for all unemployed—the time spent in the early retirement program was fully
credited at the last pre-retirement wage. Since 2012, the last-wage crediting is limited to a lower
minimum amount for individuals retiring on CER before the age of 59.
At the start of the system, the headline eligibility age was set at 60. Several collective bargaining
agreements rapidly lowered the effectively applicable eligibility ages and other eligibility
conditions. As a result, the Belgian reality in the area od CER has been characterized from the
early days by the coexistence of regimes with different career requirements, minimum ages,
etc. Though legislation in the early 1980’s tried to harmonize and put constraints, numerous
exceptions persist with respect to the general rules.
As mentioned before, we focus on the headline system as being the only economy-wide regime.
Key reform steps are described as follows/ Eligibility has gone through several changes: while
the age of 60 prevailed before 1984, it decreased to 55 in 1984 and it increased to 57 in 1986,
to 58 in 1987 and to 60 in 2008 (see figures 3 and 4). Length of career conditions were also
introduced in 1986 (see figure 2). Initially, the minimum length was set to 20 years. Over time,
it has increased and now reaches 40 years for men and 33 years for women with a further
programmed increase to 40 years for women until the year 2024.

2.4.

Disability Insurance

The Disability Insurance (DI) system is the main program targeted at people withdrawing from
the labor market for disability reasons – though it has become an increasingly relevant early
retirement route in light of ever tighter eligibility and benefit criteria for the CER and UI
systems (see Jousten et al, 2012). To be eligible for the benefit, the worker has to satisfy a series
of conditions. First, there is a condition in terms of the loss of earnings capacity in the usual
job. In order to be eligible, the worker has to suffer from a loss of earnings capacity of 66
percent over a period of at least twelve months.13 After first benefit entitlement, continued
eligibility is periodically validated using medical and administrative controls. Second, workers
also have to satisfy minimum contributory requirements to qualify for benefits. The coverage
under the system prior to the onset of the disability has to be assured for at least two quarters,
More recently in 2015, the name of the scheme has been adapted to unemployment scheme with company
supplement – mirroring this conceptual shift.
13
During these initial twelve months, workers are generally covered by sick pay from their employers and the sick
pay insurance.
12

11

combined with at least 120 days of actual or assimilated work (or 400 hours for part- time
workers) before the covered event occurs.
During the first year of disability, the benefit is equal to 60 percent of reference earnings for
everyone. It corresponds to the so-called period of incapacity. After, the benefit level is a
function of the household status of the worker and is equal to 65 percent of reference earnings
if the insured has dependents, 55 percent of reference earnings if the insured lives alone and 40
percent of reference earnings if the insured cohabits and has no dependents. Reference earnings
are based on real observed earnings in the year leading up to the onset of the insured event.
As for the UI and CER systems, DI benefits are payable up to the SEA. Contrary to other social
insurance replacement income programs, such as UI and CER, periods of benefit receipt
continue to fully count toward the build-up of pension rights at the value of the last real wage
to this date.

2.5.

Income taxes and social security contributions

In Belgium, both the earnings and the benefits are subject to income taxes and mandatory social
contributions. Mandatory social contributions are paid both by employees and employers.
Employer social contributions amount to 24.92 percent of the gross wage.14 Personal/employee
social contributions include a 13.07 percent employee contribution on wage income, a 3.5
percent contribution on DI benefits and a 6.5 percent contribution on CER and UI benefits. A
health and disability contribution of 3.5 percent on pensions becomes mandatory when the
pension is above a certain threshold. 15 While social security benefits are all capped by means
of program-specific ceilings, the same does not hold true on the contribution side where no caps
applicable.
The Belgian personal income tax (PIT) applies to wage, pension and other replacement income.
The PIT liability is calculated using a strongly progressive rate structure with marginal tax rates
from 0 to 50 percent from 2003 onwards.16 Before 2003, the tax rates were modified
substantially over the years and could go as high as 70.8 percent in 1988. Non-taxable amounts
vary according to the marital status and to the number of dependent children of the taxpayer.
An additional contribution is paid for annual vacation but it concerns only blue collar workers.
A “solidarity contribution” on OAP essentially taxing beneficiaries of higher pensions also exists. This
contribution was introduced in 1994 and has to be paid on pension income or capital. It is calculated using a
progressive rate and goes from 0 to 2 percent. It does not apply to pensions below a monthly gross amount of EUR
2311.96. Since the maximum pension for a single earner is EUR 2300, it is irrelevant for our simulation of single
wage-earners.
16
This excludes a local surtax on the PIT– ranging from 0 to 9 percent depending on the place of residence.
14
15

12

Replacement incomes (including OAP) can benefit from two types of additional tax
preferences. First, there is a set of ad hoc tax deductions for the various categories of
replacement income effectively granting these types of income a preferential treatment as
compared to wages and other types of income and effectively excluding a substantial share of
these benefits from taxation – with the most generous rules applying to DI benefits. However,
in the presence of other sources of income and depending on individual characteristics, a nonnegligible tax burden might subsist. This is where the second mechanism comes into play: a
special tax deduction reduces the taxable income and hence the tax amount to zero if a person’s
income is exclusively composed of OAP or other replacement benefits below a given threshold.
The applicable thresholds in Belgium are such that for all cases considered in sections 4 and 5,
no personal income tax is due on benefits.

2.6.

Program participation

Figures 5 to 8 present the pathways to retirement over the period 1983 to 2015. They show for
each year, and by age group, the percentage of men and women recorded as beneficiaries of
each program. On each figure, we see how the structure changed over time with the
implementation of reforms in some programs and the introduction of new programs as well.
Over the period some pathways have gained or lost importance in the distribution of exits,
reflecting the varying generosity in access conditions to and benefits. These figures document
the connected vessels aspect of the various social security schemes. For men aged 55-59 we
observe an increase in the proportion of recipients of UI and DI benefits since 2005, at a time
when CER rules have been tightened. For men aged 60-64, the proportion of pensioners has
increased since 2005. For women aged 55-59, the picture is similar to men but for older women
we observe the increase of the proportion of other pathways since the end of the nineties due to
the increase of SEA in the OAP system, hence delaying the mechanical rollover of DI, UI, OAU
and CER beneficiaries into the OAP program.

13

Figure 5: Pathways to retirement – men, age 55-59
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

OAP

DI

CER

OAU

UI

OAU

UI

Source: INAMI-RIZIV, ONEM-RVA, ONP-RVP
Figure 6: Pathways to retirement – men, age 60-64
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

OAP

DI

CER

Source: INAMI-RIZIV, ONEM-RVA, ONP-RVP

14

Figure 7: Pathways to retirement – women, age 55-59

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

OAP

DI

CER

OAU

UI

Source: INAMI-RIZIV, ONEM-RVA, ONP-RVP
Figure 8: Pathways to retirement – women, age 60-64
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

OAP

DI

CER

OAU

UI

Source: INAMI-RIZIV, ONEM-RVA, ONP-RVP

3. Measuring retirement incentives
This section describes the simulation model used to quantify the work incentives created by the
social security system. To observe the effect of changes and reforms along time, calculations
are done for the different age cohorts in each year starting in the early 1980’s.
Given the life-cycle dimension of pensions, we define a synthetic earnings history of a cohort
through time and scale it to reflect differences in socio-economic status. For each pathway and

15

case, we calculate and aggregate the benefits the representative individual is entitled to at a
given age in a given year.

3.1.

Earning histories

We consider two scenarios: a common scenario, with key assumptions based on international
data used for all countries in this volume and a Belgian scenario with assumptions based on
Belgian data. We model earnings histories for two types of individuals: single males, single
females. We distinguish stylized variants of low, medium and high earners. For each year of
observation, each of these 6 cases is associated with specific earnings level, career length and
lifetime earnings profiles. We detail the underlying calculations and assumptions below.
First, we use the median income of full-time non-manual wage-earners in 2014 as reported by
Statistics Belgium to define the median worker and attribute this wage to males aged 50 in
2014. We adjust the median wage at the anchoring age of 50 to each simulation year using a
fixed deflator, which is the average growth rate of the conventional wage of non-manual wage
earners between 1980 and 2016. We then define low earners as persons earning 50 percent of
the median and high earners as receiving 200 percent of the median earner’s income. We
assume that female median earnings are 7.6 percent below male median at age 50 for all years
of study – with 7.6 percent corresponding to the average hourly wage gap between men and
women in 2014 as reported by Statistics Belgium.
Second, we derive earnings histories for these 6 cases in the two scenarios. All earnings
histories share a common assumption of no career interruptions – with any variation in
effectively career length simply translated into different starting dates.
In the common scenario, we assume that the low earners start working at age 16, the median
earners start working at 20 and the high earners start working at 25. Once these career lengths
determined we derive lifetime earning histories for each case. The common earnings profile
uses a time-invariant common synthetic earning profile that is differentiated for men and
women and for the three income levels. The profiles are calculated with data from the US,
Germany and Italy. 17 Figure 9 presents the patterns of the earning profiles – the same for all
years concerned – each expressed as a proportion of the anchoring wage at 50.
In the Belgian scenario, we shorten the careers of men by 5 years in order to model more
incomplete (but more realistic) careers. We further consider an average gap in career length

17

See the US chapter in this volume for details.

16

between men and women of 6 years – in line with the results of a report from ONP-RVP (2005).
This assumption is plausible as compulsory schooling goes up to age 18 already for several
decades, with numerous persons studying well-beyond. Also, other forms of work interruptions
are not uncommon.18 The Belgian scenario thus assumes that male (female) low earners start
working at age 21 (27), male (female) median earners start working at age 25 (31) and male
(female) high earners start working at age 30 (36). In a second step, The Belgian specific
earnings profile is built using the average gross monthly wage by age and is time and sexspecific – but its shape does not vary by income level beyond the different starting date.19
Figure 10 presents the average of the time-specific Belgian earning profiles, again expressed as
a percentage of the wage at age 50. Unlike the common profile – that assumes an important
increase of the wage in the first years of the career, a decrease in the growth of wages until 50,
and constancy thereafter - the Belgian-specific earnings profile displays a continuous and
almost constant increase of the wage throughout the career and until age 60. Expressed
differently, while the common profile captures an internationally more usual career-wage
profile, the Belgian-specific pattern better fits the specificities of the Belgian wage-setting
system with its automatic indexing of wages to changes in the CPI and collective wage
bargaining on real wage growth across income levels.
Figure 9: Common earnings profiles

Source: Authors’ calculations

18
19

Military service obligations for men until the late 1990’s also contributed to a later start in the working lives.
Because of data limitations, the earnings profile is kept constant from 1980 to 1999 and from 2015 to 2016.

17

Figure 10: Belgian-specific earnings profiles, average across years

Source: Authors’ calculations

Each scenario is accompanied by an assumption in terms of the applicable tax system. In the
common scenario, we use the tax rules applicable in 2016 (in real terms) to all simulation years.
The motivation for this approach is to clearly distinguish the pure effects of pension policy from
those of general tax policy.20 In the Belgian scenario, we apply the tax rules as they were
applicable in all years to reflect the changes in the entire tax-benefit landscape as experienced
by real-world workers.

3.2.

Benefit stream

From these earnings profiles, we calculate, for each age-year cohort the after-tax benefit stream
from each scheme presented in section 2. For an individual i, defined according to his or her
sex and the level of career earnings, we calculate the after tax benefit 𝐵

, ,

𝑅, 𝑖 from the

program k for all ages a≥R, where R is the first year of benefit receipt. Once retired, we assume
benefits remain constant in real terms in future years.
We look at retirement ages ranging from 55 to 65 from year 1980 to 2016. Our simulation thus
takes into account any potential cohort differences and changes thereto, as well as transitory
and permanent changes over time (index t) and as a function of age (index a). The lack of
eligibility for pathway k at an age a at time t conditional on retirement at R is modeled by setting
𝐵

, ,

𝑅, 𝑖 equal to 0.

The simulation model allows for a rich set of scenarios in terms of individual characteristics.
Also, it allows for simulations of counterfactuals and system reforms. For example, the common
scenario of section 4 relies on a counterfactual assumption that only benefit rules have changed

20

The tax rates obtained using the 2016 rules are almost identical to those derived by the OECD tax model.

18

but no tax changes have occurred during the entire period of analysis. The motivation for this
deviation from the empirically observed institutional setting is to separate out strictly
retirement-related changes from broader tax policy changes affecting the wider population. The
Belgian scenario of section 5 explores the role of tax policy changes, and also provides
counterfactual analysis of benefits indexation rules and thresholds.

3.3.

Social security wealth, accrual and implicit tax

From the benefits, we calculate different indicators of social security systems’ incentives. The
key concept is the annual accrual of social security wealth (SSW). The SSW is the present
discounted value of all future benefit flows from a given social security program for a given
individual at a given age in a given year. SSW for an individual of type i starting to claim
benefits from program k at age R in time t is then given by:
𝑆𝑆𝑊
Where 𝐵

, ,

,

𝑅, 𝑖

𝐵

𝜎, 𝛽

, ,

is the after-tax benefit from pathway k at age R as calculated above. The formula

sums these benefits until the end of life T. Discounting is done allowing both for time preference
and mortality adjustments: 𝜎 , is the survival probability21 at age a for individual i and  is the
time discount rate that we assume to be equal to 3 percent real. Since we assume real constant
benefit once in the program, the amount stays the same in the forthcoming years if the person
retires on OAP. In the case of an exit through UI, CER or DI, the benefits change according to
the age since at the SEA the individual starts to receive OAP benefits instead of the other
benefits – essentially splitting the right hand-side of the formula in two separate sums before
and after the SEA.
Based on this SSW, we then compute a secondary incentive measure that represents the
variation in SSW that is obtained by retiring one year later. Postponing claiming by one year
has two effects on social security wealth. On the one hand, annual benefits 𝐵

, ,

𝑅, 𝑖 can vary

with later claiming due to additional earnings entering the benefit formula (and possible
actuarial adjustments). On the other hand, however, benefits are received one year later. The
accrual of social security wealth is then given by:
𝐴𝐶𝐶

21

,

𝑅, 𝑖

𝑆𝑆𝑊

,

𝑅

1, 𝑖

𝑆𝑆𝑊

Obtained from the average survival rates of the EU28 provided by Eurostat

19

,

𝑅, 𝑖

The accrual can thus be positive, zero, or negative. If the accrual is negative, the social security
system imposes an implicit tax on working longer. The implicit tax rate is the (negative) accrual
of social security wealth divided by the after tax earnings during the additional year of work
Yt+1,i:
𝐼𝑇𝐴𝑋

,

𝐴𝐶𝐶
𝑌

𝑅, 𝑖

𝑅, 𝑖

,
,

This last measure shows the tax on continued activity from retiring one year later. A positive
value means that there is a tax on working longer, a negative value represents a subsidy for
working longer.

4. Retirement incentives: common profile
The present section presents the analysis of the incentive measures defined in the previous
section for the 6 “common scenario” cases by sex and income level across time. To simplify
the presentation, the general discussion of incentives at the level of the individual focuses on
median earner profiles in the context of the OAP program. We only present ITAX measures for
other benefit programs as they capture the essence of the incentive landscape. The details of the
other cases can be obtained from the authors upon simple request. When discussing the impact
of these individual incentive indicators for aggregate outcomes, all incentive measures are
summed across programs and across earnings levels to one representative measure that is
confronted with observed employment rates.

4.1.

Incentives by pathway

Figures 11 to 14 present the measures for the OAP scheme for the median earners. Results are
shown for both sexes and two age groups: age 55-59 and age 60-64.
For men aged 55-59, figure 11 displays very marked changes in the SSW. The SSW of median
earners displays a generally increasing trend over the years thanks to the discretionary increases
of ceilings for pensionable earnings. Without such discretionary increases, the SSW would be
flat – reflecting the crucial role played by the floors and ceilings in the system.22 This is
particularly important in the early eighties when the ITAX is increasing rapidly. This is the
results of the combination of both upward changes of ceilings that are more important than in
other years and higher growth rate of median income. The ensuing discrete jump of the SSW
22

Implicitly, the discretionary increases – imperfectly – mimic wage-indexing of past earnings.

20

curves after 1990 can be attributed to the end of the actuarial adjustment penalty of 5 percent
for exits before the SEA. This translates in a large peak of the accrual and the corresponding
drop in the implicit tax as a result of the discrete jump in entitlements for all individuals
claiming benefits at the EEA – as is the case of individuals quitting the labor market between
ages 55 and 59.
As mentioned earlier, the EEA of both men and women gradually increased from 60 to 63
between 2013 and 2018. In our simulation, we consider that if a worker exits the labor market
through the OAP before the EEA, he receives a benefit of zero until he reaches the EEA. Since
median earners in the common scenario do not satisfy the long-career exception, they are
affected by the reform. Thus, an increase in EEA translates into a decrease of the SSW because
the worker starts receiving pension benefits one year later. Therefore, the downward trend in
SSW as of 2013 is attributable to the increase in the EEA and the associated career
requirements. Accordingly, the ITAX at age 59 increases in 2013, because there is an incentive
for the worker aged 59 to exit the labor force before the EEA rises to 61 in 2014. Given that
workers receive a benefit of zero before they reach the EEA at age 60, the ITAX is negative for
every year.
Figure 11: Incentive measures – OAP – men median earners, ages 55-59

Source: Authors’ calculations
Note: RR, SSW, ACC and ITAX correspond to the replacement rate, the social security wealth, the accrual and
the implicit tax rate respectively.

Figure 12 reports the social security incentive measures for female median earners retiring
between age 55 and 59. The results are similar to those of men except for the reform of 1987
21

that increases the EEA from 55 to 60, adding a sharp discontinuity by replacing every potential
year of benefits before 60 by zero. Moreover, as the female SEA was already set at 60 before
1997, women were not directly impacted by the end of actuarial adjustments in 1991. In
addition, other assumptions play out: as women are assumed to have the same career length as
men with and only slightly lower median earnings, their higher life expectancies and shorter
full career conditions (until 2009 only) lead them to have a significantly higher SSW. This
effect is partially cancelled out between 1997 and 2009 because of the increase in full career
conditions from 40 to 45 years. The resulting decrease in SSW during the latter period leads to
an increased incentive to leave the labor market before each increase in career condition, and
thus a positive ITAX at each step.
Figure 12: Incentive measures – OAP – women median earners, ages 55-59

Source: Authors’ calculations
Note: RR, SSW, ACC and ITAX correspond to the replacement rate, the social security wealth, the accrual and
the implicit tax rate respectively.

Figure 13 reports the social security incentive measures for men who retire between the ages of
60 and 64. The end of the actuarial adjustment in 1991 is still visible but the older the person is
when he retires, the less important is the jump of SSW because his pension benefits was less
impacted by the actuarial adjustment. In 2007, the flat-rate pension bonus was created for
continued work after age 62 (or after 44 years of career). The program was discontinued in
2015, which translates into a fall in the accruals and an increase in the ITAX at ages 63 to 65
in 2014. In this simulation, the receipt of a pension bonus increases the pension to a level higher
22

than the health and disability insurance contribution threshold for retirement ages of 65 in 2008
and of 64 and 65 starting from 2009 onwards. This additional health and disability contribution
limits the increase in pension benefits, and thus the increase in SSW, due to the pension bonus
at age 64 and 65. Since we assume that the median earner starts working at age 20 and works
without career interruption, he is eligible for the long-career exception of the OAP scheme that
allows for retirement at age 60 in 2013 and 2014, instead of 60.5 and 61, respectively. Thus in
practice workers would only be affected by the reform if their career were insufficiently long –
which is not the case for the common profile. At age 60, the SSW only starts decreasing in 2015
because in 2013 and 2014, median workers still had access to an EEA of 60. In 2015, they fall
out of these conditions that require 41 years of career to access OAP benefits at age 60 and now
have an EEA of 61.5.
Figure 13: Incentive measures – OAP – men median earners, ages 60-64

Source: Authors’ calculations
Note: RR, SSW, ACC and ITAX correspond to the replacement rate, the social security wealth, the accrual and
the implicit tax rate respectively.

Finally, figure 14 depicts the social security incentive measures for women who are median
earners and retire between the ages of 60 and 64. Logically, the 1987 reform that increased the
EEA of women to 60 has no impact on women who retire after 60. The effect of the increase in
full career from 1997 to 2009 and the pension bonus from 2007 to 2015 for retirement ages
between 63 and 64 are also visible. Moreover, the receipt of the pension bonus at age 65 also

23

increases the pension to a level higher than the health and disability insurance contribution
threshold, which limits the increase in pension benefits due to the pension bonus at age 65.
Figure 14: Incentive measures – OAP – women median earners, ages 60-64

Source: Authors’ calculations.
Note: RR, SSW, ACC and ITAX correspond to the replacement rate, the social security wealth, the accrual and
the implicit tax rate respectively.

For the other three pathways, we only present the implicit tax for each sex for reasons of brevity.
Similarly, we focus on the age group 55-59 since it is the age-window where most changes in
program parameters and employment have happened. Figure 15 and Figure 16 show the
evolution of the ITAX in the CER scheme for each age. Contrary to our assumption on the
OAP, we consider that individuals who lose benefits in the CER program would still meet the
basic conditions to UI benefits – a plausible assumption in the Belgian context. Hence benefits
are not reduced to zero in case of loss of eligibility, but rather replaced by the lower UI benefits.
The implicit tax for most ages is on average largely positive; meaning that there is strong
incentive to exit the labor market through the CER. The peak at age 55 in 1986 for both men
and women corresponds to the increase of the eligibility age from 55 to 57. There is an incentive
to quit the labor market before the reform takes place in order to be able to access the CER
pathway at age 55 instead of 57. The same effect is observed at age 58 in 2008 when the
eligibility age increased to 60. The ITAX at age 56 in 1986 is not impacted by the reform, the
worker does not lose access to the CER exit pathway if working for one more year. In 1987,
24

the increase in the eligibility to 58 creates a negative ITAX at 57 because the worker now has
an incentive to stay on the labor market for one more year to have access to the CER program
rather than exiting at 57 and remaining on lower UI benefits until the SEA. Thus, from 1987
onwards, the ITAX at 55 and 56 is lower than at other ages because if workers exit before 58
they receive UI benefits until the SEA. The UI benefits are less generous than the CER benefits,
thus creating a smaller incentive to leave the labor force. The small drop in 2001 for every age
is related to an increase of the median wage that is more important than in previous years and
is thus not explained by any changing rules of the system. These changes in the growth of the
median wage also explain the small variations we observe between 1987 and 2006 and
especially the raid increase in 2009. The same will apply for the results presented below for UI
and DI. In 2008, the increase of the headline entitlement age for CER to 60 translates into an
double effect: an increase in the ITAX at 57 resulting in an incentive to leave the labor force
before the reform; and a decrease in the ITAX at 59 resulting in an incentive to stay on the labor
market for one more year to receive CER rather than UI benefits until the SEA.23 In 2015, the
headline eligibility age increases to 62 and the ITAX at age 59 again increases.
Figure 15: Implicit tax CER - men median earners, ages 55-59

Source: Authors’ calculations

From 2012 onwards, and for exits before age 59, longer periods on CER are no longer fully
credited at the last real wage before entering the CER but rather at the guaranteed minimum
wage. Though the eligibility age for CER is higher than 59 in the headline regime that is

Notice that the impact of the 2008 reform on the ITAX at 59 is less pronounced than the impact of the 1987
reform on the ITAX at 57 simply because the period during which CER benefits are replaced by UI benefits is
longer.

23

25

discussed in this paper – the CER pathway still is affected. The reason is that exits through UI
as a fallback option remain possible, with UI crediting in the earnings history effectively facing
the same limitations as CER after the first year of unemployment. Therefore, workers in the
headline regime are affected by the reform through the indirect channel of a decrease in the
value of the UI periods in their earnings history whereas those in special CER are directly
affected – ultimately to the same effect. As a result, the reform of credited earnings in 2012 for
long periods of inactivity has led to a decrease of the ITAX at every age from 2012 onwards.
Figure 16 illustrates the evolution of the CER ITAX for women. The impact of the gradual
increase of the SEA in OAP from 1997 to 2009 is particularly visible. Each stepwise increase
in SEA translates into an immediate decrease in the ITAX because they receive one more year
of CER benefits before they are transferred into the OAP system. Therefore, an incentive to
stay at work for one more year appears at each step.
Figure 16: Implicit tax CER - women median earners, ages 55-59

Source: Authors’ calculations

The implicit tax for UI also displays some changes, as illustrated in figures 17 and 18. In 1985,
the ITAX decreases sharply in a one-off fashion because of the introduction of the seniority
supplement: there is an incentive to wait one more year in order to be eligible for the supplement
rather than merely regular UI benefits. This effect no longer plays out with the same acuity in
the following years, where only the increased generosity of the system leaves its mark through
a higher implicit tax rate. In 2015, the increase in ITAX at each age is the mirror image of the
one in 1985: namely the end of the supplement for seniority. For women, the increase of the
OAP SEA also translates into a markedly different incentive pattern at the CER level.

26

Figure 17: Implicit tax UI - men median earners, ages 55-59

Source: Authors’ calculations

Figure 18: Implicit tax UI - women median earners, ages 55-59

Source: Authors’ calculations

Interestingly, as we already noted in section 2, there has been little to no change in the DI
program and the statutory incentives to retire have not been impacted beyond the obvious effect
of the increase in the SEA for women and the discretionary increases in ceilings for pensionable
earnings24 (figures 19 and 20). As mentioned before, and short of information of
implementation rules at the level of the institutions managing the DI system, these incentive

24

The most notable effect is the important discretionary increase in the ceiling of pensionable earnings in 1981.

27

measures only capture changes in the laws and leave aside changes that could have arisen
because of modified implementation over time.
Figure 19: Implicit tax DI - men median earners, ages 55-59

Source: Authors’ calculations
Figure 20: Implicit tax DI - women median earners, age 55-59

Source: Authors’ calculations

4.2. Aggregate incentives and employment
To confront the stylized individual incentives with aggregate employment rates, a summary
incentive indicator is derived. We rely on the administrative data of figures 5 to 8 to calculate
path-specific weights corresponding to the share of the population that is either on UI, CER or
DI. The OAP takes the residual weight such that the sum of the weights is equal to one. These

28

weights are obtained by year, age group (55-59 and 60-64), and gender. Finally, incentives are
aggregated across income levels.
Figures 21 to 24 present the results of these aggregate incentive measures for median earners
by age, year and sex and include the major reforms that have influenced them since the eighties.
Aggregate retirement incentives are heavily influenced by the default option, namely the OAP
scheme. This is unsurprising as this scheme represents the largest weight (see figures 5-8) and
also affects the benefit that is payable for the longest period of time (from EEA or SEA until
death). Because of the high participation rate of men in the CER program, it also has a nonnegligible influence on the aggregated ITAX of men for both age groups.

Figure 21: Implicit tax for male median earners by age (55-59)

Source: Authors’ calculations

29

Figure 22: Implicit tax for female median earners by age (55-59)

Source: Authors’ calculations
Figure 23: Implicit tax for male median earners by age (60-64)

Source: Authors’ calculations

30

Figure 24: Implicit tax for female median earners by age (60-64)

Source: Authors’ calculations

When aggregating across income levels and focusing on changes in retirement incentives over
time, very distinct patterns can be observed. Figure 25 and 26 present the implicit tax for 4
reference years, separated by 10-year intervals each. While reforms during the first few decades
have mostly focused on ages 55-59, there is more recently a clear shift towards the age group
60-64. Results are however somewhat surprising: contrary to a general perception of an overall
greater reward of longer working lives in the recent years, our results show that incentives are
actually leaning heavily against longer working lives. Clearly, these results have to be read and
interpreted with some caution: for example, the numerous special early retirement regimes that
existed in addition to the headline CER setup clearly affected the real-world incentives faced
by individuals in ways that were sometimes quite different from the headline regime. Also, the
weighting of the pathways remains somewhat contentious – with the residual weight on the
OAP path likely overemphasizing its relevance.25

25

E.g., Jousten and Lefebvre (2013) propose an alternative approach to determining the weights of the pathways.

31

Figure 25: Implicit tax for male median earners by year

Source: Authors’ calculations
Figure 26: Implicit tax for female median earners by year

Source: Authors’ calculations

Similar caution should be applied when interpreting figures 27 to 30. In these, we relate the
average ITAX indicator by age groups of 55-59 and 60-64 in a given year to the employment
rate of the same age groups in that year. Overall a negative relationship appears between the
employment rate and the ITAX but not in a very strong manner. Clearly, the averaging across
ages and the chosen weighting are likely disputable. However, we believe that even when
correcting for some of these concerns (for example using a different weighting of exit routes
that does not put the default weight on the OAP system) no stronger relation will emerge. This
is likely due to the fact that individual incentives faced by real world Belgian workers are quite
32

substantially different from those of the typical workers we have chosen. The real world is
obviously less single, less complete career, with less stable earnings than our assumptions
imply. On the other hand, it is also more diverse as employment as defined by the labor force
survey also includes civil servants and self-employed.

.7

Figure 27: Employment rate and ITAX – men, ages 55-59

.65

2015

ER
.6

2010

1984

.55

2005

2000

.5

1995
1990

-.06

-.04

-.02
Itax

0

.02

Source: Authors’ calculations and Labour Force Survey

.6

Figure 28: Employment rate and ITAX – women, ages 55-59

.5

2015

ER

.4

2010

.3

2005
2000

.2

1995
1984

.1

1990

-.04

-.02

0
Itax

.02

Source: Authors’ calculations and Labour Force Survey

33

.04

.28

Figure 29: Employment rate and ITAX – men, ages 60-64

.26

2015

2010

ER

.24

1984

.2

.22

2005

.18

1990
1995

2000

-.05

0

.05

Itax

.1

Source: Authors’ calculations and Labour Force Survey

Figure 30: Employment rate and ITAX – women, ages 60-64

.15

.2

2015

.1

ER

2010

2005

.05

2000

1984

1995

1990

0

.01

.02

Itax

.03

.04

Source: Authors’ calculations and Labour Force Survey

34

.05

5. Retirement incentive: Belgian-specific profile
In this section we present the incentive measures for the OAP for both sexes using the Belgianspecific scenario of earnings as described in Section 3. In addition to the median earner case,
we also report the results of low and high earners since our assumptions on career length and
earnings profiles may have important effects. For example, low income earners often qualify
for the receipt of the guaranteed minimum pension and many pensionable earnings of the
median and high earners are replaced with the ceilings for pensionable income.
Figure 31 presents the SSW for the OAP scheme by sex for the age group 60-64 for the three
selected earnings profiles. The results are somewhat different from what we obtained with the
common profile. We will emphasize on three main points that explain the differences with realworld relevance in the country.
First the Belgian-specific lifetime earnings profile assumes a continuous and almost constant
increase of the wage throughout the career while the common profile assumes an important
increase of the wage in the first years of career. Since OAP benefit are calculated on the average
wage over the entire career, in the Belgian-specific scenario many more years with lower wages
are included. In figure 31, this translates into lower SSW for all typical workers as compared
to the results of the previous section. On the other hand, the use of the differently shaped Belgian
earnings profile does not impact the build-up of SSW for low earners as they are systematically
benefiting from the guaranteed minimum pension under both scenarios.
Second the Belgium-specific profile assumes shorter careers. In this scenario, each category of
worker start working at a different age: low earners men at age 21, low earners women at age
27, median earners men at age 25, median earners women at age 31, high earners men at age
30 and high earners women at age 36. Shorter careers are translated into lower lifetime SSW
for every type of worker. This is also true for the low earners for whom the guaranteed minimum
pension is adjusted for the length of career.

35

Figure 31: SSW– OAP – age 60-64

Source: Authors’ calculations

Also, because we have assumed shorter careers in the Belgian-specific scenario, workers less
often fulfill the career requirements for early retirement even if they reach the EEA. Most
notably, the reform that increased the career conditions for early OAP claiming from 20 years
in 1997 to 35 in 2005 now directly affects the SSW of low and median-earning women as well
as high earners of both sexes. This reform translates into a decrease in SSW for those who do
not reach the career requirements for early retirement because each year of potential benefits

36

before the SEA is replaced by a zero.26 Low and median earners men are not directly impacted
by this reform as they have sufficiently long careers to retire early. However, as a result of the
general increase of the EEA, and the increase in stringency of the long-career exception, low
and median-earner men also lose access to OAP benefits at age 60 as of the year 2013. Hence,
their SSW at age 60 starts decreasing as of 2013 as a result of the increase in EEA to age 60.5.
Similarly, their SSW at age 61 starts decreasing in 2015 when the EEA increases to age 61.5.
Third, the impact of the 2007 reform (i.e., pension bonus) on individuals at different earnings
levels can easily be identified on these graphs. The effect is comparable in absolute terms across
income levels whatever the earnings level as the pension bonus is a constant amount given for
any additional days worked above age 62 or after more than 44 years of career, independently
of earnings levels and unaffected by pension ceilings.
Finally, the Belgian-specific scenario also allows for the taxation rules to vary over the years
instead of keeping them constant using 2016 tax laws as in the common scenario. The specific
impact of taxes in explaining differences in SSW between the common and the Belgian-specific
scenarios is only visible for high earners above the age of 60: given the relative brevity of
assumed careers, no OAP pensioner actually has to pay the disability or the solidarity
contributions on pensions; High-earner OAP pensioners merely start paying a small amount of
taxes at older ages from the early 1990’s onwards; Male median-earner OAP pensioners start
paying a small amount of taxes as of age 65 starting in 1996; Changes in the tax deduction for
replacement income are also mostly visible for high earners only, such as the 1998 decrease of
the tax deduction for CER but remain trivial compared to the impact of eligibility reforms.
The most important change in taxation happened for taxes on personal income, which has
become less progressive over the years. Smaller taxes for high earners have increased their
wage, which is translated into decreasing ITAX over the years. Once again the impact of such
reform is fairly limited and mostly indistinguishable next to the eligibility reforms – hence
confirming the general validity of results from the common scenario analysis.

More specifically: at age 60, low-earner women have 33 years of career and cannot access early retirement at
age 60 from 2004 onwards: eligibility is age 61 in 2004, and 62 from 2005 onwards. Similarly, median-earner
women have a career of 29 years when they reach the age of 60 and do not meet the career requirements for
early retirement from 2002 onwards. High-earner men have a career of 30 years once they reach the age of 60
and hence do not meet the career requirement for early retirement from 2003 onwards. Finally, high earners
women count 24 years of career at age 60 do not meet the career requirement for early retirement from 2000
onwards. From 2004 onwards, male high-earners have to wait until age 63 to retire and women high earners do
not have any access to early retirement from 2005 onwards.

26

37

6. Conclusion
The Belgian labor market has undergone major changes over the last decades. While the country
was long characterized by low employment and labor force participation rates of the elderly
male population, there was a reversal of this trend as the country witnessed a continuous
increase in employment rates of older men from the early 2000’s onwards. In this chapter, we
explore the main institutional changes that have affected the retirement pathways of older
workers from the 1980’s until today. We simulate the retirement incentives faced by several
typical workers, differentiated by age, sex and level of earnings, for each retirement year
between 1980 and 2016, retirement ages ranging from 55 to 65 and for the four traditional labor
force exit pathways. To do so, we use the concept of social security wealth and implicit tax on
continued activity and we rely on two specific scenarios: a common one that is comparable
among countries in this volume and a Belgium-specific one.
The results show that the various reforms have affected the incentive to retire through one or
another pathway at the micro-level. We find that the tightening of eligibility conditions and the
greater variation in the generosity of some benefits translate into important changes of our
incentive measures to retire. These in turns appear to be correlated, although marginally, with
variations in the employment rates at the macro-level.
However, these results are far from being clear-cut and the Belgian institutional landscape is
likely to be more complex than the stylized view of the headline retirement and early retirement
schemes we analyze in this chapter. These first results open avenues for further research better
taking into account individual heterogeneity and the related social security generosity at the
individual-level. This would however require better information on eligibility of special or
derogatory schemes – a nontrivial task. The results also show that there is room for microeconometric analysis exploring the large individual variation in earnings histories and
incentives.

38

References
Dellis, A., R. Desmet, A. Jousten, and S. Perelman (2004). Micro‐ Modeling of Retirement in
Belgium. In Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Micro‐ Estimation,
edited by J. Gruber and D. Wise, 41–98. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Eurostat, (2017). European Labour Force Survey, European Union, Luxembourg.
Human Mortality Database (2017). University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max
Planck Institute for Demographic Research (Germany). www.humanmortality.de.
INAMI-RIZIV (various years). Statistiques des indemnités, INAMI-RIZIV: Brussels.
Jousten A., M. Lefebvre and S. Perelman (2012). Disability in Belgium. There is More than
Meets the Eye, in D. Wise, Social Security and Retirement around the World : Historical
Trends in Mortality and Health, Employment, and Disability Insurance Participation ,
University of Chicago Press and NBER.
Jousten, A., Lefebvre, M. and S. Perelman (2016). Health status, disability and retirement
incentives in Belgium, in D. Wise, Social Security and Retirement around the World:
Disability Insurance Programs and Retirement, 179-209. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press and NBER.
Jousten A. and M. Lefebvre (2013). Retirement Incentives in Belgium: Estimations and
Simulations Using SHARE Data, De Economist, vol. 161(3), pages 253‐276
Jousten, A. and M. Lefebvre (2016). Older men's labor force participation in Belgium, eWorking Paper University of Liège, forthcoming in D. Wise, Social Security and Retirement
around the World: men's labor force participation, University of Chicago Press and NBER.
Jousten A. and M. Lefebvre (2017). Spousal and survivor benefits in option value model of
retirement: an application to Belgium. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance
ONEM-RVA (various years). Bénéficiaires de l’ONEM. ONEM-RVA : Brussels.
ONP-RVP (2005). Etudes Statistiques. ONP-RVP : Brussels.
ONP-RVP (various years). Statistiques annuelles des bénéficiaires de prestations. ONP-RVP:
Brussels.
Pestieau P. and J.P Stijns (1999).Social Security and Retirement in Belgium, in Social Security
and Retirement around the World, edited by J. Gruber and D. Wise, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
39

