                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF REVOKING NAFTA

                                       Raphael Auer
                                    Barthélémy Bonadio
                                    Andrei A. Levchenko

                                     Working Paper 25379
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25379


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2018




Preliminary version of a paper prepared for the 2018 IMF Jacques Polak Annual Research
Conference and the IMF Economic Review. We are grateful to our discussant Kei-Mu Yi, Stijn
Claessens and workshop participants at the BIS and the IMF ARC for helpful comments, and to
Julieta Contreras for excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this study do not
necessarily reflect those of the Bank for International Settlements. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Raphael Auer, Barthélémy Bonadio, and Andrei A. Levchenko. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economics and Politics of Revoking NAFTA
Raphael Auer, Barthélémy Bonadio, and Andrei A. Levchenko
NBER Working Paper No. 25379
December 2018
JEL No. F11,F13,F16,F62,R13

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide a quantitative assessment of both the aggregate and the distributional effects of
revoking NAFTA using a multi-country, multi-sector, multi-factor model of world production
and trade with global input-output linkages. Revoking NAFTA would reduce US welfare by
about 0.2%, and Canadian and Mexican welfare by about 2%. The distributional impacts of
revoking NAFTA across workers in different sectors are an order of magnitude larger in all three
countries, ranging from -2.7 to 2.26%in the United States. We combine the quantitative results
with information on the geographic distribution of sectoral employment, and compute average
real wage changes in each US congressional district, Mexican state, and Canadian province. We
then examine the political correlates of the economic effects. Congressional district-level real
wage changes are negatively correlated with the Trump vote share in 2016: districts that voted
more for Trump would on average experience greater real wage reductions if NAFTA is revoked.


Raphael Auer                                   Andrei A. Levchenko
Bank for International Settlements             Department of Economics
Postfach CH-4002                               University of Michigan
Basel                                          611 Tappan Street
Switzerland                                    Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and CEPR                                       and CEPR
raphael.auer@bis.org                           and also NBER
                                               alev@umich.edu
Barthélémy Bonadio
University of Michigan
bbonadio@umich.edu
1    Introduction
With the onset of the global financial crisis, the longstanding downward trend in tariffs
and other barriers to trade has come to a halt. Recent political events such as the election
of the Trump administration in the US and the British vote to leave the European Union
indicate an acute danger of rising protectionism and renationalisation of production and
consumption. International trade has become salient in voters’ minds and some parties
and politicians profess strong views on the benefits and costs of particular trade poli-
cies. However, in a highly interconnected world economy with supply chains that cross
country borders, who gains and who loses from trade policies is far from transparent.
     Against this backdrop, this paper studies the distributional impacts of one promi-
nent proposed protectionist measure – revoking NAFTA – in the global network of input-
output trade. To examine the general equilibrium effects of this policy, we combine the
multi-sector, multi-country, multi-factor general equilibrium Ricardian trade model (e.g.
Eaton and Kortum, 2002; Caliendo and Parro, 2015; Levchenko and Zhang, 2016) with a
specific-factors model that generates distributional effects of trade across sectors (Jones,
1971; Mussa, 1974; Levchenko and Zhang, 2013; Galle et al., 2017). We calibrate the model
to the global matrix of intermediate and final goods trade from the 2016 edition of the
World Input-Output Database (WIOD) and WIOD’s Socioeconomic Accounts (Timmer
et al., 2015). We then simulate a scenario in which NAFTA is dismantled. In particular,
this counterfactual entails a rise in tariffs from the current NAFTA-negotiated ones to the
Most-Favored Nation (MFN) level, as well as an increase in non-tariff barriers in both
goods and service sectors estimated by Felbermayr et al. (2017).
     We first assess the economic impact of this policy at the level of US congressional
districts, Canadian provinces, and Mexican states. To do so, we combine the sector-
country-specific real wage changes resulting from our general equilibrium model with
information on employment shares in those geographical units. We then analyze the po-
litical dimension of this policy by correlating the economic outcomes with recent voting
patterns. Since the threat to revoke NAFTA comes from the United States, we focus on
this country and examine in particular the Trump vote shares in the 2016 election. This
exercise sheds light on whether districts that voted for the arguably most protectionist
candidate stand to benefit or lose disproportionately from this particular potential trade
policy.
     Our results can be summarized as follows. The total welfare change from revok-
ing NAFTA would be −0.22% for the United States, −1.8% for Mexico, and −2.2% for
Canada. These aggregate numbers are an order of magnitude smaller than the distri-


                                             1
butional effects across sectors. Sectoral real wage changes range from −2.70% to 2.26%
for the US, from −16.76% to 9.46% for Mexico, and from −13.90% to 1.74% for Canada.
Because sectoral employment is unevenly distributed across geographic locations, there
are considerable distributional consequences across space as well. In the United States,
average wage changes range from −0.41% in Ohio’s 4th district to 0.08% in Texas’ 11th
district, with a cross-district standard deviation of 0.04%. Average wages changes range
from −3.34% to −1.34% across Canadian provinces and from −4.08% to −0.85% across
Mexican states. Thus, both the aggregate welfare changes, and the extent of distributional
impacts are significantly greater in Canada and Mexico in percentage terms.
    Turning to the relationship with political outcomes, we find that if anything there is
a negative correlation between the real wage change in a congressional district and the
Trump vote share. Though dismantling or renegotiating NAFTA was a prominent pillar
of the Trump presidential campaign, Trump-voting districts would experience system-
atically greater wage decreases if NAFTA disappeared. The exception to this empirical
regularity are congressional districts with a large share of Mining and quarrying in em-
ployment, such as the Texas 11th congressional district, or the state of Wyoming.
    To better understand this somewhat surprising pattern, we construct three simple,
heuristic measures of trade exposure to NAFTA at the US congressional district level.
The first is a measure of import exposure to the NAFTA partner countries, defined as the
employment share-weighted average of sectoral imports from NAFTA partners in total
US absorption. Intuitively, import exposure to NAFTA partners is high in a congressional
district if it has high employment shares in sectors with greater import competition from
those countries. All else equal, we should expect wages to rise the most in locations that
in the current regime compete most closely with Canada and Mexico. The second is an
export orientation measure, which is the employment share-weighted average of sectoral
exports to NAFTA partners in total US output. Intuitively, we should expect locations
with higher employment shares in NAFTA-export-oriented industries to lose dispropor-
tionately from NAFTA revocation. Finally, the third measure is NAFTA imported input
intensity, defined as the employment-weighted share of spending on NAFTA inputs in
total input spending. We should expect congressional districts that rely on NAFTA in-
puts to experience relatively larger wage decreases when NAFTA is revoked, although
this prediction is contingent on the relevant substitution elasticities.
    Taken individually, the bilateral relationships between all three heuristics and model-
implied wage changes are negative and statistically significant. This is intuitive for two
measures – export orientation and imported input intensity – but counterintuitive for
import exposure, as it implies that congressional districts suffering the most from direct


                                            2
import competition actually see larger real wage reductions when protection increases
following a dismantling of NAFTA.
    At the same time, the statistical association between all three of these heuristics and
the Trump vote share is positive and significant. This is intuitive for the import exposure
measure – locations suffering the most from import competition voted more for Trump
– but less so for the other two measures, as locations exporting to NAFTA or sourcing
inputs from NAFTA should foresee wage decreases if NAFTA is done away with.
    The apparent mystery is resolved by the fact that the correlation between the three
heuristics is extremely high: the export orientation has a 0.92 correlation with import ex-
posure, and a 0.86 correlation with imported input intensity. Less surprisingly, imported
input intensity has a 0.95 correlation with import exposure. Thus, the picture that emerges
from this exercise is first and foremost one of differences across locations in the overall
level of integration with NAFTA countries. Places that suffer the most from NAFTA im-
port competition are also overwhelmingly those that export to NAFTA and use NAFTA
intermediates.
    It is thus not surprising that the locations overall more open to NAFTA trade experi-
ence larger net welfare losses: effectively, a revocation of NAFTA represents a relatively
greater reduction in trade openness for those locations. We do show, however, that these
locations are also the ones that voted systematically more for Trump. This exercise under-
scores the need for a model-based quantitative assessment that takes into account multi-
ple import and export linkages and general equilibrium adjustments. Heuristic measures
of import competition that have been used in other contexts (e.g. Autor et al., 2013, and
the large literature that followed) would be misleading as to which locations would stand
to lose the most from NAFTA revocation, and how the distributional effects of NAFTA
correlate with Trump vote. Indeed, while the bivariate relationships between all three of
the heuristic measures and real wage changes or Trump vote all have the same sign, the
conditional relationships all have the expected signs: when controlling for export orien-
tation and imported input intensity, the locations with greater NAFTA import exposure
experience relative wage gains from NAFTA rollback. Similarly, controlling for import
exposure, districts with greater export orientation actually tended to vote less for Trump.
    Our work follows the tradition of quantitative assessments of trade policy, going back
to the first-generation CGE literature (see, among many others, Deardorff and Stern, 1990;
Harrison et al., 1997; Hertel, ed, 1997). More recent contributions extend the Eaton and
Kortum (2002) framework to study the welfare effects of NAFTA (e.g. Caliendo and Parro,
2015), the effect of the UK leaving the European Union (Dhingra et al., 2017), or greater
potential US protectionism (Felbermayr et al., 2017). Our two main contributions are (i) to


                                            3
bring to the fore the distributional aspects of trade policy, and (ii) to systematically relate
those distributional aspects to the variation in political support for the most protectionist
US chief executive in decades.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the quantitative frame-
work used in the analysis, and Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents the real
wage and income changes following the revocation of NAFTA, and Section 5 relates those
to voting patterns in the US. Section 6 presents some extensions and robustness checks,
and Section 7 concludes. Details of data, calibration, and model solution are collected in
the Appendix.


2      Quantitative framework
The world is composed of N countries denoted by m, n, and k, and J sectors denoted
by i and j. Each sector produces a continuum of goods. There are two types factors of
production: labor and capital (K). Labor is further decomposed into high- (L H ), medium-
(L M ), and low-skill (L L ) labor. Capital and labor are perfectly mobile across goods within
a sector, but immobile across sectors (Jones, 1971; Mussa, 1974). This assumption means
that the results should be interpreted as the short-run effects of the policy experiments
we simulate.1 Micro evidence shows that following trade shocks, worker mobility across
sectors is quite limited (Artuç et al., 2010; Dix-Carneiro, 2014), and thus our model pro-
vides a good approximation to the factor adjustment in the short run. Country n, sector
j are endowed with L H,jn units of high-skilled labor, L M,jn units of medium-skilled labor,
L L,jn units of low-skilled labor, and K jn units of capital.


Preferences and final demand. Utility is identical and homothetic across agents in the
economy. Individual ι maximizes utility

                                                     J
                                         Un (ι) =   ∏ Yjn (ι)ξ jn ,
                                                    j =1

where the Yjn (ι) is ι’s consumption of the composite good in sector j, subject to the budget
constraint:

                                           J
                                          ∑ p jn Yjn (ι) = I (ι),
                                          j =1

    1 Section
            6.1 presents the results when factors are mobile across sectors, a scenario intended to capture
the long-run outcomes.


                                                     4
where p jn is the price of sector j composite good, and I (ι) is ι’s income. Income in this
economy comes from labor and capital earnings, tariff revenue, and a trade deficit in the
form of a transfer to n from the rest of the world (which will be negative in countries with
a trade surplus):

                       J                 J                                      J                   J
  In ≡   ∑ In (ι) =   ∑ w H,jn L H,jn + ∑ w M,jn L M,jn + ∑ wL,jn L L,jn + ∑ r jn K jn + Tn + Dn ,
          ι           j =1             j =1                                 j =1                   j =1


where ws,jn and r jn are the wage rate for s-skilled labor and the return to capital in sector
j in country n, Tn total tariff revenue in country n, and Dn is the trade deficit. Since utility
is Cobb-Douglas, this demand system admits a representative consumer, and thus final
consumption spending in each sector is a constant fraction of aggregate income. Denote
the economywide final consumption on sector j goods in country n by Yjn . Then:

                                              p jn Yjn = ξ jn In .

The corresponding consumption price index in country n is:

                                                                         !ξ jn
                                                          J       p jn
                                        Pn =      ∏               ξ jn
                                                                                    .                     (1)
                                                      j =1

In the quantitative implementation below, agents ι will be differentiated by which sec-
toral factor endowments they own, and thus we will be computing income changes for
medium-skilled workers in the apparel sector, for example.


Technology and market structure. Output in each sector j is produced competitively
using a CES production function that aggregates a continuum of varieties q ∈ [0, 1] unique
to each sector:
                                             Z       1
                                                                                      e−e 1
                                                                         e −1
                                   Q jn =                 Q jn (q)         e    dq             ,
                                                  0

where e denotes the elasticity of substitution across varieties q, Q jn is the total output of
sector j in country n, and Q jn (q) is the amount of variety q that is used in production in
sector j and country n. The price of sector j’s output is given by:

                                             Z       1
                                                                                     1−1 e
                                                                     1− e
                                    p jn =                p jn (q)          dq                .
                                                  0




                                                              5
The production function of a particular sectoral variety q is:


                                                                                                                                           J                         1− β jn
                                                                                                    1−α H,jn −α M,jn −α L,jn β jn
                                                                                                                                         ∏ mijn (q)
                                   α H,jn                α M,jn                 α L,jn
                                                                                                                                                              γijn
y jn (q) = z jn (q) l H,jn (q)              l M,jn (q)            l L,jn (q)             k jn (q)                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                         i =1

where z jn (q) denotes variety-specific productivity, k jn (q) and ls,jn (q) denote inputs of cap-
ital and s-skilled labor, and mijn denotes the intermediate input from sector i used in pro-
duction sector-j goods in country n. The value-added-based labor intensity is given by
αs,jn for skill type s, while the share of value added in total output is given by β jn . Both of
these vary by sector and country. The weights on inputs from other sectors, γijn , vary by
output industry j as well as input industry i and by country n.
    Productivity z jn (q) for each q ∈ [0, 1] in each sector j is equally available to all agents
in country n, and product and factor markets are perfectly competitive. Following Eaton
and Kortum (2002, henceforth EK), the productivity draw z jn (q) is random and comes
from the Fréchet distribution with the cumulative distribution function

                                                                                           −θ
                                                          Fjn (z) = e− A jn z .

    Define the cost of an “input bundle” faced by sector j producers in country n:

                                                                                                                 β jn "                        #1− β jn
           
                        α H,jn             α M,jn               α L,jn          1−α H,jn −α M,jn −α L,jn                J
  b jn =       w H,jn             w M,jn              w L,jn                r jn                                           ∏ ( pin )     γijn
                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                           i =1
                                                                                            (2)
The production of a unit of good q in sector j in country n requires               input bun-                                   z− 1
                                                                                                                                 jn ( q )
dles, and thus the cost of producing one unit of good q is b jn /z jn (q). International trade
is subject to iceberg costs: in order for one unit of good q produced in sector j to arrive
at country n from country m, d j,mn > 1 units of the good must be shipped (in describ-
ing bilateral flows, we follow the convention that the first subscript denotes source, the
second destination). We normalize d j,nn = 1 for each country n in each sector j. Note
that the trade costs will vary by destination pair and by sector, and in general will not be
symmetric: d j,nm need not equal d j,mn .
     In addition to non-policy trade frictions d j,mn , there are two policy barriers to trade:
an ad valorem tariff τj,mn that is paid at the border, and an ad valorem non-tariff barrier
η j,mn > 1, that distorts trade but does not result in any government revenue. The total
trade cost is thus given by κ j,mn = d j,mn η j,mn (1 + τj,mn ).
     Goods markets are competitive, and thus prices equal marginal costs. The price at


                                                                            6
which country m can supply tradable good q in sector j to country n is equal to:

                                                          b jm
                                      p j,mn (q) =             κ     .
                                                       z jm (q) j,mn
Buyers of each good q in sector j in country n will select to buy from the cheapest source
country. Thus, the price actually paid for this good in country n will be:

                                                             
                                  p jn (q) =        min          p j,mn (q) .
                                                 m=1,...,N

   Following the standard EK approach, define the ”multilateral resistance” term

                                                N
                                   Φ jn =   ∑       A jm b jm κ j,mn )−θ .
                                            m =1

This value summarizes, for country n, the access to production technologies in sector j.
Its value will be higher if in sector j, country n’s trading partners have high productivity
(A jm ) or low cost (b jm ). It will also be higher if the trade costs that country n faces in this
sector are low. Standard steps lead to the familiar result that the probability of importing
good q from country m, π j,mn is equal to the share of total spending on goods coming
from country m, X j,mn /X jn , and is given by:
                                                                              −θ
                               X j,mn            A jm b jm κ j,mn
                                      = π j,mn =                                    .           (3)
                                X jn                    Φ jn
In addition, the price of good j aggregate in country n is simply

                                                             − 1θ
                                          p jn = Γ Φ jn              ,                          (4)
                        1
where Γ = Γ( θ +1θ −e ) 1−e , with Γ denoting the Gamma function.
         


Equilibrium and market clearing. A competitive equilibrium in this economy is a set
                    j=1,...,J                       j=1,...,J                         j=1,...,J
of goods prices p jn n=1,...,N , factor prices ws,jn n=1,...,N for s = H, M, L and r jn n=1,...,N ,
                                  j=1,...,J    j=1,...,J          j=1,...,J
and resource allocations Yjn n=1,...,N , Q jn n=1,...,N , π j,mn n,m=1,...,N , such that (i) con-
sumers maximize utility; (ii) firms maximize profits; and (iii) all markets clear.
    The market clearing condition for sector j aggregate in country n is given by

                                            J                            N                 
                                                                              πi,nk pik Qik
                    p jn Q jn = p jn Yjn + ∑ (1 − β in )γ jin            ∑ 1 + τi,nk .          (5)
                                          i =1                           k =1

Total expenditure in sector j, country n, p jn Q jn , is the sum of domestic final expenditure

                                                      7
p jn Yjn and expenditure on sector j goods as intermediate input in all domestic sectors i:
                                      
   J                   N πi,nk pik Qik
∑i=1 (1 − β in )γ jin ∑k=1 1+τi,nk       . In turn, final consumption is given by:

                                                       !                                                                          
                                       J                        J                             J
                                                                                                  τi,mn πi,mn pin Qin
 p jn Yjn = ξ jn          ∑          ∑ ws,in Ls,in          + ∑ rin Kin +            ∑∑              1  + τi,mn
                                                                                                                      + Dn  .
                      s={ H,M,L}      i =1                     i =1                  m 6 = n i =1
                                                                                          (6)
Finally, since all factors of production are immobile across sectors, sectoral skill-specific
ws,jn and sectoral r jn adjust to clear the factor markets:

                              N   π j,nm p jm Q jm   ws,jn Ls,jn         r jn K jn
                             ∑       1 +  τ j,nm
                                                   =
                                                     α s,jn β jn
                                                                 =
                                                                   ( 1 − ∑    α s,jn ) β jn
                                                                                            .                                       (7)
                             m =1                                           s


Formulation in changes. Following Dekle et al. (2008), we express the model in terms
of gross changes relative to the baseline equilibrium and the baseline equilibrium observ-
ables. For any baseline value of a variable x, denote by a prime its counterfactual value
following some change in parameters, and by a “hat” the gross change in a variable be-
tween a baseline level and a counterfactual: xb ≡ x 0 /x. The shock we will consider is
an increase in tariffs τj,mn and non-tariff barriers η j,mn between US, Canada, and Mexico
following the revocation of NAFTA. In changes, (6) becomes:

                                                                                       0
                                           !
                       J                          J                            J           bi,mn pbin Q
                                                                                     τi,mn π                 i,mn pin Qin
                                                                                                      b in π
     bjn =
pbjn Y       ∑ ∑ wbs,in SLs,in                 + ∑ brin SKin +         ∑∑                  1 + τ 0 i,mn             In
                                                                                                                               +D
                                                                                                                                b n SD(8)
                                                                                                                                       n,
              s       i =1                       i =1                 m 6 = n i =1


where SLs,in , SKin , and SDn are the initial shares of s-skill labor income in sector i, capital
income in sector i, and the trade deficit, respectively. The market clearing condition (5)
becomes:
                                                         J                               N              b ik π i,nk pik Qik 
                                b jn p jn Y jn + ∑ (1 − β in )γ jin                           bi,nk pbik Q
                                                                                              π
          b jn p jn Q jn = pbjn Y
     pbjn Q                                                                              ∑                     0
                                                                                                       1 + τi,nk
                                                                                                                               .    (9)
                                                        i =1                             k =1

The factor market clearing conditions become:

                                                         N          b j,nm pbjm Q
                                                                    π           b jm π j,nm p jm Q jm
                                                        ∑m =1                        0
                                                                                1+τj,nm
                                  bs,jn = b
                                  w       r jn =                     π j,nm p jm Q jm
                                                                                                        .                          (10)
                                                                 N
                                                                ∑m =1 1+τj,nm




                                                               8
The trade shares in changes are
                                                                               −θ
                                                                  b jm κbj,mn
                                                                  b
                                             b j,mn =
                                             π                                             ,                                          (11)
                                                         ∑kN=1    π j,kn b b jk κbj,kn )−θ

where
                                                                                                β jm "                    #1− β jm
             
                          α H,jm            α M,jm            α L,jm          1−∑s αs,jm               J
    b jm =
    b            w
                 b H,jm             w
                                    b M,jm             w
                                                       b L,jm             r jm
                                                                          b                               ∏ ( pbim )γijm              (12)
                                                                                                          i =1

and
                                                                                0
                                                                          (1 + τj,mn )
                                              κbj,mn = d j,mn ηbj,mn                       .                                          (13)
                                                                          (1 + τ j,mn )
Finally, standard steps lead to the counterfactual price indices:

                                                                                         !− 1
                                                        N                                        θ

                                        pbjn =         ∑              b jm κbj,mn )−θ
                                                              π j,mn (b                                                               (14)
                                                       m =1

and

                                                                     J
                                                                   ∏ pbjn .
                                                                          ξ jn
                                                         Pbn =                                                                        (15)
                                                                   j =1

Equations (8)-(15) are solved for all the price, wage, and quantity changes between the
baseline equilibrium and the counterfactual. The model is solved using the algorithm
described in Appendix A.


3     Data
This section describes the sources of our trade, input-output, trade policy, and voting
data.
    The 2016 release of the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) is our main data source.
It contains data on trade flows, intermediate input usage, and final consumption at the
sectoral level. The socio-economic accounts compiled by the WIOD also contain data on
labor and capital share in value added. Labor is broken down into three skill levels. A
low-skilled worker is defined by the WIOD as one with at most some secondary edu-
cation. A medium-skilled worker has a complete secondary education. A high-skilled
worker has some tertiary education or more. We use the latest year available, which is


                                                                    9
2014.2 The WIOD and its construction are described in detail in Timmer et al. (2015). We
combine some sectors with too many zeros, and add Turkey, Russia, Luxembourg, and
Malta to the composite “Rest of the World” region. The resulting dataset consists of 40
countries and 38 sectors. Tables A1 and A2 in the Appendix provide a list of countries
and sectors.
    To get a sense of the importance of input and final goods trade among the NAFTA
countries, Table 1 reports aggregate intermediate and final spending shares according to
WIOD. The left panel reports the share of spending on intermediates from the country in
the row of the table in the total intermediate spending in the country in the column. Thus,
the US sources 89.7% of all intermediates it uses from itself, 1.8% from Canada, and 1%
from Mexico. The importance of the US for Canada and Mexico is predictably larger. The
US supplies 12.1% of all intermediates used in Canada, and 15.1% of intermediates used
in Mexico. The right panel presents the corresponding shares in final consumption spend-
ing. The importance of NAFTA countries in each other’s final goods spending is lower,
with Canada and Mexico supplying 0.6% and 0.8% of US final consumption spending,
and the US supplying 6.2% and 3.5% of final consumption of Canada and Mexico, respec-
tively.

                                  Table 1: NAFTA market shares

                        Intermediate spending                     Final consumption spending
                    Canada Mexico United States                  Canada Mexico United States
 Canada              .783     .007        .018                    .876     .002       .006
 Mexico              .006     .716        .010                    .006     .914       .008
 United States       .121     .151        .897                    .062     .035       .943
Notes: This table reports the share of input spending (left panel) and final spending (right panel) in the
column country coming from the row country. The columns do not add up to 1 because of imports from
non-NAFTA countries.

   Location-specific employment data come from the U.S. Census Bureau (year 2015),
Statistics Canada (year 2015) and the Instituto Nacional de Estadistica y Geografia (year
2014). These are provided at the sectoral level following the NAICS classification. We
convert these to ISIC 4 using the correspondence table from the Census Bureau. We do
not have breakdowns of location-specific employment by skill level. Employment shares
by skill for the US at the county level come from the U.S. Census Bureau (2016). For the
US, we convert county-level data to congressional district by using the Census Bureau’s
mapping. Finally, data on election results at the congressional district level have been
   2 Thelatest WIOD release does not include worker breakdowns by skill. For that information, we use
the previous (2011) WIOD release, with skill-specific sectoral labor data pertaining to 2009.

                                                   10
compiled by Daily Kos Elections.
    At the national level, the sectors in which the bulk of US employment is currently
found have at best weak direct connections to NAFTA countries. The left panel of Fig-
ure 1 plots US employment at the sector level against the share of intermediate spending
sourced from the NAFTA countries. There is a broad negative relationship: the sectors
with the greatest NAFTA input spending shares tend to not have much US employment.
The right panel plots employment against the share of output exported to NAFTA coun-
tries. Here, there are essentially two groups of sectors: the group with a relatively high
export intensity to NAFTA and low overall US employment, and sectors that export vir-
tually nothing to NAFTA but have higher employment.


             Figure 1: US Sectoral Employment, NAFTA Input Share and NAFTA Export Share

                                                                  Employment and NAFTA input share                                                                              Employment and NAFTA export share
                  20000




                                                                                                                                          20000
                                       53                                                                                                                 53
                          15000




                                                                                                                                                  15000
   Total employment (thousands)




                                                                                                                           Total employment (thousands)



                                       30                                                                                                                 30
                                            36                                                                                                            36
                                       44                                                                                                                 44
              10000




                                                                                                                                      10000




                                        28                                                                                                                28
                                         50                                                                                                                    50
                                                 54                                                                                                       54
                                  41                                                                                                                       41
   5000




                                                                                                                           5000




                                                             27                                                                                           27
                                            37                                                                                                             37
                                                  51                                                                                                      51

                                            34 531                                                                                                         31
                                                                                                                                                           34             5
                                                             22  16 19                                                                                                        22      16                     19
                                                                       24
                                                                17 14 21                                                                                     24
                                                 33 1 6 11 13         718 15 4 20                                                                                           4 3314 15 21 11          13 17          20 18
                                            32        9 12
                                                        2
                                                        3
                                                           8                                                     10                                         32        91 37 12    10      8     6
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                  0




                                                                                                                                          0




                                  0                                .05                    .1                   .15                                        0                      .05                      .1                  .15
                                                 Share of total input spending coming from Canada and Mexico                                                        Share of export to Canada and Mexico in sectoral output


Notes: The left panel depicts the US sectoral employment against the share of total input spending in
a sector that is sourced from Canada and Mexico. The right panel depicts the US sectoral employment
against the share of total output exported to Canada and Mexico. The sector key is in Appendix Table A2.


    We use the 2014 tariff data for Canada, Mexico and the US from the World Bank’s
                                                                                  0
WITS database.3 We set τj,mn to the current effectively applied tariff rate, and τj,mn to the
Most Favored Nation (MFN) rate when m and n are NAFTA countries, and τj,mn = 0 if
either m or n is not the one of the NAFTA countries.4 Estimates of non-tariff trade barrier
(NTB) changes in case of rollback of NAFTA come from Felbermayr et al. (2017). Those
authors fit a gravity model and infer non-tariff barriers from the deviation of actual trade
volumes from trade volumes predicted based on observable gravity variables in each
sector and country pair. According to this procedure, in a small number of sectors NTBs
   3 We extract tariff data directly at the ISIC 3 sectoral level, and use a correspondence to ISIC 3.1, then

ISIC 4, to match it with the WIOD data classification.
   4 Since we are not changing other countries’ tariffs, and are not keeping track of non-NAFTA tariff rev-

enue, this simplification is inconsequential.


                                                                                                                      11
will actually fall as a result of revoking NAFTA. Since this appears implausible, we set
the NTB change to zero in instances where the regression model predicts them to fall if
NAFTA is revoked.
     Figure 2 presents the changes in tariffs and NTBs that we assume would occur if
NAFTA were revoked, expressed in percentage points (Appendix Table A3 reports the
precise numbers). Since we assume that Canada and Mexico would receive MFN treat-
ment if NAFTA disappeared, the tariff changes that would actually occur are by and large
in single digit percentage points. The inferred NTB changes are both larger on average,
and more broad-based, affecting also a number of service sectors in which tariffs are zero.
It is plausible that a revocation of NAFTA will be accompanied by a general deterioration
of the relationship between the countries, and that the NTBs will rise in a wide range of
sectors.

Figure 2: Assumed changes in US tariffs and NTBs on Canada and Mexico if NAFTA is
revoked

                        NTB baseline   Canada   Mexico
          30
      Change (%)
   10     0 20




                              Pu ccom ousin trans ort
                                       sh odat g, co port
                                                      , and er
                                     tat Fina cons food
                                                 d m ial se ncy
                                                               se es
                                     He c. se mini vices

                                           erv nd s ucat n
                                                ice ocia ion

                                                                     eh k
                                                                          old
                            tur tran oto t, n (M)

                                 Ele air o equ icle )
                                      ctr f m ipm (M)

                                                       ate ery )
                                                                            )
                                          rad l tra truc e
                                        d p e of de, r ion
                                                      ne ve ir
                                                 Wa s tra hicle
                                                              tra ort
                                                               Fo mal
                                                                 F try
                                           les , to arry g




                                            an med per ( )
                                                       etr rep )
                                                 an bac ing
                                                                            )
                                                                   od )



                                         Ph Ch eum d.
                                                                 ica M)
                                      No er a ceuti l (M)
                                                eta plas l (M)
                              mp d m sic inera M)
                                                                            )
                                                 ele uc M)
                                                                            )
                                                                    pt )
                                    rep spor r veh c (M

                                               y, w chin nt (M
                                                            ea o (M
                                                             Wo r (M
                                                            Pa (M
                                                                          M




                                   ute eta me l (M

                                    ine Elec ctron ts (M
                                             an rical ics (M




                                                             r, s (M




                                                            ho l wor
                                             ipi non epa




                                   he h a , e atio
                                              eta Cons wag
                                   Te rage nd q ishin




                                                                       ro




                                                                          i


                                                         isc rvic
                                                                      urr
                                                                    res




                                                           ir nsp
                                                                        (



                                                                        (

                                             nd prod als (




                                                        ter nsp
                                                                        t




                                                                     ta
                                                                     ni




                                                                   tic
                                                                  ca
                                                                the




                                                                 str
                                                                   e




                                                                    r
                                                                   c




                                                                   e




                                                                    l
                                                               da




                                                                us
                                                 d e eq




                                                                  u
                                                                 t
                                                               u




                                                                -




                                                               d
                                     Ru arm em
                                                d p ia
                                                            ol
                   an




                                          ing ion
                                                         m




                                                           p
                                                       dl




                                                        A
                                                        q
                                         n-m nd




                                                         .

                                                       s,
                                                        c
                                                       a




                                           o Ad
                                                      a




                                                       c
               op




                                                       l




                                                     n
                                                    a




                                               , IT
                                                    t
                                                  s




                                                 eli
                                                    l




                                                    i
                                                  t
                          Co ate Ba
             Cr



                                                g




                                  Co and




                                             an
                                              M




                                               h
                                 , b nin




                                          icit




                                             e
                                         dr




                                         alt
                                         bb




                                        ra




                                           r
                                        ry




                                        e,
                             od Mi




                                      Wa




                                       ,s

                                       rs
                                         e
                                       xti



                                      ing
                                       ke




                                        T
                                      an
                                      ev




                                    an




                                   in.
                                   bli
                                  int




                                   A
                                  ls




                                es
                                ch


                                  r




                              dm
                                 c




                              Ot
                                e,




                              nd
                     Fu Othe




                             Wh
                              Pr




                             bri



                            Ma




                             al
                           La




                           ca
                         Fa
                         Fo




                         Re
                        rni




                       bli
                    Pu




Notes: This figure reports the change in sectoral tariffs on Mexico and Canada, and the change in the NTBs
imposed by the US on Mexico and Canada, if NAFTA is revoked, expressed in percentage points. “(M)”
denotes a manufacturing sector.


                                                         12
    At the same time, the NTB changes reported in Figure 2 are inferred from observed
variation in trade flows, rather than measured directly. Direct measurement of NTBs is
not feasible. To our knowledge, the only comprehensive NTB database is compiled by
UNCTAD, and contains count measures of the number of NTBs in place by sector and
country pair. We collected these data and compared the number of NTBs among the
NAFTA countries with the number of NTBs that the NAFTA countries impose on non-
NAFTA trading partners. It is indeed the case that the within-NAFTA number of NTBs
is systematically lower than the number imposed by NAFTA countries on non-NAFTA
economies. We computed the bilateral sectoral change in the number of NTBs within
NAFTA if each NAFTA country went from the observed number of NTBs to the average
that it imposes on the rest of the world. In this exercise, we assumed that after the lower
NTBs due to NAFTA are phased out, each NAFTA country treats its NAFTA partners
with the same level of NTBs that it imposes on the rest of the world, in each sector. The
correlation between the implied change in the number of NTBs and the ad valorem NTB
change from Felbermayr et al. (2017) in Figure 2 is 0.23 for the US-Mexico NTBs and 0.36
for the US-Canada NTBs. Given the significant caveats with simply using the number
of NTBs as a measure of their severity, the positive correlation is reassuring that there is
some informational content in the NTB values inferred from trade flows and used in the
baseline.
    Nonetheless, given the large amount of uncertainly surrounding the NTB numbers,
throughout we report the results under two additional assumptions. First, we assume
that the NTBs don’t change following the dismantling of NAFTA, and only tariffs do.
This is the most conservative treatment of NTBs, resulting in far smaller overall trade
cost increases from dismantling NAFTA. The second alternative we implement is to jetti-
son the sectoral variation in NTB changes, and simply apply a uniform increase in NTBs
that is equal to the average change across sectors implied by the Felbermayr et al. (2017)
numbers. This implies a 9.62% uniform increase in NTBs when NAFTA is revoked.


4     Quantitative results

4.1   Calibration
All parameters except the trade elasticity θ can be calibrated directly from the WIOD data.
All numbers in the WIOD data are in basic prices and therefore ex-tariff. One cell in the
the WIOD database is Mij,mn , the exports from country m, sector i to country n, sector j,
where j could be j = C the final consumption. Denoting M j,mn = ∑iJ=1 M ji,mn + M jC,mn


                                            13
the total WIOD value of good j exported from m to n, we have that in terms of our model
          π   p jn Q jn
M j,mn = j,mn
            1+τj,mn .
    The quantities needed to solve the model are:

                                N
                 p jn Q jn =   ∑ (1 + τj,mn ) Mj,mn                                            (16)
                               m =1
                               (1 + τj,mn ) M j,mn
                  π j,mn =                                                                     (17)
                                    p jn Q jn
                                J                             J                 J
                     Dn =      ∑ Djn where Djn =             ∑      M j,nm −   ∑      M j,mn   (18)
                               j =1                          m =1              m =1
                                N          J
                     Tn =      ∑ ∑ τj,mn Mj,mn                                                 (19)
                               m =1 j =1
                                N
                  p jn Yjn =   ∑ (1 + τj,mn ) MjC,mn.                                          (20)
                               m =1

    The production and utility parameters can be calibrated using the optimality condi-
tions described above:


                                         N
                                        ∑m =1 (1 + τj,mn ) M jC,mn
                     ξ jn =         J   N
                                                                                               (21)
                               ∑ i =1 ∑ m =1 (1 + τi,mn ) MiC,mn
                                          N        J
                                         ∑m =1 ∑i =1 (1 + τi,mn ) Mij,mn
                    β jn = 1 −                      N
                                                                           for j 6= C          (22)
                                                   ∑m =1 M j,nm
                                          N
                                         ∑m =1 (1 + τi,mn ) Mij,mn
                   γij,n =      N              J
                                                                                               (23)
                               ∑m =1 ∑ j0 =1 (1 + τj0 ,mn ) Mij0 ,mn
                               labor_revenues,jn
                   αs,jn =                       ,                                             (24)
                                 value_added jn

where skill-specific labor revenue and value added come from the social and economic
accounts of the WIOD.
   In the baseline we set the trade elasticity θ = 5, a common value in the quantitative
trade literature (e.g. Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare, 2014). Section 6.2 assesses the robust-
ness of the results to alternative θ’s.




                                                       14
4.2   Sectoral and aggregate effects
With immobile factors, the sectoral wage change for each skill level is identical (see equa-
tion 10). Figure 3 reports the change in the real wage for each sector following the full
revocation of NAFTA. As discussed above, we present three scenarios for NTB changes:
(i) baseline depicted in Figure 2; (ii) no NTB changes (tariff changes only), and (iii) uni-
form NTB changes.
     The real wage change is simply the change in the sectoral wage divided by the con-
sumption price index, expressed in net terms: w bs,jn / Pbn − 1. US sectors experience a range
of wage changes from a 2.26% increase in the mining and quarrying sector to a 2.7% de-
cline in the coke and petroleum sector. The large majority of sectors experience wage
decreases, with 5 sectors, all in manufacturing, seeing reductions in excess of 1%. With
unchanged NTBs, wage decreases are much smaller on average, as would be expected
since this scenario involved much smaller trade cost increases. In the United States, over-
all the uniform NTB case is quite highly correlated with the baseline, with the notable dif-
ference for the outlier sectors, where the uniform NTB scenario implies changes smaller
in absolute terms. In Canada and Mexico, the range of sectoral wage changes is much
greater. Both Mexico and Canada have sectors that experience wage reductions in excess
of 10%.
     In all three countries, the employment-weighted average wage changes are negative
for all three scenarios, as reported by the horizontal lines in Figure 3. The numbers are
in the first column of Table 2. The average wage fall in the US is an order of magnitude
smaller than in Mexico and Canada in all scenarios. However, when computing aggre-
gate welfare changes, we must take into account changes in the capital income and tariff
revenue. Proportional changes in capital income are the same as wage income in our
framework. Adding tariff revenue, the second column of Table 2 reports the overall wel-
fare changes. The US loses 0.22% from the dismantling of NAFTA in the baseline scenario.
Canadian and Mexican losses are about ten times larger in proportional terms at around
−2%. The numbers are quite similar under a uniform NTB change. When only tariffs
change, the US is indifferent, whereas Canadian and Mexican welfare fall by 0.08% and
0.26% respectively.




                                             15
ufacturing sector.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Change in real wage (%)                                                                                                                            Change in real wage (%)                               Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Change in real wage (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ke
                                                                                                                              Ru Mot                                    -15                                                 -10       -5      0      5                  Ot                Ele                                         -20                                          -10         0        10                 Fa                an                                   -3                                                 -2   -1      0     1      2
                                                                                                                                  bb or                                                                                                                                     h                  ctr                                                                                                                             bric Rub d pe
                                                                                                                                      e          v                                                                                                                      Co er tra Mo ical e                                                                                                                                Fo ate ber trole
                                                                                                                                Min r an ehic                                                                                                                               m          n        to           q                                                                                                                 od                  a
                                                                                                                                      ing d pla le (M                                                                                                                  Fa pute spor r veh pt (M                                                                                                                                    , b d me nd p um (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           bric r a t e                     ic         )                                                                                                                ev
                                                                                                                                     Ele and stic ( )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      era tal pr lastic M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ate nd quip le (M                                                                                                                                              ge odu (M
                                                                                                                                          ctr qua M)                                                                                                                                  d m ele               mn )                                                                                                                                    s,
                                                                                                                     Ot
                                                                                                                                              ica rry
                                                                                                                                                   l            in                                                                                                                          e ct                 t                                                                                                            Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tob cts ( )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ac M)
                                                                                                                        he
                                                                                                                           rt               Ch eqp g                                                                                                                                 Min tal p ronic (M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in        r          s                                                                                                                 ch                               c
                                                                                                                                                  em t (M                                                                                                                Ma                   g od                 (M                                                                                                                 ine                    Pa o (M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  p          )
                                                                                                                        Pr rans
                                                                                                                           int       p
                                                                                                                                                        ica )                                                                                                                 ch Trad and ucts )                                                                                                                                           ry         C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               an hem er (M
                                                                                                                               ing ort e Wo l (M)                                                                                                                          Wh inery e of qua (M)                                                                                                                                                   de            ica )
                                                                                                                                     an qu od (                                                                                                                                                                r                                                                                                                     Te                  q  p          l
                                                                                                                                         d m ipm M)                                                                                                                     La ls an and non- rying
                                                                                                                       Wh
                                                                                                                           ls                  e           n                                                                                                                nd         d          e          v                                                                                                                           xtil Basic t, ne (M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                              an Bas dia r t (M)                                                                                                                                 an reta qpt, ehicle                                                                                                                                    No s an met c (M)
                                                                                                                                  dr         ic           e                                                                                                                           d p il t ne
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ipie rad c (M                                                                                                                                    n-m d le als
                                                                                                                              He eta met prod                                                                                                                                                   lin e, r                                                                                                                                          eta ath (M)
                                                                                                                                  alt il tr als .                                                                                                                                                   e           e )                                                                                                                                     l m er
                                                                                                                                      h a ad                   (M                                                                                                                             Wa s tra pair                                                                                                                                                   in         (M
                                                                                                                                  Ph nd s e, re )                                                                                                                                                  ter nsp                                                                                                                                              Air eral )
                                                                                                                                       arm oc pa                                                                                                                                                          tra ort                                                                                                                                              tra (M)
                                                                                                                                             ac ial w ir                                                                                                                                           Co ns                                                                                                                                                           ns
                                                                                                                            Te                    eu                                                                                                                             Ac                      ns po                                                                                                                                Ele
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F        p
                                                                                                                                xtil                   t       ork                                                                                                Pu                                                                                                                                                                               ctr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ic o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ort
                                                                                                                  R                  es Con ical (
                                                                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     bli Oth como Adm truc rt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ca         e                     in        tio                                                                                                        Ot                 Cr al e restr
                                                                                                              Pu eal
                                                                                                                bli
                                                                                                                                          an
                                                                                                                                              d le struc )                                                                                                                  dm r se datio istr n                                                                                                                                 he                 o             q          y
                                                                                                                    c a estat                       a         t                                                                                                                  in. rvic n a atio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r tr Phar p an pt (M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         an        m            d
                                                                                                                        dm e,                          the ion                                                                                                                           o es               nd n                                                                                                                             sp ace anim )
                                                                                                                            in. and               Pa r (M
                                                                                                                                ,s          m            p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  He c. se , hou food
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a          c          s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      eq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               utic         a l
                                                                                                                                    oc
                                                                                                                                        .       isc er ( )                                                                                                                        Ru lth a ., ed ehold                                                                                                                                                      uip al (M
                                                                                                               Fu                Tra sec ser M)                                                                                                                               Ele bbe nd so ucat                                                                                                                                  Ele                            mn )
                                                                                                                  rnit                 de ., ed vice                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t (M
                                                                                                                      ure
                                                                                                                          , re
                                                                                                                                           of            uc s                                                                                                                       ctr r an cia ion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ic                                                                                                                             Fu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rnit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ctr Moto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            icit        r         F          )
                                                                                                                                        C non atio                                                                                                                               Te ity, d pla l wor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     xtil wa                                                                                                                                   ure               y, w veh ishin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e                 stic k
                                                                                                                        O pa rop a -veh n
                                                                                                                    Co ther ir of                  n           ic                                                                                                                                    t                                                                                                                       Co , rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ate icle g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r           (
                                                                                                                       mp se ma d an le                                                                                                                                            Wa s an er, s (M)                                                                                                                            mp air Wat , sew M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         reh d le ewa




                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                     Ma uter rvice chine ima                                                                                                                                                  ou ath ge                                                                                                                       La uter of m er tra age
                                                                                                                         ch        a          s                     l                                                                                                       Pu                    s in        er                                                                                                                 nd         an         ac nsp
                                                                                                                             ine nd e , ho ry (M                                                                                                                                 bli                                                                                                                                                 a           d           h
                                                                                                                                 ry         le         u            )                                                                                                                sh Basic g, co (M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                                      an ctro seho                                                                                                                                                              u                                                                                                                Pr nd p elec inery ort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    int
                                                                                                                                                       n          ld                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Canada
                                                                                                                                          de                                                                                                                       Fu              No g, IT met rrier                                                                                                                                   ing ipieli tronic (M)
                                                                                                                                               qp ics (
                                                                                                                                                   t, n M                                                                                                             rnit              n-m , c als                                                                                                                                           an nes                  s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ur                 eta onsu (M)                                                                                                                       Pu               d m tra (M)
                                                                                                                                     F                    ec )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       bli                 ed nsp
                                                                                                                   Fa
                                                                                                                       bric War inanc Fo (M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Re e, re Fin l min ltan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           al        p         a                     c                                                                                                                   sh                   ia           o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              es air o ncia eral y                                                                                                                                          ing Adm rep rt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     United States




                                                                                                                            ate eho ial rest
                                                                                                                                 d         u           s          r                                                                                                               tat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e, f ma l ser M)                                                                                                                Pu                         , IT inis rod
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,            t         .
                                                                                                                          Ele me sing ervic y                                                                                                                                             an          c         v                                                                                                        bli
                                                                                                                               ctr tal               ,           es                                                                                                                           d m hine ices                                                                                                                  c a Acc Fina cons ratio
                                                                                                                                   icit       p co                                                                                                                                                   isc ry (                                                                                                              Re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dm om nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     in.                   ial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ult n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                       y, w rodu urrie
                                                                                                                                              ate cts r                                                                                                                                                    se M)                                                                                                               al        , od                   s nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fo                                      rvic                                                                                                               es soc ation ervic y
                                                                                                                              No                   r,          (M                                                                                                                            Cr                                                                                                                                        tat       .s
                                                                                                                                  n- Ad sew )                                                                                                                              od                   op           F es                                                                                                                Ot e, a ec., and es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,b                     an ishin                                                                                                                       he                                f
                                                                                                                     La Acc meta minis age
                                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ev                      d                                                                                                                             r s nd m edu ood
                                                                                                                        nd                                t                                                                                                                            era                   an g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  im                                                                                                                         erv          is        c
                                                                                                                             an mod l min ratio                                                                                                                                             ge                                                                                                                                                    ice c se ation
                                                                                                                        Pu d p atio era n                                                                                                                                               Ph s, to Fore al                                                                                                                                               s,
                                                                                                                            bli ipie n a l (M                                                                                                                                               arm ba str                                                                                                                                                      ho rvice
                                                                                                                                sh
                                                                                                                                   ing lines nd f )                                                                                                                                               ac cco y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r         C         u se s
                                                                                                                   Fo                   , IT                  oo                                                                                                                                       eu                                                                                                                              He ehou ons hold
                                                                                                                       od                                                                                                                                                                                  tic (M)                                                                                                                                               tru
                                                                                                                                             , c trans d                                                                                                                                                       a                                                                                                                            alt                       c




                                                                                                                                                                        Tariff and uniform NTB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tariff and uniform NTB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Tariff and uniform NTB




                                                                                                                          ,b                     on                                                                                                                                                      W l(                                                                                                                                   h sin




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tariff and NTB baseline
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tariff and NTB baseline
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tariff and NTB baseline




                                                                                                                              ev                       su port                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Wh Tr and g, co tion
                                                                                                                                  era
                                                                                                                                       ge                  lta
                                                                                                                                                               nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ch ood M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        em         (                                                                                                                ls       a                       u
                                                                                                                                           s,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           an de o socia rrier
                                                                                                                           Co                  tob Fish y                                                                                                                   Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                int                A        ica M)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ir t l (M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dr         f
                                                                                                                                ke                   a          ing                                                                                                                 ing                    ran                                                                                                                                  eta non l wor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     il t        -           k
                                                                                                                                    an Air cco (                                                                                                                                Co and                  P       sp )                                                                                                                                      rad vehic
                                                                                                                                         d p tra M)                                                                                                                                  ke                    a         or                                                                                                                  Min                    e,          le
                                                                                                                                              et          ns                                                                                                                              an med per ( t                                                                                                                                       ing                  r
                                                                                                                                          Wa roleu port                                                                                                                                      d p ia                  M                                                                                                                               an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wo epair
                                                                                                                                               ter m                                                                                                                                              etr rep )                                                                                                                                                d q od (M
                                                                                                                                                     tra (M)                                                                                                                                            ole rod                                                                                                                                                 ua
                                                                                                                                                          ns                                                                                                                                                 um .                                                                                                                                                    rry )
                                                                                                                                                              po                                                                                                                                                   (M                                                                                                                                                     ing
                                                                                                                                                                   rt                                                                                                                                                  )




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tariff only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tariff only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tariff only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 3: Sectoral wage changes in NAFTA countries due to full rollback of NAFTA




Notes: This Figure depicts sectoral real wage changes due to revocation of NAFTA. “(M)” denotes a man-
         Table 2: Employment weighted average wage and total welfare changes

                       Real wage change, %            Total welfare change, %      in bln. US$

                                     Tariff and NTB baseline
     Canada                      -1.67                      -2.18                     -36.58
     Mexico                      -1.78                      -1.80                     -21.99
     United States               -0.27                      -0.22                     -39.86

                                             Tariff only
     Canada                      -0.37                          -0.08                 -1.29
     Mexico                      -0.98                          -0.26                 -3.11
     United States               -0.05                          -0.00                 -0.23

                                     Tariff and uniform NTB
     Canada                      -2.14                     -2.05                      -34.47
     Mexico                      -3.09                     -2.03                      -24.74
     United States               -0.24                     -0.22                      -39.17

Notes: This table reports the aggregate real wage changes and the total welfare changes, in percentage
points and in billion US$, for the NAFTA countries under the three NAFTA revocation scenarios.


    Though proportional changes are smaller in the US, it bears the largest dollar losses
from dismantling NAFTA, at about US$40 billion, as reported in the last column. Canada
is a close second at US$37 billion, and Mexico at US$22. Our exercise implies that rela-
tive price levels (real exchange rates) also move, with the US dollar appreciating by 2.4%
against the Mexican peso, and by 1.3% against the Canadian dollar in real terms. Table 3
presents the percentage changes in trade volume from the rollback of NAFTA relative to
world GDP. As expected, NAFTA countries tend to trade less with each others and sub-
stitute towards other countries. In the baseline scenario, the fall in NAFTA trade volume
is quite large. For example, U.S. exports to Canada and Mexico would fall by 36.9% and
41.8% respectively. When only tariffs change, the changes are smaller but still sizeable, at
around 8% and 17.7%.




                                                 17
Table 3: Percentage change in NAFTA country trade volumes due to a full rollback of
NAFTA

                                     Tariff and NTB baseline
                                                      Source
           Destination         Canada Mexico United States           Other       Total
           Canada                 0.07      -23.40     -36.88         2.06       -3.27
           Mexico               -41.10       -0.33     -41.81        -2.19       -4.13
           United States        -36.49      -33.87      0.49          2.14       -0.12
           Other                 11.63       16.41      0.09          0.19        0.22

           Total                -3.25      -4.12         -0.12        0.22       0.03

                                           Tariff only
                                                     Source
           Destination         Canada     Mexico    United States    Other       Total
           Canada                 0.39     -3.66        -8.00         1.79       -0.29
           Mexico               -14.88      0.96       -17.70         1.01       -0.67
           United States         -5.59    -11.81        0.09          0.08       -0.07
           Other                  0.46      1.50        0.36          0.03        0.03

           Total                -0.29      -0.66         -0.08        0.03       -0.01

                                    Tariff and NTB average
                                                    Source
           Destination         Canada Mexico United States           Other       Total
           Canada                0.37      -23.71     -37.98          6.23       -2.81
           Mexico               -44.49      -0.39     -45.90         -0.75       -4.42
           United States        -32.25     -34.90      0.43           1.47       -0.18
           Other                 7.66       13.66      0.82           0.20        0.23

           Total                -2.80      -4.40         -0.18        0.23       0.03

Notes: This table reports the percentage changes in trade volume between NAFTA countries and other
countries relative to world GDP.



4.3   Geographic distribution
We now move on to the geographic distribution of relative gains and losses. To this end,
we aggregate county-level sectoral employment to obtain sectoral employment shares in
each congressional district. Then, we construct the weighted average real wage change
in a district by applying the sectoral wage changes to district-level sectoral employment
shares. In Canada and Mexico, we use province- and state-level sectoral employment

                                               18
shares, respectively. Let c subscript locations, and let ω jc be the share of sector j employ-
ment in total district c employment. The mean real wage change in location c is then

                                                     w
                                                           
                                                     b jn
                                        ∑ ω jc       Pbn
                                                          −1 .
                                         j


    Figure 4 depicts the average real wage changes following the revocation of NAFTA, by
geographical region. Darker shades denote larger wage reductions. The first distinctive
feature of the figure is that the location-specific real wage changes are overwhelmingly
negative throughout North America. Second, the systematically darker colors are outside
of the United States: as reported above, wage reductions are greater in Canada and Mex-
ico. The figure highlights the pervasiveness of average wage reductions geographically
in Canada and Mexico: though individual sectors sometimes experience wage increases,
no region in Canada or Mexico sees real wage gains.
    Figure 5 zooms in on the United States. In the eastern portion of the country, there
are two distinct darker bands in the upper Midwest and the South. The lightest hues
(smallest wage decreases) are in mining areas of Texas, West Virginia, and Wyoming.


    Figure 4: Real wage changes in NAFTA countries following revocation of NAFTA




                                                                                             (2.5,5]
                                                                                             (1,2.5]
                                                                                             (.5,1]
                                                                                             (.25,.5]
                                                                                             (.1,.25]
                                                                                             (0,.1]
                                                                                             (-.1,0]
                                                                                             (-.25,-.1]
                                                                                             (-.5,-.25]
                                                                                             (-1,-.5]
                                                                                             (-2.5,-1]
                                                                                             [-5,-2.5]


Notes: This figure depicts the average wage changes by geographic region in North America.




                                                     19
Figure 5: Real wage changes in US congressional districts following revocation of NAFTA




                                                                                                      (.5,1]
                                                                                                      (.4,.5]
                                                                                                      (.3,.4]
                                                                                                      (.2,.3]
                                                                                                      (.1,.2]
                                                                                                      (0,.1]
                                                                                                      (-.1,0]
                                                                                                      (-.2,-.1]
                                                                                                      (-.3,-.2]
                                                                                                      (-.4,-.3]
                                                                                                      (-.5,-.4]
                                                                                                      [-1,-.5]


Notes: This figure depicts the average wage changes by congressional district in the United States.


5     Political correlates of the local economic impact
The quantitative assessment above establishes that the revocation of NAFTA has distri-
butional consequences: real wage changes differ across sectors and geographic locations.
This section analyzes the political dimension by correlating the geographic variation in
real wage changes with recent voting outcomes. Since proposals to revoke NAFTA origi-
nate from the United States, we focus on this country.


5.1    Correlation with Trump vote
Figure 6 presents the scatterplots of the real wage changes due to revocation of NAFTA
against the Trump vote share. The left panels shows the scatterplots at the congressional
district level, and the right panels at the state level. At the district level, the slope of the
relationship is negative. It is not significant in the baseline, but becomes significant in
the other two scenarios. Looking closer, in the baseline the negative relationship is sub-
stantially attenuated by districts with a heavy presence of mining and quarrying, such
as Texas 11th district (encompassing central Texas and eastern Texas cities of Midland
and Odessa), the state of Wyoming (a single Congressional district), and West Virginia
3rd (roughly the southern half of the state). Since mining and quarrying experiences a

                                                    20
large change in NTBs in the baseline, these districts are relatively better off from the pol-
icy change, but voted heavily for Trump. Dropping just 2 districts (out of 435) with the
highest mining and quarrying employment shares renders the negative bilateral relation-
ship significant at the 1% level. All in all, with the possible exception of heavily mining
areas, Trump-voting congressional districts would experience systematically larger wage
decreases if NAFTA is revoked.
    The right side of Figure 6 depicts these relationships at the state level. This might be
thought of as corresponding to voting for the president and the US Senate. Under the
NTB baseline, the slope is positive but not significant. Looking closer at the plot, it is
clear that the slope is once again influenced by mining states such as Wyoming, North
Dakota, and West Virginia, that voted for Trump but would lose relatively less from the
revocation of NAFTA. In the upper left part of the plot are states in the South and the
Midwest that voted for Trump but would be hurt the most by NAFTA revocation, with
the top 5 largest wage reductions being in Wisconsin, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, and Ohio.
The two alternative NTB scenarios yield a negative slope: Trump-voting states are hurt
relatively more by revoking NAFTA.




                                             21
                                                                      Figure 6: Real wage changes and 2016 Trump vote

                         Congressional district level                                                                                                                                                                     State level

                                                                                                                          Tariff and NTB baseline




                                                                                                                                                                 80
       80




                              AL                                     TX             KY
                              GA                                                                                                            TX
                             TN
                  GA                NE          TXMO
                                                           OK                           OK
                                    TN       KY
                                                          PA       TX TXTX             TX                WV
                                            MO IL AL                                                              WY
                                         KS PAMS OHVA
                           TN
                          IN SCKY           MOTN                   AZFL LA       WV LA                                                                                                                                                                         WV                                           WY
                                             TNMO PA                FL     WVOK                                                                                                                                                          OK
               OH     IN TN     OHAR
                                 IN AL
                                     GA
                                       MSAL
                                       AL  KY  IN          TN
                                                           LA        PAFL
                     MI AR                     GAAL TXID            LA                   ND                                                                                                                                                                                            ND
                              OHAR MN NC     MO               PA FL
                                                             FL
                                                            MD                TX                                                                                                          AL      KY SD




                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                     SDOK
                                                        MSGA
       60




                                    NC IN
                                   IA                        TXNC                                                                                                                         TN
                                                                                                                                                                                         AR
                  OHIN            SC    MI     PAIL
                                         KSVA NY
                                               MN
                                                     GA                  FL LATX
                                                                                                                                                                                                NEMS    ID
                         TX WISC
                               WI
                                NC      NCWA PA
                                            NE     SC AZ    AZCAFLMI
                                                                  FLCO                                                                                                                                                                  LA
                       WI                  SCGA GA            OR TXCO
                                                                   FL
                                                                   FLCA     MT                                                                                                 IN                KSMO
                      MI
                       WI          MI OHNC
                                   IL        NC
                                            KS
                                            NY
                                           KY
                                                  OH
                                                   ILOH       CA
                                                                    NJ
                                                                   TX
                                                                  TX                                                                                                                     SC                                             MT
                                  OH    NY    NC
                                               TX       ID
                                                        NYCA CA
                                                              NY FL VA MN
                                  MN WI CA OH      VA
                                                    NC
                                                   IN  NCPASCFL
                                                            AZCA NYTX FLNY        OK
                            MI                       ME PA
                                                          MOWA  TX  TX
                                                                   TXAR         NV AK
                                                                               CO                                                                                                   IAOH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TX                           AK
                             MI                OHMI
                                                       WA TX   NJ NJ
                                                              GA
                                                              NY
                                                              VA                                NM                                                                                             NC GA
                              IA      IAWI PAMI ILUTIL NHVA
                                                       IA
                                                      NE    NJNJNYFL
                                                           GA                                                                                                                                           PA         FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AZ
  Vote share




                                                                                                                                                            Vote share
                                    IL            PA       NJ
                                                           PA
                                                           TXUT NV TX AZ                                                                                                 WI         MI                NH
                                    OHMICAMN NH    CTMI
                                                     NYCA
                                                      CT  KS FL
                                                            UT
                                                         WA NY
                                                              OR
                                                                     AZ
                                                                      NV
                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MN    MEUTVA            NV
                                                 OR    CA
                                                       RI        FL  NY
                                                 GACA
                                                PA
                                                IL      CACAVA CA                                                                                                                                                         CO
                             IN                        DE       MAFL                                                                                                                                    DE




                                                                                                                                                                40
                                               MN                 CO
      40




                                                   MO    CT CANY
                                                              CANJ
                                                               MD  CAFL
                                                                    FL                                                                                                                                 CT     NJ                                                    NM
                                                 KY IL UT
                                                   NY     ME    CO
                                                               FL WA
                                                                   WAFL             TX                                                                                                                   OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                        RI
                                        PA WA  NY MA        AZ NY
                                                           TN
                                                           CA       FL            TX                                                                                                               IL
                                                          VA
                                                         MCT
                                                           ACA                      TX
                                                                                   NM                                                                                                                  WA      NY
                                CA        OH CTIL MA  IN
                                                       CA  CA
                                                        MAMA NJ
                                                            CA  FL
                                                                MD  FL
                                        WAPAMS IL OR
                                            MI          RI    FL
                                                             MA  CO NM
                                                                   TX PA                                                                                                                                            MD
                                                     IL NY     CA
                                                               NJ                                                                                                                                          MA
                                                      CA  VANJNVAZ
                                                                 MD MD                                                                                                                                   CA
                                          NC      SC    VTMN  HI MD
                                                             HI
                                                            CA    TX                                                                                                                                    VT HI
                                              WI
                                               NCAL     CA OH    NC
                                                     CACA
                                                      CACAGATX VA
                                                     CACAPA MA
                                            CA IL  ILCA         CA TX
                                         WI        OR
                                                   ILCA WATX
                                                           CA
                                                        LACA
                                                        GA
                                                             CA
                                                             CA
                                                            AZ
                                                             CA
                                                            NJ
                                                               CO NY                                                   Coeff = -26.91                                                                                                                                                   Coeff = 35.908




                                                                                                                                                                 20
       20




                                                             VA
                                        MI MIILMO   MN
                                                        CA
                                                        TX
                                                       CA
                                                          CA
                                                          TN MD  NY
                                                                 NY
                                                                    TX
                                                                   MD
                                                                     FL
                                                                      TX
                                                                                                                       Std.Err. = 22.43                                                                                                                                                 Std.Err. = 24.52
                                             OH CA
                                                                    FL                                                 R2 = .006                                                                                                                                                        R2 = .033
                                                  ILCA  NJ      NY NY
                                                 WA  CA   GA MANY
                                                     CA         NY
                                                  ILCA CA
                                           PA             CA
                                                                  NY      NY                                                                                                                                       DC
       0




                                                                                                                                                                 0
                 -.4                        -.3               -.2           -.1                                                 0                .1                                        -.3                              -.2                  -.1                                                            0
                                                      Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                               Average real wage change (in %)



                                                                                                                                             Tariff only
                                                                                                                                                                 80
       80




                                      AL                                           TX             KY
                                                   GA                         TN                        TX
                          GA                               NE                     MO TX                                                                                                                                                                                                 WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WV
                                                             KY              TNOK TX OK                 TXTX  TX WV
                                                                                IL MO                        AL     WY PA                                                                                                                      OK
                                                           KS
                                                           TN                VA     OH PA            MS                LA                                                                                                                                      ND
                                                                  SC KY IN                   MOTN         LA WVAZ FL          FL                                                                        AL    KY                   SD
                                                                                                                                                                 60




                                                               TN                        TNKY          OK WV LA   PA                                                     AR                                           TN
                                                            IN ALINAR      OH MS
                                                                           AL             ALMOPA        TN              FL
                                           AR          OH          MI GA INGA         NCID
                                                                                         MO         TX
                                                                                                       ND
                                                                                                      AL   LA
                                                                                                           TX          PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MS                                                           LA
                                                                    OH                                              FLFL
                                                           AR     MN                        GA ILOK MD
                                                                                         INSD                                                                                                           IN                                    MO
       60




                                                            IA         SC     MS KSPA
                                                                             NC                          LA   TXNC
                                                                                                             GA                                                                                                KS                                                                      MT
                                                    IN     OH                      MIVA           NY      TX                      FL                                                                            SC
                                                       NC WI   SCWA          WINC GANEORPA CA   MI MN
                                                                                               SC    CO             AZ FL
                                                                                                                    AZTX FLCO
                                                                                                                           FL                                                                                                                                            TX
                                                           WI WI MI IL            KSNCOH
                                                                                  MIKY   NC GA TX
                                                                                         SC            OH
                                                                                                        OH  TXCA MT
                                                                                                             FL              NJ                                                           IA                                  OH                                         AK
                                                                      MN          OH ID
                                                                                      NY
                                                                                       VATXIL NY NC CANC
                                                                                                   NY
                                                                                                   NC
                                                                                                        CAMN
                                                                                                          OHPA
                                                                                                           IN   CA
                                                                                                                OK
                                                                                                                  CAVA
                                                                                                                 NY
                                                                                                                  SC
                                                                                                                   FL FLTX  TX
                                                                                                                          FL NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NC
                                                                     CA MIMI        WI
                                                                                     PA                TX WAAK
                                                                                                            TX  MO
                                                                                                               AR
                                                                                                              TX    AZNY
                                                                                                                      TX                                                                                                                              PA                                AZ FL
  Vote share




                                                                                                                                                            Vote share




                                                                                         ME           OHNV
                                                                                                         OH
                                                                                                        GA          CONJ                                                                 WI                               MI
                                                                         UTIA                WA      ILMI MINYTXNJ NM FL
                                                                                                              VA                                                                                                                                       NH
                                                                IA           WI PA                               NJ NY
                                                                                                                VA                                                                                                                           MN      MEUT                                   NV
                                                                                   IL
                                                                                                ILIAPA NENJ
                                                                                                       NH     UTNJTX
                                                                                                              TX
                                                                                                                      GA NV
                                                                                                                      AZ  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                               CA                        OR MN MI NH NYKS    CA
                                                                                                             UTCT FL
                                                                                                              CT      NY                                                                                                                                        DE
                                                                                                                                                                40




                                                                         OH                                   WA
                                                                                                            RICA        AZNV                                                                                                                                                   CT NJ
                                                                                 GA          OR PA
                                                                                            MI      IL CA CA     CA VAFLNY
                                                                                                                CA                                                                                                                       OR                               RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NM
                                                                                                    IN DE   MN CTNJMA  FL FL                                                                                                                         IL
    40




                                                                                                   MO     CA       NYCOCA
                                                                                                                      MD   FL
                                                                      CA                           KY      ILTX
                                                                                                              CO
                                                                                                             ME  WA
                                                                                                                WA AZNY                                                                                                                                    WA                               NY
                                                                                PA                  NY WACA
                                                                                                           NYUT
                                                                                                            MA    TNTX FL FLFL
                                                                                                                         TX
                                                   CA                                            VA   CA
                                                                                                   OHIL
                                                                                                      ILCA
                                                                                                        CAMA
                                                                                                          CT  MA
                                                                                                               IN CT
                                                                                                               NJ       NM                                                                                                                                                                   MD
                                                                                 MS                         MA     CA
                                                                                                                RIMA  MDFL
                                                                                                                        NM FL                                                                                                                                                          MA
                                                                                   PA WA            ORCO
                                                                                                   MI               FL
                                                                                                                     PA
                                                                                                                    TX  MA                                                                                                                                          CA
                                                                                                                CAAZ NY
                                                                                                            IL NJ         MDNV
                                                                                                                             MD                                                                                                                    VT                                         HI
                                                                                                                VANJ
                                                                             NC                  VT SC CA MN       TX
                                                                                                                   CA HI HI MD
                                                                                          AL WI NCCA   CA    CATXOH  NC           VA
                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                       CA CA        GA
                                                Coeff = -406.53                  CA                CA
                                                                                                        CAIL
                                                                                                        CA  CA
                                                                                                           IL
                                                                                                            TX
                                                                                                              TXCA PAMA
                                                                                                                WA    CO
                                                                                                                                                                                         Coeff = -437.54
                                                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                               WI GA   CA ILCA
                                                                                                       OR       NJ CALA CANY
                                                                                                                    AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                         Std.Err. = 128.72
       20




                                                Std.Err. = 32.02                                              CA
                                                                                                               TN CAMD MD
                                                                                                              TX             NY VA
                                                                                              MI       MIIL TX MO
                                                                                                                MN
                                                                                                               TX         CAFL   NY
                                                                                                                                                                                         R2 = .269
                                                                                                       OH
                                                                                                       CA
                                                R = .218
                                                  2
                                                                                                                           FL
                                                                                                                          NY
                                                                                                                          NYNY NY
                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                       CAWAIL NJ GA MA
                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                       CA                       NY
                                                                                                             IL                 CA
                                                                                    PA                             CA
                                                                                                                                  NY
                                                                                                                                 NY                                                                                                                                                                             DC
       0




                                                                                                                                                                 0




               -.15                                     -.1                    -.05                                                              0                              -.08                                     -.06                  -.04                                                         -.02
                                                      Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                               Average real wage change (in %)



                                                                                                                          Tariff and uniform NTB
                                                                                                                                                                 80
       80




                                                     AL                                   TX                      KY
                                                     GA                                                                                     TX
                                                           TN
               GA                                               NE                    TX
                                                                                     MO
                                                                                    OK                  OK
                                                                       TN
                                                                       KY                         TXTX TX
                                                                                                   PA
                                                                                                                        TX           WV
                                                                              IL MO PA              AL                                 WY
                                                       TN IN KS                        OH
                                                                                      VA           MS
                                                          SC      KY             MO TN                          WVLA
                                                                                                             AZLA   FL                                                                                                                                          WV                                 WY
                                                                                     TN             PA       OKWV FL                                                                                                               OK
                                    OH                  IN TN AR IN OH
                                                                   GA AL AL      ALMS
                                                                                   KYMO PALATN
                                                                                  IN                             FL
                                                   MI AR                      NCMO GA             ID
                                                                                                   AL    LA  TXFL
                                                                                                                       ND                                                                                                                                                      ND
                                                             OH AR MN                             TX PA FL                                                                                          AL KY
                                                                                                GA MD                                                                                                          SD
                                                                                                                                                                 60




                                                                                 OK    SD
                                                                                        MS GA
       60




                                                                 NC
                                                             IA SC       KS        IN IL
                                                                                   PA                 TX NCTX   LA                                                                       AR         TN
                                                 OH IN                 MI        VA  NY                                   FL                                                                        NE                   ID
                                                           SCWI WI
                                                            NC              TX
                                                                             WA
                                                                             NCGANEPA MN SC      CAMICO  AZ
                                                                                                         AZ FLFL
                                                                                                                COFL MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               MS                                  LA
                                                    WI MI                 OHKSNCSC
                                                                                NC         OHGA TX       ORFLNJ  CA                                                                            IN KS           MO                                              MT
                                                    WI           IL MI  NY KYNYTX     NC   ID OH
                                                                                          IL
                                                                                                NY NY
                                                                                                         TX
                                                                                                         MN
                                                                                                      CAFL CA
                                                                                                            CATX
                                                                                                             FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                 SC
                                                                 MN OHWI               VA NCNC
                                                                                             PA
                                                                                            OH IN
                                                                                               PAMO
                                                                                                  TX TX AZ
                                                                                                           SC
                                                                                                          NY
                                                                                                         AR
                                                                                                              TX
                                                                                                             CA   VA
                                                                                                                 NY
                                                                                                               TXOKFL
                                                                                                                    AK CO                                                                                                                 TX
                                                           MI MI             CA       ME
                                                                                      OH
                                                                                      OHMI         WA
                                                                                                    TX    NJ       NV                                                               IA          OH                                                              AK
                                                                                                      GA
                                                                                                      NY
                                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                       VA NJ                    NM                                                                        GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC
                                                               IA IA        WIUT
                                                                               PA ILMI IA   WAIL NJ        NY      FL
                                                                                           NH
                                                                                            NENJ   NJ GA VA                                                                                                       PA                          AZFL
  Vote share




                                                                                                                                                            Vote share




                                                                   IL                    PA          UT
                                                                                                     TX FL
                                                                                                    PA             AZ NV                                                  WI                  MI                NH
                                                                                   MNNH MI CT  CT  CA
                                                                                                  KS TX
                                                                                                     UT OR                 TX                                                                                                                                       NV
                                                                      OH CA                  NY     WANY
                                                                                                RI CA           AZ
                                                                                                                FL        NV                                                                                 MN      UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ME             VA
                                                                          MI           PA OR
                                                                                    GAIL       CA CA CA      CANY                                                                                                                             CO
                                                                                                         VA
                                                                                     IN MN      DE        MACOCAFL                                                                                                  CT DE NJ
                                                                                                                                                                40
      40




                                                                                           MO  CT    NY NJ
                                                                                                        CAMD       FLFL
                                                                                                                    TX                                                                                                                                                         NM
                                                                            PA
                                                                                        CA  KYUT
                                                                                         NYILMA
                                                                                                   ME NY AZ
                                                                                                         TNFLWA
                                                                                                          CO   WAFLFL     TX                                                                                  IL       RIOR
                                                                                       NYWA           CA
                                                                                                  VA NJ                TX                                                                                             WA
                                                               CA                OH CT ILMAMA  CACT
                                                                                                 IN    CAMD
                                                                                                      CA   CA  FLFL       NM                                                                                                 NY
                                                                         PA MS   WAMI IL MA     ORRIMAMA COPAFLTXNM                                                                                                                           MD
                                                                                            ILNY NJ  NJ AZ   CA                                                                                                                 MA
                                                                                                CAMN  VA MD MD NV                                                                                                              CA
                                                                           NC                 SC
                                                                                               VT            MD
                                                                                                              TX
                                                                                                               HI                                                                                                        VT                               HI
                                                                                     WI NC
                                                                                        AL CACA    CA  OHCANC VA
                                                                                                                     HI
                                                                                             CA CA
                                                                                                 CA GA     TX
                                                                                    CA IL    ILCACAPATXMA
                                                                                                            CA
                             Coeff = -126.51                                 WI              CA
                                                                                             GA
                                                                                                  TX CA
                                                                                                ORWA
                                                                                              IL NJ
                                                                                                       CACO
                                                                                                         CA
                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                       LAAZ
                                                                                                       CA VANY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Coeff = -38.323
                                                                                                                                                                 20
       20




                             Std.Err. = 21.51                                 MI      MI IL MNMO
                                                                                                  CACA
                                                                                                TX CA
                                                                                                     TX
                                                                                                      TN MD MD
                                                                                                        NY
                                                                                                       TX       NYFL                                                                                                                                                                         Std.Err. = 63.61
                             R2 = .074                                               OH CA
                                                                                                                 FL                                                                                                                                                                          R2 = .012
                                                                                             ILNJ
                                                                                             CA        NYNYNY NY
                                                                                             CA
                                                                                            WA         GAMA
                                                                                             CA               NY
                                                                                             CA
                                                                                             IL                  CA
                                                                             PA                         CA
                                                                                                                NY
                                                                                                                 NY                                                                                                                                        DC
       0




                                                                                                                                                                 0




                       -.4                                 -.3                    -.2                                                            -.1                     -.3                                 -.25               -.2              -.15                                                           -.1
                                                      Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                            Average real wage change (in %)




Notes: This figure depicts the scatterplots of the average real wage change from revoking NAFTA and the
2016 Trump vote share by congressional district (left side) and state (right side), along the OLS fit. The
boxes report the coefficient, robust standard error, and the R2 of the bivariate regression.

                                                                                                                                                       22
    Appendix Table A4 shows the top and bottom 10 US congressional districts in terms
of mean real wage change. The second column also shows the mean change in real wage
and tariff revenue. Under the assumption of uniformly distributed tariff revenue, this can
be computed as IWTjn = w jn L jn + s jn Tn , where s j is the share of employment of sector j
in country n, and the mean change in district c is given by:
                                                        !
                                                IWT
                                                 d jn
                                   ∑ ω jc        Pbn
                                                      −1 .
                                    j


5.2   Political outcomes and heuristic measures of trade exposure to NAFTA
To better understand the patterns documented above, we next construct heuristic mea-
sures of trade exposure to NAFTA and correlate them with the real wage changes and
voting patterns. We use three simple observable measures, intended to capture at an
intuitive level some of the main driving forces behind the geographic distribution of
losses. The specific-factors model delivers the intuition that factors employed in import-
competing sectors should benefit from a uniform increase in trade barriers, and sectors
with an export orientation should lose. In a model with input-output linkages, factors in
a sector employing imported inputs might lose, although that prediction depends on the
substitution elasticities in production and demand.
    Thus, at the sector level, we define import penetration as the share of imports from
NAFTA in total absorption:

                                                I MPORTS jN AFTA
                             I MPjN AFTA    =                          ,
                                                      p jn Q jn

where, as before, p jn Q jn is the total US spending (absorption) in an industry. Define
export intensity as the share of output exported to NAFTA countries:

                                                EXPORTS jN AFTA
                             EXPjN AFTA     =                          ,
                                                 ∑k π j,nk p jk Q jk

where ∑k π j,nk p jk Q jk is the total US output/sales in sector j. Define NAFTA input depen-
dency as:
                                              I NTERMI MPORTS jN AFTA
                                     N AFTA
                          I NPDEPj          =                              ,
                                                   I NTERMUSEj

where I NTERMI MPORTS jN AFTA is the value of intermediate imports from the NAFTA
countries, and I NTERMUSEj is total spending on intermediate inputs for sector j.

                                                23
   These are aggregated to the congressional district level with employment shares:

                       I MPORT EXPOSUREc =         ∑ ω jc I MPjN AFTA ,
                                                    j


                     EXPORT ORIENTATIONc =              ∑ ω jc EXPjN AFTA ,
                                                         j

and
              I MPORTED I NPUT I NTENSITYc =                 ∑ ω jc I NPDEPjN AFTA .
                                                              j

Thus, a congressional district has a high import exposure, for example, if it has high
employment shares in sectors with high import penetration from NAFTA countries, and
similarly for other measures.
    The top row of Figure 7 presents the scatterplot of the real wage change due to the re-
vocation of NAFTA against import exposure (left panel), export orientation (center panel)
and imported input intensity (right panel). All three measures have statistically signifi-
cant negative correlation with the real wage change. This is intuitive in the case of two
of the measures: NAFTA export-oriented districts and those that import a lot of NAFTA
inputs should lose more from dismantling NAFTA. However, the relationship is also neg-
ative for import exposure, which is not intuitive, as locations that compete with NAFTA
imports should benefit in relative terms if NAFTA disappeared.
    The bottom row reports the bivariate relationships between these three measures and
the Trump vote. All three are positive and significant. This time, the import exposure
measure delivers “intuitive” results, as the NAFTA import-competing locations voted
more for Trump. But evidently so did those that export a lot to NAFTA countries, or use
more NAFTA inputs.
    This apparent incoherence is resolved by observing that the three heuristic measures
are highly correlated among themselves. Import exposure has a 0.92 correlation with ex-
port orientation, and a 0.95 correlation with imported input intensity. Export orientation
has a 0.86 correlation with imported input intensity.
    The picture that emerges is that US congressional districts differ systematically in their
overall trade openness with NAFTA. Locations that compete with NAFTA imports are
also the ones that export the most to NAFTA, and use most NAFTA inputs. For these
areas, a dismantling of NAFTA represents a larger fall in trade openness compared to
locations not engaged with NAFTA, and thus larger real income falls. These are also the
locations that on average voted for Trump.



                                             24
                                                                                                                     Figure 7: Heuristic measures, real wage changes and 2016 Trump vote

                                                                      Import exposure                                                                                                                                             Export orientation                                                                                                                                          Imported input intensity

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Real wage change




                            .1
                                                                                                                                                                                         .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .1
                                                                                                                                                          TX                                                                                                            TX                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TX



                                                                 Coeff = -3.539                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Coeff = -8.18                                                                                                                          Coeff = -6.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                 Std.Err. = 1.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Std.Err. = 0.40                                                                                                                        Std.Err. = 1.86
                                                                 R2 = .092                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R2 = .4                                                                                                                                R2 = .088
                                                                                                                             WY                                                                                                                    WY                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WY

                                                                                                                       WV                                                                                                                            WV                                                                                                                                                                                                   WV




                                                                                                                                                                                            -.1




                              -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.1
                                                                                                   NM                                                                                                                                 NM                                                                                                                                                                                                      NM
                                                                                                              ND                                                                                                                                     ND                   OK                                                                                                                                                                            ND
                                                                                                      TX                            OK                                                                                               TX TX                                                                                                                                                                                                    TX                                  OK
                                                                                            TX                          LA                                                                                                            AK         TX KY              LA                                                                                                                                                             TX                                  LA
                                                                                     TX    AK          TX     KY                                                                                                                    TX                                                                                                                                                                                  TX               AK TX KY
                                                                              TX    NM                                                                                                                                       TX NM                  OKWV                                                                                                                                                           TX         NM         OK
                                                                                                      OK WV
                                                                                                        NV                                                                                                                        CO                  NV                                                                                                                                                                                             WV
                                                                                    CO                                                                                                                                                             LAOK  TX        TX                                                                                                                                                                      CO NV        TX
                                                                                                   LAOK    TX TX                                                                                                                   MT                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA                   TX
                                                                                    MT                                                                                                                                                           WV                      TX                                                                                                                                                         MT OK




                                                                                                                                                                                   -.2
                                                                                                WV                   TX                                                                                            NY                   AZ                                                                                                                                                                                                  WV                 TX




                     -.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.2

                                                        NY                                           TX              TX                                                                                                                                    TX          TX                                                                                                                       NY                                                                TX
                                                         NY     FL                LAAZ         MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NY FLNV FLLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NY  FL             PA          MNTX                                                                                                                                            NY         FL           AZ LA
                                                           NY
                                                          NYNY FLFL
                                                                MD   NVFL CA           PA        TX              PA                                                                                                      FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NJFL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FMD  NMCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA     AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LA                                                                                                                                                  NY   NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NY             MDNVCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MN TX TX
                                                             NJ FL
                                                                FLMD
                                                                  FLFLCO
                                                                      TXFL
                                                                        NMAZ
                                                                           VA        AR
                                                                                     CO         TX                                                                                                                VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NY       MDCAFL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NYTX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LFLCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FLFL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NYTXTX CO TXTX TXTX MI PA                                                                                                                                 FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FL  FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FLFL NJ FL FLFL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FL    NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COMD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FL ARPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AZVA
                                                    NY
                                                    NYVA     MD
                                                             NY
                                                             MD  CAFLNY
                                                                    FL TX
                                                                      CONJ
                                                                        TX
                                                                       NY FL
                                                                          WAWA
                                                                            FL
                                                                             TXAZTXLA  CO         TX TX MI                                VA                                                                       NY      MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NY  FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MD  NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MDFL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AZ NC  FLCO  TX TX                                            VA                                                                              NY               MDCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NY  NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FL    NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NYNYTX FLTXFL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX LA CO TX           TX TX TX PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI                   VA
                                                      NY NY NY
                                                             MD
                                                             NVNYMD  NC
                                                                    NJ
                                                                     NY
                                                                      CA
                                                                     CO
                                                                     MD TXFL
                                                                           CO
                                                                           AZ MA
                                                                             NCFLCA      TXTX                                                                                                                          HIHIMDMAFLVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FLTX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FLCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NJNJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PANJCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CANJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CAGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CA  NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TXNY   OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CA         OR                                                                                                                  NY NY VA TX MDMD   NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FLFL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CONY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MDNV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX    NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CA  FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AZNC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FL        COTXCO
                                                      CA
                                                     VA      MA
                                                             HI
                                                            HI    FLFL
                                                                  VA
                                                                 MA NJ
                                                                    FLNJ
                                                                     FL
                                                                     FLNJ
                                                                        NY
                                                                       VA
                                                                       CACA
                                                                          PA
                                                                          NJ NJ
                                                                              GA
                                                                             CA NY
                                                                               CA
                                                                               FL
                                                                               CA CA
                                                                                 MD NY
                                                                                   CA
                                                                                  TXUTCA    OR
                                                                                           CA TX OR
                                                                                                              OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CAVANV        MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PA OHGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CA AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NJ NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CATX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MN   MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PAUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SC  WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TNLA     GA   ID   OHOK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PA                                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VA    MA  NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FLNJHINY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HI NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NJ NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA    CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CA  NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GA CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MD   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NYUT   CA ORTX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CA        OR            OH
                                                              GA
                                                             PA MAOH
                                                                 TNGA  AZ
                                                                       NJ
                                                                    NJCA
                                                                      NJ TX
                                                                          CA
                                                                         MN  MA CA PA WA
                                                                                   CACA
                                                                                   SC
                                                                                  CA   UTLA GA
                                                                                      TN           ID     PAOK                                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GA     CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TNNJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VAWA     VAMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AL CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PAMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MACA  NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MAMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GATNNJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NJPA MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CA   AZMACACATN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CACA  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CACA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SCUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WAGA       ID    PA OK               LA
                                                             GAPACA    TN
                                                                      VA WA
                                                                        WA VAMA MO
                                                                                VA
                                                                               CT
                                                                                PA
                                                                                MA
                                                                               CA ME
                                                                                  TX
                                                                                 KSTX
                                                                                  CT
                                                                                  MAALCA     NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PA NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CA NY LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DENEWATX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GA   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IN   UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CA  CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CACA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MN RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OHCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MA VT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MEMS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NY  SWA                                                                                                                           GA    PA TN    VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VA  KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MAWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CA MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CTME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PA CA VA   NYAL
                                                            CANY NJDE
                                                                    NE  LATXCA
                                                                             RI
                                                                            CA
                                                                          INIANC UT
                                                                                GA
                                                                                CACA
                                                                                 CA ID
                                                                                   CA
                                                                                   RI
                                                                                   CT CA
                                                                                     OH
                                                                                     MAME
                                                                                      IL VT
                                                                                          OR
                                                                                           NY  MS
                                                                                              WA
                                                                                              NH             OK                                                                                                                         MOILIL IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IL IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IN  IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ORNY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OH  NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ORWAILSCS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ILCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NH MIMS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA   NHMO OKUT                                                                                                            CA NE NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DE    IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MNTXCACANC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CARI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IN CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CT  UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MAMECA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IL  VT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NYSDMS  WA  LA         OK
                                                                      MO
                                                                       GAIL  ILMN
                                                                        ILILIL
                                                                        IL       NY
                                                                                  OH
                                                                                   MI
                                                                                  OH NC
                                                                                    PA
                                                                                    WAMO
                                                                                     OR
                                                                                     CT
                                                                                      OR SCSC
                                                                                          IL  SDAL
                                                                                             MO
                                                                                             IL
                                                                                             GA     MI AL MO
                                                                                                 VANH        MS UT                                                                                                                               IL  IL GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OHPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ILMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WANYKY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OHIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CT      TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AL TX               IL IN                                                                                                                 IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ILCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IL ILIL    OH MOOH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NYIN MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GA  OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CT SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ORMO    MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ILVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WANH       MOAL         UT     MS
                                                                             ILINNC
                                                                                 IL
                                                                                 OH
                                                                                IL   GA
                                                                                     MN
                                                                                    ILPA
                                                                                      WAPA
                                                                                       NYMN
                                                                                        NY
                                                                                         OH
                                                                                         CT KY
                                                                                           ILGA
                                                                                              PA       TX
                                                                                                       TX                   IL IN                                                                                                                  NC      OH  MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TN MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PANC TN      MO                  KY                                                                                                             MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IL NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IL IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IL PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OH   PA KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NYNY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OHIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CTGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GATX    WA     TXAL             IL      IN
                                                                            NC       OH   MI
                                                                                          NC
                                                                                         WI
                                                                                         MO
                                                                                          GA
                                                                                         TN     TN
                                                                                               PA                                       KY                                                                                                  CACAWA MN           MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VANEPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SC KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MSMI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KY NY       PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KY NC                                                                                                                            NC     WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OH   MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TNNCMO   GAPA                                     KY
                                                                                           MONE                                                                                                                                                                      NC                                                                                                                                                            TNNE             KS




                                                                                                                                                                         -.3
                                                                            CACA WA       VA
                                                                                         MNSC   MS
                                                                                               PA
                                                                                                MI
                                                                                                 KY
                                                                                                  KSNY MOKY NC    PA                                                                                                                                                   OH   KSAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NCWA                                                                                                                                       CACA  MO   VAKY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WA PA NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MIMN  SC    NCMO PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KY
                                                                                             NC                                                                                                                                                       CA                                                                                                                                                                           NC




           -.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.3




                                                                                   CA            OH     AL
                                                                                                         KS
                                                                                                         NC                   PA                                                                                                                                    PA WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NC WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OH MIMI NY MIIN KSPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MN             MS AL                                                                                                                                      OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AL                    IN          PA KSWA
                                                                                             PA
                                                                                              WINC MI WINY
                                                                                                    OHMI  WAMI KSIN
                                                                                                          MN                  MS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CA WI NCPA      NCWI MI KSMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OHMI         MINY MS            AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NE OH ILAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WIIA IA MI   TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GANC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ILSC                                                                                                                                                      IA
                                                                                                   NEIL    WI
                                                                                                            AL
                                                                                                           IA
                                                                                                                      GA TN AL
                                                                                                                      NC
                                                                                                                      MI                                                                                                                                  CA         AR  MN        OH       AR        IN                                                                                                                                    NEWIIL OH SCAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GA NC TNMI
                                                                                                 MN         OH IA ILAR
                                                                                                            OH SC                 IN                                                                                                                                  NC                   KYOH                                                                                                                                     MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AR             OH     IA AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OH          IL
                                                                                     CA NCAR                       KY OH SCWI                                                                                                                                             IN         GAIA       WIOHSC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SC MI                                                                                                                     CA NC                             KYSC




        Counterfactual wage change (with NTB)
                                                                                                                                                                     Counterfactual wage change (with NTB)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Counterfactual wage change (with NTB)




                                                                                                          GA  WI
                                                                                                               IA MI INSC MI OH                                                                                                                                                       TN WI TN MIAR        TNAL                                                                                                                                    GA   WI   IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SC MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WIOHIN
                                                                                                          TNTN                       TN    AL                                                                                                                 TX                                   IN                                                                                                                                               TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TN                             ALIN
                                                                                     TX                                   INAR                                                                                                                                                               WI WIMI                  IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ARIN TN              TX
                                                                                                                WI WI MI                                                                                                                                                                                   MI                    IN                                                                                                                         WI WI      MI
                                                                                                                                  MI            IN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MI        IN
                                                                                                                                                          IN                                                                                                                                                OH         GA                                                                                                                                                                               IN




                                                                                                                                                                                         -.4
                                                                                                                                 GA OH                                                                                                                                                                                      OH                                                                                                                          GA                         OH




                            -.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.4




                                                                                                                                                     OH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OH

                                                0                                  .01                   .02                                                   .03                                           0                 .005                     .01           .015                                      .02         .025                                              .01                                       .015                    .02                                                   .025
                                                                                     NAFTA import exposure                                                                                                                                            NAFTA export orientation                                                                                                                                          NAFTA imported input intensity




25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Trump vote




                            100
                                                                                                                                                                                         100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          100




                                                                                                               KY      TX                  AL                                                                                                          KY             TX                                        AL                                                                                                                            KY               TX               AL




                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80




                                                                                                           GATN                                           TX                                                                                                               TX       GA        TN                                                                                                                                                 GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TN                                             TX
                                                                                                    NE TX MO                     GA                                                                                                                                     TXMO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NE                                           GA                                                                                                              TX NE      MO   GA
                                                                                                      TXTX OK                TN     OK KY                                                                                                   TX         WV                OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OK                     TNKY                                                                                                                                        TX TX OK                          OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             KY
                                                               PA                                     TX              TX WV                                                                                                     PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TX TX          TX                                                                                                                                 PA                                           TXWVTX TN
                                                                                     AL     MOPA                           IL    WY                                                                                                            AL WY          MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PA                       IL                                                                                                                                    MO                                  IL
                                                                                   LA                     KS  MS
                                                                                                               OH                    TN   VA                                                                                       LA                                 OHMSKS                        VA     TN                                                                                                                   PALAAL             KS     OH       MS VATN WY
                                                                 FL            AZ                TN       WV
                                                                                                           MO           LAIN
                                                                                                                     KYSC                                                                                                   FL         AZ              WV         LATN       MO            KY      IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SC                                                                                                                                               WV MOSC  KY      LAIN
                                                                         FL               TN MO  WV
                                                                                                  KY OK TN               OH MSAL                IN                                                                                 FL         PA WVTN OK   TN                                 MS                      IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FLFL AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TN      TN TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PA     MO    WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OK                ARMS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PA                           IN
                                                                       FL          PATN LA                   AL PA AR           ININ                 OH                                                                         FL                   LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ND       MO KY PA AL AL TN AR          INGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OHAR ALIN    MI               OH                                                                                        FL              KYAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TN ALGA OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ND            AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LAALININMI                  OH
                                                                     FL             LA
                                                                                    TX MOGA       ALID AL NDTX    NC GA AR   OH MI                                                                                             FLFL PA LA          TX       MOAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IDTX                NC            OH                                                                                                                          LA     GA             AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NCTX                 OH
                                                                     FL PA MD                  AR
                                                                                               SD          MN
                                                                                                            IA         NC                                                                                                                    MD            GA  SD AR          OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MN IA IN         NC                                                                                                     FL FL PA TXTX      MD MO    AR SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GAMS             MNOKNCIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IA
                                                                FL     GA NCTX PANY        IL GA
                                                                                           VA
                                                                                                MS LA       TXOK SCIN
                                                                                                              MI KS                  OH                   IN                                                           FL                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GA TXLA PA    TX MSNY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ILVA                    MI   KS  SC            OH                   IN                                                                          GA FL NC PAILNY VA                LA SC  MI           TX        KSOH                       IN




                  60
                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60




                                                                                       TX
                                                                                       CAMNNCSC PA                         WI                                                                                                                FLCAWA         MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SC PA  MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NC                                                                                                                                              FL CAMNNC       WA                                WI                  TX
                                                                    FLCOAZFL FL WA
                                                                           CA       MTCO
                                                                                       GA  GA
                                                                                          TX  NE
                                                                                             OR
                                                                                            SC            NC
                                                                                                           MI WI
                                                                                                                  WI      SC                                                                                                    CO FLAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FLMT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CA                 OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GA       NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GA                       WIWI WI SC                                                                                                     FL     AZCOFLCAFL       COSCNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PANC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OR    SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MIWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WI    SC
                                                             NJ         TX
                                                                             FL OH         NC
                                                                                       OH TX  NC   KSOH                MI
                                                                                                                     ILWI MI                                                                                              NJ          FL CO TXOH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TX               OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TX          SCNC  OH NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KS NY                   MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IL WIMI                                                                                            TX     NJ            OH OH      NCNC  TX OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IL NY       KS                MI
                                                         NY                CA
                                                                           FLNC
                                                                            VA CA
                                                                                NY
                                                                               NCTX
                                                                                 CACAID
                                                                                    SC
                                                                                              ILMN NYTX
                                                                                              NY  VA     NY OHKY                                                                                                    NY               FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CANY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CATX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CA    SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NCID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NCMN  ILNY NC       TX        KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NYOH                                                                                                                              NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NC    VA CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TXIDCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NY  SC  NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CA VA MN     OHKY NY WI MI IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TX
                                                                 FL
                                                                  FL NYTX
                                                                        AZ      PA
                                                                                IN
                                                                                MO
                                                                               CA  OH NC
                                                                                      AR
                                                                                       WA
                                                                                        CO      AKMN
                                                                                                   TX OKNVPAWI                                                                                                             FL FLTXCONYAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AZ         INPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CA OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WA   NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TXTX VAPA MN             WI                                                                                                                  FLNYFL AZ  OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NY     MOPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CA NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          INAR     MN  OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AK   WI TX TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NVPA
                                                                        NJ GA
                                                                       NJ
                                                                       VA        OH
                                                                                  TXMI  MEOH TXTX                    MI MI                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VANJ AR GATX NYNV  OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MIME OH                                MI      MI                                                                                                  NJ VATXNJMIOH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TXGA    OH                             MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MI
                                                                FL NY   NJVA
                                                                                    NYIL   MI  WA
                                                                                                PA      NM      IA  UT                                                                                                     FL NY     NM NJNJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VA                      WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MI  PA     WI                                                                                                                                  NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY MIMEWA COTXNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IL     PA WAWI              UT
                                                              GA NE
                                                             NV        NJ    IA
                                                                              NJ PA         IL NH ILWI           IA                                                                                                   NV       GA NE    AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NJ                                     IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UT IAIA                                                                                                            FL NJ IA NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GA                        AZ NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PAIL             IL     IA IA
                                                             PA           TX FLKS    UT
                                                                                      AZ MN
                                                                                       CA
                                                                                        UT       TX  NH
                                                                                                 TX OR                                                                                                                        PA     TX  TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IAUT IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FL   KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PATXMN ILNH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA               NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NENJPANV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CAUT   TX        ORTX
                                                                      NY
                                                                      NVWA          CT
                                                                                    CA CT            MI                                                                                                                  NV         NY               CACT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CT NYOR MI             OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TXFL NY  KSAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WACTCA    CTUT     MIMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NY NH          OH
                                                            NY      FL    AZ CA  CA RI CAPANY
                                                                                     ILOR     GA       MI OH                                                                                                            NY      FLAZ WA   CA CARI      CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ORPA GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IL                    MI                                                                                                                 NY        FL CANV     RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ILCA  CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PAGA ORCA        MI
                                                                  VAFL
                                                                     DECO      MACAMN                                 IN                                                                                                      FL VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CODE MA CA              MN             IN                                                                                                                               FLVA MNMA                                                               IN




         Vote share
                                                                                                                                                                      Vote share
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Vote share




                                                                  CA
                                                               FLFL  NJ
                                                                      MDNY
                                                                         CA
                                                                          WA      CT         KY
                                                                                            CA          TX                                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FLFL      NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WA  NY      ILTX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CA   CT MO  KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DENJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FLFL CA     NYIL CT   CO MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WA    KY CA
                                                                             WA   ME MO                                                                                                                                              WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CO           ME                                                                                                                                                                     WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ME




        40
                                                                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40




                                                               FLFL              UT
                                                                             IL NY                                                                                                                                       FL FL     FL                                                                                                                                                           FL FL                      UT
                                                                 NY
                                                                  TN FL AZ CO
                                                                       CA       TX
                                                                                 MA     NY
                                                                                       WATX   PA                                                                                                                             TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TN CA TX              MANYWA NY PA                                                                                                                                      FL MDNY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TN        AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TXMACANY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TX      NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO PATX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WA
                                                                 FL       NJ    VA
                                                                               MA
                                                                                CT
                                                                                IL
                                                                                CA  CAMA
                                                                                       CANM
                                                                                          CT      OH                                                                                                                            FLNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AZ VAUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IN  MACT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CACA  MA             OH                                                                                                                          FL             CAMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CTIN      MAVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NMCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CA CT       OH
                                                                 MD FL NM
                                                                  MA FL       CA
                                                                              MA
                                                                           INRI  ILMACA CO
                                                                                        PA OR MS MI        WA                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FLMD NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FL NJPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MA        CA MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RICO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ILMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IL  CA CT MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OR        MI       WA            PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FLFLNJ  MA  CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IL IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RI        CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OR       MIMS                             PA WA
                                                                      TX                                                                                                                                                       TX     NJ                                                                                                                                                          MA NJMD    TX NM                  CA
                                                             NV
                                                             MD
                                                              NYMD NJVANJ AZ  IL CA                                                                                                                                   NV MDMD       NYAZ CA IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NJ                                                                                                                                                              MD NJ  ILNV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VAMD AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NY
                                                             MD
                                                            HI            MN  TX CA SC    VT      NC                                                                                                                                                       SC          NC                                                                                                                                    HI    CATX           SC NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VT
                                                             HI OH            CA
                                                                               CANC      WI             AL                                                                                                             HIHIMD OH TX     MNCA CA VT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CA      NC    WI AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MDHIMN        CA WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CA                               AL
                                                      VA              NCTX CA  CACA CA                                                                                                                             VA             NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TX          CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CA   CA  CA                                                                                                                                    VA   OH NC CA NC              CA
                                                                                CA               TX                                                                                                                             MA GA          CACA TX                                                                                                                                                  GA TX CACACA                           TX
                                                               PA
                                                                MAGACAIL CA
                                                                             CA
                                                                            IL    TXCA                                            Coeff = 2342.11                                                                               PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CA       ILCAIL   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TX                                                   Coeff = 2204.057                                                                           MA PA IL IL CA      TX    CA CA                                      Coeff = 4118.811
                                                                     COCA
                                                                        WA
                                                                        AZ
                                                                        LA CACA CA    OR                                                                                                                               NY      CACOCA AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LA WACA   CAGA OR                                                                                                                                                NY  CO CACA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AZ WA   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GACA OR               LA
                                                     VA
                                                           NY CANJ              GACA
                                                                                       CA       WI                                                                                                                  VA               NJ     ILCA                      WI                                                                                                                  VA           NJ ILCA       CA    CA WI
                                                           NYMD MD TNILCA                        TX                                                                                                                        MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MD       TN          CACACA                                                                                                                                             MD   TNNY CAMD                            TX




                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20




                                                    NY      CAFL      MOTXILMN                    TX MI                           Std.Err. = 161.50                                                              NY      FL CA          MO TXILMN TX     TX                 MI                         Std.Err. = 172.43                                                             NY         CA FL        MN                                MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TX                       Std.Err. = 296.88
                                                                             CA        OH MI                                            2                                                                                                      CA         OH MI                                                                                                                                              TXIL MOOH MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CA                                                         2
                                                                 FL                                                               R = .335                                                                                  FL                                                                         R2 = .241                                                                                  FL NY                                                                R = .326
                                                      NY NY NY
                                                             NY                      WA                                                                                                                            NY NY NY NY                          WA                                                                                                                              NY             NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IL NYCA                       WA
                                                             MA NJ IL CA
                                                             GA              CA                                                                                                                                              MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GA NJ IL CA      CA                                                                                                                                               MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GA NJ        CA
                                                      NY                 IL CA                                                                                                                                     NY                     IL CA                                                                                                                                         NY              IL CA
                                                      CA                                                                                                                                                          CA                                                                                                                                                                      CA
                                                                       CA                                          PA                                                                                                                CA                                          PA                                                                                                                         CA                                              PA
                                                    NY NY                                                                                                                                                        NYNY                                                                                                                                                               NY            NY




                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                0                                  .01                   .02                                                   .03                                           0                 .005                     .01           .015                                      .02         .025                                              .01                                       .015                    .02                                                   .025
                                                                                     NAFTA import exposure                                                                                                                                            NAFTA export orientation                                                                                                                                          NAFTA imported input intensity


     Notes: The top row of the Figure depicts the scatterplots of the real wage change at a congressional district level against each of the heuristic
     measures defined in Section 5.2. The bottom row of the Figure depicts the scatterplots of the Trump vote share against each of the heuristic measures
     defined in Section 5.2. The lines through the data are the OLS fit. The boxes report the coefficient, robust standard error, and the R2 of the bivariate
     regression.
    This discussion shows how misleading it can be to rely on simple heuristic measures,
especially in isolation. Looking at the strong positive correlation between the widely
used import exposure index and the Trump vote may lead one to conclude that revok-
ing NAFTA does indeed correspond to the economic interests of Trump-voting districts.
However, it turns out that the districts with a high import-exposure level are also system-
atically different along other pertinent dimensions, such as export orientation.
    Altogether, the patterns imply that the districts with higher import exposure would
actually lose systematically more from revoking NAFTA. To further illustrate this point,
Table 4 shows results of a regression of the real wage changes and vote shares on the three
heuristic measures. Columns 1-3 report the regressions underlying the bivariate plots in
Figure 7. Column 4 uses all three heuristics together. Now, the export orientation and im-
ported input intensity still have same the “intuitive” sign, but the import exposure indica-
tor switches sign and thus also becomes intuitive. Controlling for export orientation and
imported input intensity, locations with greater NAFTA import exposure experience rel-
atively positive (less negative) wage changes from revoking NAFTA. Columns 5 through
8 repeat the exercise for the Trump vote share. Here again, when all three heuristics are
included together, the sign on the import exposure coefficient is unchanged and remains
intuitive, but the sign on the export orientation switches in the expected direction: con-
trolling for import exposure, districts with higher NAFTA export orientation votes less
for Trump.




                                            26
                                                     Table 4: Vote shares and heuristic measures

                                               (1)     (2)       (3)      (4)                       (5)          (6)       (7)              (8)
           Dep. Var.:                            NAFTA rollback wage change                                    Trump vote share

           Export orientation              -8.178***                            -30.74***       2204.1***                                -1219.9**
                                            (0.401)                              (0.684)         (172.4)                                  (469.0)

           Import exposure                              -3.539**                 25.64***                     2342.1***                  2602.2***
                                                         (1.247)                  (0.880)                      (161.5)                    (671.1)




27
           Imported input intensity                                 -6.151**    -6.858***                                  4118.8***      1420.9
                                                                     (1.860)     (1.562)                                    (296.9)       (884.5)

           N. obs.                            435          435         435         435             435           435          435           435
           R2                                0.400        0.092       0.088       0.932           0.241         0.335        0.326         0.351

     Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5% level. In columns (1) to (4), the dependent
     variable is the percentage wage change caused by a revocation of NAFTA in the congressional district. In columns (5) to (8), the dependent variable
     is the vote share Donald Trump received during the 2016 presidential election in the congressional district. Variable definitions and sources are
     described in detail in the text.
6     Extensions and robustness

6.1    Mobile factors
All of the above analysis assumes that factors are immobile across sectors, and thus is
meant to capture the short-run effects. In this section, we instead allow factors to be mo-
bile across sectors, as is more standard in multi-sector trade models. Since cross-sectoral
factor movements are subject to large frictions even at multi-year horizons (Artuç et al.,
2010; Dix-Carneiro, 2014), this exercise is meant to capture the long-run effects. Note that
in this environment, factor market clearing ensures that factor prices are the same in all
sectors, and thus there is a single factor price change for each factor of production (capital
and the three types of labor). However, there are still distributional effects across workers
according to skill type, and across geographic locations according to the skill composition
of the labor force.

                         Table 5: Skill-specific wage and welfare changes

                           Real wage change, %
                    High skill Medium skill Low skill                  Total welfare change, %         in bln. US$

                                            Tariff and NTB baseline
 Canada                -1.40            -1.29          -0.29                       -2.06                  -34.70
 Mexico                -1.18            -1.89          -0.72                       -1.56                  -19.03
 United States         -0.31            -0.33          -0.38                       -0.23                  -41.35

                                                    Tariff only
 Canada                -0.27            -0.39           -0.49                      -0.07                  -1.098
 Mexico                -0.33            -0.67            0.02                      -0.14                  -1.691
 United States         -0.05            -0.06           -0.10                      -0.01                  -2.305

                                            Tariff and uniform NTB
 Canada                -1.86            -1.99          -1.79                       -2.00                  -33.61
 Mexico                -1.44            -2.56          -1.37                       -1.67                  -20.37
 United States         -0.27            -0.28          -0.31                       -0.24                  -42.69
Notes: This table reports the aggregate real wage changes for each skill type, and the total welfare changes,
in percentage points and in billion US$, for the NAFTA countries under the three NAFTA revocation sce-
narios.


   Table 5 reports the real wage changes by skill type. In the United States, in all scenarios
the wage changes increase with skill: more skilled workers are hurt less by dismantling of
NAFTA. Intriguingly, the pattern is U-shaped in Mexico, with the medium-skilled work-


                                                     28
ers hurt the most by NAFTA dissolution in all scenarios. In Canada, all skill types are
worse off, but the relative ranking is not stable across scenarios, indicating sensitivity to
assumptions on the pattern of trade cost changes across sectors.
    The fourth and fifth columns report the total proportional and dollar amount welfare
changes. These are very similar to the baseline, indicating that assumptions on cross-
sectoral factor mobility are not crucial for the aggregate welfare. A similar result was
found by Levchenko and Zhang (2013).
    Turning to the geographic distribution of real wage changes, we construct congres-
sional district average real wage changes by using skill shares in each district, similarly
to the immobile factor case:
                                                      
                                                 w
                                     ∑ ωsc
                                                 bsn
                                                     −1 ,
                                      s          Pbn
where ωsc is the share of skill s in district c. Thus, districts with more skilled workers lose
relatively less in the long run from the dismantling of NAFTA, as their wages fall by less.
Note that the range of wage changes across skills, at only 0.07 percentage points in the
baseline, is far smaller than the range of wage changes across sectors in the specific-factors
model, which was about 5 percentage points. Thus, as expected the range of average
wage changes across locations is also quite small, about 0.02 percentage points. Figure 8
presents the scatterplots of the revocation of NAFTA against the Trump vote share. There
is still a systematically negative relationship between the long-run district-level real wage
change and the Trump vote. In fact, in several scenarios this relationship is stronger than
in the specific-factors case.




                                                 29
                          Figure 8: Real wage changes and 2016 Trump vote, mobile factors
                        Congressional district level                      State level

                                                                                                                       Tariff and NTB baseline




                                                                                                                                                                  80
       80




                                          KY                   AL     TX
                                                                  TX GA
                                                                       TN
                                                             GA  MO                         NETX
                                                               WVTX  TXOK TX
                                                                  KYTX        TN OK
                                                                                       PAMOIL AL
                                                                            MS  OH KS PA                    WY
                                                                     VA      TN LA     WVTNMOFL                                                                                             WV                                                                                                WY
                                                                   LA      SCKYAZ      IN
                                                                    MSAL     TN TN
                                                                                WV      FLMO OK                   PA                                                                                                      OK
                                                                   ARARAL LAGA FL    ININ PA
                                                                                          OHOH
                                                                                             AL KYIN
                                                                                               TN
                                                               LATX GA        NCFL AL      MI      ID
                                                                                                  MO         ND                                                                                                                                                                               ND
                                                                                 AR OHTX FL         MNMD                  PA                                                                 KY AL                                                                                 SD




                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                           MS    GA TXNCPA        OK     SDIL
       60




                                                                         LA  NC                 IN   IA                                                                                       AR                TN
                                                                TX           IN     VA FL MI OH NY GA
                                                                                     SC            KS
                                                                                                                          MN                                                                                                                                     ID                 NE
                                                     CA     WA            SC
                                                                          NCNC     TX       AZ
                                                                                            AZ  PA
                                                                                                FL   FL
                                                                                                    WI MI  WICO NE                                                         MS          LA
                                                                    GA      SC      TX GAOR    SC         FL      MT    CO                                                                                                        IN                   MO                           KS
                                                                               FL NC
                                                                                   NC        OH
                                                                                             IL  CAOH
                                                                                                   MI
                                                                                                  OH  WI  WI
                                                                                                           KS
                                                                                                          MI       NJ                                                                                               SC                                                                                         MT
                                                             CA                CA NY     TX NY
                                                                                           KY    IL                               TX
                                                                CA TX          TX
                                                                                VA CA   FL FL
                                                                                       OK      NYNY ID MN
                                                                                                   OH      NY
                                                                                                      NCINSC
                                                                                                     NC     NC
                                                                                                            VA
                                                                                                           MN FL
                                                                                                              OHNY TX MO PA
                                                                             TX        NV AZ
                                                                                      PA      TXAR   WI        AK                                                                  TX
                                    CA                                                TX
                                                                                        TX NJ ME   MI
                                                                                                  NY MIOHGAWA
                                                                                                      CO       NJOH        MI                                                                                             GANC                              OH                           IA         AK
                                                                     NM        FL            PA MI    WAVAWI  UT
                                                                                                             IL
                                                                                                            IA
                                                                                                           NY                                                                                                                  FL
                                                                                                           VA
                                                                                                          NJ
                                                                                                           IA NJ
                                                                                                               NEIL
                                                                                                                  IA GA
                                                                                                                      NH                                                                                                  AZ                                       PA
  Vote share




                                                                                                                                                             Vote share
                                                                     TX       NV AZPA     TXIL OR FL PA       UT      NJ MN                                                                                                                                       MI                    WI                                NH
                                                       TX
                                                        CA                                CA
                                                                                          MI       NY        UT
                                                                                                             CTCT NH       KS                                                                          NV
                                                                             NV             AZ
                                                                                          CA RIOHFL   NY            WA                                                                                                                                                         VA               UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ME                        MN
                                                                 GACA
                                                                CA                           CA        ORIL MI PANY VA                                                                                                                                                                                             CO
                                                                     CA           FL              DE                                                                                                                                                         DE
                                                                                          IN                   MACO




                                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                             MN
      40




                                                                         FL     CA        CA      FL MO              NJ
                                                                                                                    NY
                                                                                                                   CT
                                                                                                                   MD                                                                                  NM                                                                           NJ              CT
                                 TX CA                                                                KY
                                                                                                      COIL WA
                                                                                                           WAUT         ME                                                                                                                                                     OR
                       TX           TX                               FL          CA         AZ    FL
                                                                                               PATN  FL    NYNY        MA
                                                                                                                       WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RI                  IL
                                                                                               VA                                                                                                                                                                                             WA
                                CA                         CA
                                                              MS CA           FL CANM IN
                                                                                      FL RI CA
                                                                                                OH FLMA NJMA
                                                                                                  IL           CT
                                                                                                              MD CT
                                                                                                                     MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NY
                                                                            TX                  PA IL MA WA
                                                                                                NM
                                                                                                MI              ORMA   PA      CO                                                                                                                                                              MD
                                                                CA     NY NV AZ                       NJ
                                                                                                     IL
                                                                                                     MD              MD                                                                                                                                                                                       MA
                                                                                              VA                NJ                                                                          CA
                                                                      NC CA                 TX
                                                                                            SC                HI VTMN MD                                                                                                                                                                       HI                    VT
                                                             CA                     AL CA CA NC HIOH               NC       WI
                                                       TX    CACA
                                                               CA CA      CA                                  GA              VA
                                                                     TX                PACAIL                      MA
                                                                        TX                     CA IL CA       CA         WA
                                                               CA NY CACA               LA AZ ILGANJ WI      CA CO
                                                                                                              CA OR
                       Coeff = -543.26                                                                                                                                                           Coeff = -1773.982




                                                                                                                                                                  20
       20




                                                                     TX                                     CA
                                                                                                           MD CA                       VA
                                                        NY                                  TNILMD
                                                                                                NY            MO CA MN
                       Std.Err. = 289.93                       TX
                                                               CA
                                                                              MI     TX         FL MI
                                                                                                     OH                                                                                          Std.Err. = 677.18
                                                                              FL
                       R2 = .01                                CA
                                                               CA
                                                                        NY
                                                                       NY               NY NY
                                                                                       NJ     IL                                                                                                 R2 = .13
                                                                                                            GA            WA
                                                                                                                         MA
                                                               CA                       NY
                                                               CA                             IL                     CA
                                                                                                      PA CA
                                    NY                                         NY
       0




                                                                                                                                                                  0
               -.345                 -.34                     -.335          -.33                                       -.325                    -.32                     -.334                         -.332             -.33             -.328                                                                                       -.326
                                                        Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                     Average real wage change (in %)




                                                                                                                                                Tariff only
                                                                                                                                                                  80
       80




                                                   KY             AL        TX
                                                                       TX   GA
                                                                           TN
                                                                  GA MO                    NE TX
                                                                          OK
                                                                    WVKYTXTX
                                                                          TX   TN TXOK
                                                                                         ILPA
                                                                                         MO         AL WY
                                                                         VA MSOH
                                                                               TNAZLA    KS PA                                                                                              WV                                                                                          WY
                                                                       LA     KY
                                                                              SC       WV
                                                                                      IN     TN
                                                                                              MOFL
                                                                        MSAL TN   TN
                                                                                 WV        FL
                                                                                           MOOKAL               PA                                                                                                         OK
                                                                     ARAR AL LA   GA  IN
                                                                                      INPA
                                                                                     FL     OH  KY
                                                                                                TN
                                                                   LA TX
                                                                       GA           ALOH
                                                                                 NCOH    MITX
                                                                                                 IN
                                                                                                MOID       ND
                                                                                                                          PA                                                                     KY                                                                                           ND
                                                                                    FL          FLOK MD                                                                                                AL
                                                                               NC AR            MN                                                                                                                                                                                 SD
                                                                                                                                                                  60




                                                                           LAMS      GA NCTX           SDIL
       60




                                                                                               IN
                                                                                              PA IA                 GA                                                                           AR                  TN
                                                                    TX         IN      VASC FL
                                                                                           MI  OHKS NY                    MN                                                                                                                                     ID                     NE
                                                             CA WA          SC
                                                                            NC  NC   TX        AZ
                                                                                                WI
                                                                                               AZ
                                                                                                FL   FL WI NECO
                                                                                                    MI
                                                                                                    PA                                                                       MS             LA
                                                                        GA    SC        GAOR
                                                                                          TX     SC     FL MT CO                                                                                                                   IN                   MO                                KS
                                                                                FL NC      IL OHCA OH
                                                                                                   MI
                                                                                                  OHWI WI
                                                                                                       MIKS          NJ                                                                                                   SC                                                                                   MT
                                                                  CA                CA NYNY
                                                                                   TX       TX
                                                                                            NY IL
                                                                                              KYNY ID
                                                                                                    MNNC      NYNC TX                TX
                                                                     CA     TX      VA CAOK
                                                                                          FLTXFL
                                                                                               AZMI
                                                                                                   OH
                                                                                                   TX
                                                                                                  AR WI MNNCINFL
                                                                                                              VA
                                                                                                             SCOHNY
                                                                                                              AK         MO PA                                                                    TX
                                              CA                                    TX
                                                                                     PA NV     ME   MICO WA
                                                                                                      OH       NJ                                                                                                                                           OH                          IA          AK
                                                                                              TX  NY           GA OH                                                                                                              GANC
                                                                          NM        FL PANJ        WA MI
                                                                                                       WI
                                                                                                        IAIA
                                                                                                             VA
                                                                                                            ILUT
                                                                                                           VA NY
                                                                                                               NJ NJIL NH GA
                                                                                                                            MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FL
                                                                                                                 IA
                                                                                                                  NE                                                                                                             AZ                                   MI PA
  Vote share




                                                                                                                                                             Vote share




                                                                            TX  NV AZ IL    PA    TX FL UT      PA
                                                                                                               UT         NJ MN                                                                                                                                                         WI                                        NH
                                                              TX
                                                             CA                         MI AZOH   CA
                                                                                                 OR     NY CTCT     NH        KS                                                                        NV
                                                                              NV                  CA  NY               WA                                                                                                                                                                          VA UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ME                          MN
                                                                     CA
                                                                     GA    CA
                                                                            CA                      CAFL
                                                                                                    RI  OR IL  MI      PA NY                                                                                                                                                                                                    CO
                                                                                    FL
                                                                              FL CA IN CA MO
                                                                                                    DE           MA CO         MNVA                                                                                                                                    DE
                                                                                                                                                                 40
      40




                                                                                                     FL                CTNJ                                                                                                                                                                              NJ              CT
                                          TXCA                                                          WAIL NYNY
                                                                                                       KY
                                                                                                        CO            MD                                                                                       NM
                               TX            TX                            FL        CA        AZ FL
                                                                                              PA       TNNY UT    NY ME    MA
                                                                                                                          WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RI                IL        OR
                                                                CA                       NM    VA                MA   CT                                                                                                                                    NY                                       WA
                                         CA
                                                                   MS      CA      FL CA  IN OHFL
                                                                                                   NMCAMAILILNJ CT
                                                                                                               WAMD      MA
                                                                                                                        MA
                                                                                 TX FL PA      RIMI            MA  ORPA          CO                                                                                                                                                                                 MD
                                                                     CA         NV AZ                        NJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MA
                                                                              NY
                                                                                  CA            VA MDIL              NJ MD                                                                                   CA
                                                                         NC                   SCTX CA HIHI VT MN                 MD                                                                                                                                                                 HI                             VT
                                                                     CA CA              AL                         OHNC      WI
                                                              TX     CA CA        CA              CA NC                             VA
                                                                           CA                                     GA     MA
                                                                            TX              PACACA  IL
                                                                               TX                            IL CACA CO WA
                                                                        CA NY CA LA AZ IL              GA NJ   WI CA CA OR
                     Coeff = -1460.294                                                                                                                                          Coeff = -2982.634
                                                                                                                                                                  20
       20




                                                                                                                     CA                         VA
                                                                NY          TX                     MD NYMD
                                                                                               TN IL              MO
                                                                                                                      CA
                     Std.Err. = 377.88                                  TX
                                                                        CA
                                                                                 MI          TX FLOH  MI                    MN
                                                                                                                           CA                                                   Std.Err. = 766.12
                     R2 = .043                                                  NYFL
                                                                               NY                                                                                               R2 = .214
                                                                        CA
                                                                        CA                    NJ NY IL
                                                                                                    NY           GA         WAMA
                                                                        CA                         NY
                                                                        CA                          IL                       CA
                                                                                                    PA                 CA
                                              NY                                            NY
       0




                                                                                                                                                                  0




               -.075                          -.07              -.065             -.06                                                          -.055                     -.066                                    -.064                  -.062                                                                                        -.06
                                                  Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                                 Average real wage change (in %)




                                                                                                                       Tariff and uniform NTB
                                                                                                                                                                  80
       80




                                         KY                     AL      TX
                                                                   TX    GA
                                                                         TN
                                                             GA   MO                             TX
                                                                                                  NE
                                                                                          OK
                                                               WVTXKYTXTX OK TX   TN
                                                                                          PA MO IL AL                 WY
                                                                       VA      MSTN LAOH IN  KS PA                                                                                                     WV                                                                                                 WY
                                                                    LA             AZ
                                                                                  KY
                                                                              SC TN         WV TN    MOFL
                                                                     MSAL       TN   WV     FL MOOK  KYIN                  PA                                                                                                      OK
                                                                    AR AR A L    LA GA    IN
                                                                                          FL   PAOH
                                                                                                AL
                                                                                            IN OH   TN                ND
                                                               LA                      ALOH     MI MO      ID
                                                                 TX GA            NC FL    TX        FL       MD                  PA                                                                   KY AL                                                                                                  ND
                                                                                NC AR                   OKMN                                                                                                                                                                                   SD
                                                                                                                                                                  60




                                                                            LAMS     GA TX NC PA             IA SD
       60




                                                                                                      IN                                                                                                 AR               TN
                                                                TX               IN      SC FL MI
                                                                                        VA                OH NYILGA
                                                                                                          KS
                                                                                                                                  MN                                                                                                                                          ID               NE
                                                   CA      WA                 SC
                                                                              NC
                                                                               NC      TX      AZ PA
                                                                                               AZ    FL     FL
                                                                                                            WI   MI WI CONE                                                       MS             LA
                                                                      GA       SC       TX GAOR                   FL       MT CO                                                                                                                  IN              MO                           KS
                                                            CA
                                                                                   FL NC
                                                                                  CA
                                                                                       NC   TXKY  ILSCCA
                                                                                                 OH
                                                                                                 NY     IL
                                                                                                          OH
                                                                                                          MIWI MI
                                                                                                         OH
                                                                                                         NYID
                                                                                                                   WI
                                                                                                                    KS NJ
                                                                                                                   NY                      TX                                                                               SC                                                                                                MT
                                                                                  TXVA NY CA                       NC
                                                                                                                  MN
                                                                CA TX                      OK
                                                                                           FL AZFL NYNC   OH
                                                                                                           NC
                                                                                                            WI  INSCVA
                                                                                                                   MN  FL
                                                                                                                      OHAK TX MO PA
                                                                                                                        NY
                              CA                                               TX           NV TX AR
                                                                                         TXPA             MI
                                                                                                         ME  CO
                                                                                                            MIOH GA NJOH
                                                                                                                        WA                                                                  TX                                                                          OH                           IA             AK
                                                                      NM                  TX NJ NY               VA                 MI                                                                                           GA NC
                                                                                 FL                PA MIWA       NJWI
                                                                                                                  NY
                                                                                                                   VA ILUT
                                                                                                                     NJ
                                                                                                                     IA ILIA GA                                                                                                   AZ         FL                                PA
                                                                                                                       NE      NH
  Vote share




                                                                                                                                                             Vote share




                                                                     TX          NV      AZPA IL                     PAUT     NJ                                                                                                                                               MI                   WI                               NH
                                                      TX                                    TX
                                                                                            CA            OR     FL CTUT NH       KSMN
                                                       CA                       NV             MI NY
                                                                                            CAAZ RI OH       NY CT          WA                                                                                 NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VA                     UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ME                   MN
                                                                CACACA
                                                                 GA                            CA              FL
                                                                                                               OR
                                                                                                               IL     MI PA   NY                                                                                                                                                                                             CO
                                                                                      FL      IN         DE             MA CO      VAMN                                                                                                                                  DE
                                                                                                                                                                 40
      40




                                                                          FL        CA       CA         FL  MO           CT
                                                                                                                         MD NJ
                                                                                                                            NY                                                                                 NM                                                                             NJ               CT
                             TX CA                                                                      FLFLCOIL WA
                                                                                                             KY     WAUT         ME                                                                                                                                                          OR
                TX              TX                                  FL              CA         AZ PA  TN         NYNYNY       MA
                                                                                                                               WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RI                IL
                             CA                           CA                          CA  NM
                                                                                         IN        VAOHIL   MA        MA
                                                                                                                   NJMD CT
                                                                                                                       CT MA                                                                                                                  NY                                                         WA
                                                              MS CA             FL
                                                                               TX         FL RI CA  NM
                                                                                                    MI
                                                                                                          FL
                                                                                                      PAIL MA           ORMA PA
                                                                                                                        WA              CO                                                                                                                                                               MD
                                                                CA               NV AZ                    NJ                                                                                                                                                                                                            MA
                                                                       NY                         VA ILMD              NJ MD                                                                     CA
                                                                        NCCA                  TX
                                                                                               SC                      HI VTMN MD                                                                                                                                                                             HI                  VT
                                                            CA
                                                             CA                          AL CA CA NC                  HIOHNC         WI
                                                      TX    CA
                                                             CA CA        CA                                          GA MA          VA
                                                                     TX                   PA CA ILCA IL CA
                                                                         TXCA CA                                     CA
                                                                                                                    CA CO ORWA
                                                             CA     NY                      LA AZ ILGA
                            Coeff = -745.731                                                              NJ CA     WI
                                                                                                                   CA                                                                            Coeff = -3213.641
                                                                                                                                                                  20
       20




                                                                     TX                                            CA
                                                                                                                  MD                            VA
                                                      NY                                       TN
                                                                                               NY ILMD               MOCA
                            Std.Err. = 569.88                 TX
                                                             CA
                                                                                  MI TX             FL MI
                                                                                                            OH
                                                                                                                                 MN                                                              Std.Err. = 1383.13
                                                                                FL
                            R2 = .005                        CA
                                                             CA
                                                                       NY
                                                                       NY                NY
                                                                                          NJ NY IL                                                                                               R2 = .109
                                                                                                                  GA           MAWA
                                                             CA                          NY
                                                             CA                                 IL                        CA
                                                                                                               PA CA
                              NY                                               NY
       0




                                                                                                                                                                  0




                     -.288                -.286        -.284        -.282                                                  -.28                 -.278                     -.284                         -.283             -.282            -.281                                                                                       -.28
                                              Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                               Average real wage change (in %)


Notes: This figure depicts the scatterplots of the average real wage change from revoking NAFTA and the
2016 Trump vote share by congressional district (left side) and state (right side) under the assumption of
perfect factor mobility across sectors, along the OLS fit. The boxes report the coefficient, robust standard
error, and the R2 of the bivariate regression.
                                                                                                                                                        30
6.2    Varying the productivity dispersion parameter
In this robustness check, we repeat the main counterfactuals using alternative values of
θ = {2.5; 8}. These values represent the typical range of θ used in the trade literature. Ta-
ble 6 shows the employment weighted average wage change for the different values of θ.
Table 6 presents the aggregate real wage changes and welfare changes. We only report the
baseline NTB scenario (the others deliver similar results and are available upon request).
The alternative values of θ produce quite similar overall welfare changes. Appendix Fig-
ures A1 and A2 present the scatterplots of Trump vote against real wage changes at the
congressional district level for the two alternative values of θ. The overall patterns are the
same as in the baseline.

Table 6: Aggregate real wage changes and welfare changes for different θ (Tariff and NTB
baseline)

                       Real wage change, %            Total welfare change, %      in bln. US$

                                              θ = 2.5
      Canada                     -1.93                          -2.25                 -37.76
      Mexico                     -1.97                          -1.77                 -21.59
      United States              -0.32                          -0.26                 -46.97

                                               θ=8
      Canada                     -1.40                          -2.00                 -33.64
      Mexico                     -1.59                          -1.72                 -21.00
      United States              -0.23                          -0.19                 -34.73

Notes: This table reports the aggregate real wage changes and the total welfare changes, in percentage
points and in billion US$, for the NAFTA countries under the two alternative values of θ.




6.3    Difference with Romney vote
It may be informative to focus on voters that changed their vote in the 2016 election.
To this end, Appendix Figure A3 shows the scatterplots of the difference between the
Trump 2016 vote share and the Romney 2012 vote share against the average real wage
change at the congressional district level (left panel) and state level (right panel). Negative
correlations are if anything more pronounced for the Trump-Romney increment than the
Trump vote itself, especially at the state level.




                                                 31
7    Conclusion
Today’s global production arrangements will lead to strong spillovers of protectionist
policies. Barriers to input trade can reduce the competitiveness of domestic industries
as internationally sourced inputs become more expensive. In a global input-output net-
work, a tariff aimed at one specific trade partner or import sector ultimately affects all
sectors of the domestic economy, yet very heterogeneously so. It is thus a domestic redis-
tributive policy. In a highly interconnected world economy with supply chains crossing
country borders, it is not transparent which workers stand to gain or lose from trade pol-
icy changes. In this paper, we undertake a quantitative assessment of both the aggregate
and the distributional effects of one proposed trade policy change: revoking NAFTA.
    We find that NAFTA revocation lowers real incomes in the large majority of sectors
in all three NAFTA countries, and that average wages fall in nearly all US congressional
districts, and in all Mexican states and Canadian provinces. Within this range of nega-
tive values, however, these are still differences in outcomes across locations. Correlating
real wage changes with recent voting patterns, we show that if anything Trump-voting
congressional districts would lose relatively more from the revocation of NAFTA. Our
results underscore the difficulty of making simple heuristic judgements about who gains
and loses from trade policy changes in the current global economy.




                                            32
References
Artuç, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren, “Trade Shocks and Labor Ad-
  justment: A Structural Empirical Approach,” American Economic Review, June 2010, 100
  (3), 1008–45.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China Syndrome: Local
 Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic
 Review, October 2013, 103 (6), 2121–68.

Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
  NAFTA,” Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (1), 1–44.

Costinot, Arnaud and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quan-
 tifying the Consequences of Globalization,” in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and
 Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2014, chap-
 ter 4, pp. 197–261.

Deardorff, Alan V. and Robert M. Stern, Computational Analysis of Global Trading Arrange-
 ments, Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 1990.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum, “Global Rebalancing with Gravity:
 Measuring the Burden of Adjustment,” IMF Staff Papers, July 2008, 55 (3), 511–540.

Dhingra, Swati, Hanwei Huang, Gianmarco Ottaviano, João Paulo Pessoa, Thomas
 Sampson, and John Van Reenen, “The costs and benefits of leaving the EU: trade ef-
 fects,” Economic Policy, October 2017, 32 (92), 651–705.

Dix-Carneiro, Raphael, “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics,” Economet-
 rica, May 2014, 83 (3), 825–885.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel S. Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Economet-
  rica, September 2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.

Felbermayr, Gabriel, Marina Steininger, Erdal Yalcin et al., “Global Impact of a Protec-
  tionist US Trade Policy,” ifo Forschungsberichte, 2017.

Galle, Simon, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Moises Yi, “Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the
 Aggregate and Distributional Effects of Trade,” August 2017. mimeo, BI Norwegian
 Business School, UC Berkeley, and US Census Bureau.



                                           33
Harrison, Glenn W., Thomas F. Rutherford, and David G. Tarr, “Quantifying the
 Uruguay Round,” The Economic Journal, 1997, 107 (444), 1405–1430.

Hertel, Thomas W., ed., Global Trade Analysis: Modeling and Applications, New York: Cam-
 bridge University Press, 1997.

Jones, Ronald, “A Three-Factor Model in Theory, Trade, and History,” in Jagdish Bhag-
  wati, ed., Trade, Balance of Payments, and Growth: Papers in International Economics in
  Honor of Charles P. Kindleberger, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1971.

Levchenko, Andrei A. and Jing Zhang, “The Global Labor Market Impact of Emerging
  Giants: a Quantitative Assessment,” IMF Economic Review, August 2013, 61 (3), 479–519.

   and , “The Evolution of Comparative Advantage: Measurement and Welfare Impli-
  cations,” Journal of Monetary Economics, April 2016, 78, 96–111.

Mussa, Michael, “Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of Factor Speci-
 ficity, Substitutability, an Intensity in the Short and Long Run,” Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 1974, 82, 1191–1203.

Timmer, Marcel P., Erik Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J.
  de Vries, “An Illustrated User Guide to the World Input–Output Database: the Case
  of Global Automotive Production,” Review of International Economics, August 2015, 23
  (3), 575–605.




                                             34
Appendix A                     Solution algorithm
To solve equations (8) to (15) start by guessing {ŵ jn , r̂ jn } and use the following algorithm.

   i. Solve for p̂ jn using equations (14) and (12):
                                                                                          N                                        − 1θ
                                                                         p̂ jn =          ∑       π j,mn (ĉ jm κ̂ j,mn )      −θ
                                                                                         m =1
                              N                                                J                                            −θ − 1θ
                                                     α jm 1−α jm  β jm                               1− βim
                              ∑                                                ∏( p̂im )γij,m
                                       j
                p̂ jn =              π j,mn       ŵ jm r̂ jm                                                       κ̂ j,mn
                              m =1                                             i =1

      which can be solved iteratively. Then use p̂ jn to solve for ĉ jn and P̂n :

                                                                                J
                                                      α jn 1−α jn β                                 1− β jn
                                       ĉ jn = (ŵ jn r̂ jn         )
                                                                    jn
                                                                              ∏( p̂in )γij,n
                                                                              i =1
                                                                                            J
                                                                                          ∏
                                                                                                            ξ jn
                                                                               P̂n =                p̂ jn
                                                                                           j =1


  ii. Solve for π̂ j,mn using equation (11) and ĉ jn :

                                                                          (ĉ jm κ̂ j,mn )−θ
                                              π̂ j,mn =      N
                                                            ∑m 0 =1 π j,m0 n ( ĉ jm0 κ̂ j,m0 n )
                                                                                                  −θ


  iii. Use equations (8) and (9) to solve for Ŷjn and Q̂ jn :

                          J                       J                              J       0   bi,mn pbin Q
                                                                                       τi,mn π                 i,mn pin Qin
                                                                                                        b in π
      p̂ jn Ŷjn =    ∑ wbin SLin + ∑ brin SKin + ∑ ∑                                       1 + τ 0 i,mn                        In
                                                                                                                                            +D
                                                                                                                                             b n SDn
                      i =1                    i =1                      m 6 = n i =1


                                                                J                                   N
                                                                                                        π̂i,nm πi,nm p̂im Q̂im ( pim Qim ) 
      p̂ jn Q̂ jn ( p jn Q jn ) = p̂ jn Ŷjn ( p jn Yjn ) + ∑ (1 − β in )γ ji,n                     ∑                      0
                                                              i =1                                 m =1
                                                                                                                  (1 + τi,nm   )

      This can be solved iteratively.

  iv. update the next guess for ŵ jn , r̂ jn from the labor market clearing condition

                                                                 N            b j,nm pbjm Q
                                                                              π           b jm π j,nm p jm Q jm
                                                                ∑m =1                          0
                                                                                          1+τj,nm
                                       b jn = b
                                       w      r jn =                                     π j,nm p jm Q jm
                                                                                                                      .
                                                                             N
                                                                            ∑m =1            1+τj,nm


      the solution is defined up to a numeraire, and in updating the ŵ jn and r̂ jn ’s, re-set a

                                                                     35
numeraire country’s ŵ1 = 1 (where country 1, sector 1 is the numeraire). Then the
actual next guess to be returned to step 1 is:


                                          w̃ˆ next
                                              jn
                                ŵnext
                                  jn     = next                              (A.1)
                                           ˆ
                                          w̃    11
                                            r̃ˆnext
                                               jn
                                 r̂ next
                                    jn =                                     (A.2)
                                            w̃ˆ 11
                                                next




                                     36
                                           Figure A1: Real wage changes and 2016 Trump vote, θ = 2.5

                      Congressional district level                                                                                                                                                                          State level

                                                                                                                  Tariff and NTB baseline




                                                                                                                                                              80
       80




                                 AL                                   TX        KY
                                  GA                                                                                              TX
                                  TN
                       GA               NE         TX
                                                    MO
                                         TN KY             OK TX TX                  OK
                                                                         TX           TX          WV
                                                 MOIL ALPA                                                WY
                                              KS PAMSOH       VA
                              TNINSCKY             TN
                                                  MO               AZFL LA WV LA                                                                                                                                                                                  WV                                           WY
                                 TN OH    ALMS AL TNMO PA FL WVOK                                                                                                                                                                                 OK
                       OH IN          AR
                                     IN  AL
                                          GA     KY
                                                  IN        TNLA   PA   FL
                            MIAR                   GAAL ID      PA LA
                                                                                       ND                                                                                                                                                                                                   ND
                                  OHAR MN NCMO              TX FL
                                                              MD     FL       TX                                                                                                               AL KY SD




                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                      SD
                                                      MSOK GA
       60




                                        NC INKS PA
                                       IA                      TX                                                                                                                            AR TN
                         OH
                         IN             SC    MI VA NY
                                                      IL GA      NC        FLLATX                                                                                                                  NE     ID
                                  WI NCTX NC
                                    WI
                                   SC         WANEPAMN
                                                  GA
                                                     SC CA     AZFLFL
                                                                MI
                                                               AZ   CO
                                                                     CO MT
                                                                     FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MS                                              LA
                             WI                   NCGA
                                                 SC         OR TX  FLCA                                                                                                            IN               KS MO
                            MI
                             WI          MI OH
                                        IL      NCKS
                                                 NY
                                                KY
                                                       OH
                                                      ILOH     CA  TX
                                                                    TX NJ                                                                                                                     SC                                                   MT
                                        OH    NY    NC
                                                   TX   ID
                                                         NY CA CA
                                                               NY FL   MN
                                                                     VAFLNY
                                        MN WI CA VA   OH
                                                       NC
                                                       INNCPASCCAFL TX
                                                                   NY             OK
                                  MI                  ME   PAMO
                                                             WAAZ
                                                                TX TXTX
                                                                     TX
                                                                      AR        NV AK
                                                                               CO                                                                                                       IA OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TX                         AK
                                                    OH MI
                                                      WA        NJNJ
                                                               GA
                                                               NY
                                                               TX
                                                               VA                           NM                                                                                                      NCGA
                                   IA       IAWI PAUT
                                                    MI  IL VA
                                                    IL NH IA
                                                          NENJNJNJ NYFL
                                                               GA                                                                                                                                           PA                   FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AZ
  Vote share




                                                                                                                                                         Vote share
                                           IL         PA       UT  NV AZ                                                                                                     WI          MI
                                                  MNNH CT CA
                                                          CTKS
                                                           OR TX
                                                              UTFL TX
                                                               PA                     TX                                                                                                                  NH                             NV
                                         OHCA MI GA
                                                      MI
                                                     OR
                                                       NY CA
                                                          RIWA NY  FL AZ NV
                                                                        NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MN MEUT VA
                                                     IL CA
                                                     PA   CA CACA                                                                                                                                                                      CO
                                    IN                     DE VA MA FL                                                                                                                                         DE




                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                     MN             CO
      40




                                                       MO   CT  NYNJ CA
                                                                      FLFL                                                                                                                                    CT            NJ
                                                     KY ILUTCACA
                                                            ME   MD
                                                                  WA
                                                                 CO                TX                                                                                                                                                                                    NM
                                              PA NY    NY
                                                     WA VA MA    FL
                                                               AZ NY
                                                              TN
                                                              CA      FLFL         TX
                                                                                    TX                                                                                                                    IL ORRI
                                    CA               ILMA
                                                 OH CT   IN
                                                          CAMA
                                                             CT
                                                             CANJMD                NM                                                                                                                        WA              NY
                                                               CA FLNMFL
                                               WA
                                               PA MI IL
                                                 MS    OR  MA
                                                            RIMA FL
                                                                MACO TXPA                                                                                                                                                      MD
                                                         IL NY  CA
                                                                NJ
                                                                 AZNV
                                                                   MDMD                                                                                                                                                  MA
                                                         CAVAMN
                                                               NJ
                                                                    MD                                                                                                                                              CA
                                               NC
                                                   WI
                                                    AL
                                                      SCVT     CA
                                                              OH  HITX
                                                                 HI                                                                                                                                               VT       HI
                                                     NCCA  CA
                                                          CA      NC
                                                         CACA TX VA
                                                        CACAGA  MA TX
                                                  CA IL ILCA  PA CA
                                                WI OR   CA
                                                        ILGA
                                                            TX
                                                            WACA
                                                             CA
                                                             LACACO NY
                                                               CA
                                                               AZ
                                                               CA
                                                              NJ
                                                                                                             Coeff = -60.07                                                                                                                                                                 Coeff = 28.309




                                                                                                                                                              20
       20




                                                                 VATX
                                               MI MIILMN MO
                                                            CA
                                                           CA
                                                           TX
                                                             TN MD
                                                            CA
                                                                   NYMD
                                                                      NY
                                                                       FL
                                                                       TX
                                                                                                             Std.Err. = 26.90                                                                                                                                                               Std.Err. = 35.39
                                                   OH CA
                                                                      FL                                     R2 = .021                                                                                                                                                                      R2 = .013
                                                        IL
                                                        CA  NJ     NY
                                                                   NYNYNY
                                                      WACA GAMA
                                                        CA           NY
                                                        CA
                                                        IL         CA
                                                PA            CA
                                                                      NY NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DC
       0




                                                                                                                                                              0
               -.5                -.4                 -.3           -.2                                               -.1                      0                      -.4                                                -.3                     -.2                                                                 -.1
                                               Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                                         Average real wage change (in %)



                                                                                                                                              Tariff only
                                                                                                                                                              80
       80




                                 AL                                      TX                    KY
                                               GA                     TN                           TX
                        GA                           NE                        MOTX
                                                    KY                   TN OKOK  TX               TX TXTX WV                                                                                                                                                           WV             WY
                                                                            IL MO PA                   AL WY PA
                                                  TN KS                 VA       OH              MS                LA                                                                                                                        OK
                                                               SC KYIN                   MOTN       LA WV AZ FL FL                                                                                                                                          ND
                                                              TN     AL     MS         TN
                                                                                        KYMO         WVLAPA FL
                                                                                                    OK                                                                                            AL KY                       SD
                                                                                                                                                              60




                                      AR     OH     IN       AL
                                                           INMIAR GA  OH
                                                                      IN               AL PA       TN
                                                                                                   ND                                                                  AR                                           TN
                                                                          GA       NC ID
                                                                                       MO        AL     LA                                                                                                         ID
                                                                 OH                             TX TX
                                                                                             OK MD              FLPA
                                                                                                                  FL                                                                                               NE
                                                        IAAR MNSC NC MS KS               SD IL                                                                                                                    MS                                                         LA
       60




                                                                                    INPAGA           LA
                                                                                                     TXGATXNC                                                                           IN                                                   MO
                                      IN              OH                       MI VA           NY
                                                                                                MN                           FL                                                                              KS                                                                        MT
                                                       WI SC WA
                                                      NC                 WI NC GA NEOR      CA
                                                                                             SC
                                                                                        PA MI CO              TXAZ FL
                                                                                                                AZ FLCO                                                                                      SC
                                                        WI WI MI IL             KS OHSC
                                                                                  NC   NC GA TX    OH  TXFLCA MT FL
                                                                            MIKY
                                                                                     TX ILNY NY    OH
                                                                                                    CA        CAVA    TXNJ                                                                                             OH                                         TXAK
                                                                              OHWIID NY          CANC MN    NY
                                                                                                             SC   FLTXFL    NY                                                 IA                                                 GA
                                                                     MN
                                                                    CA
                                                                    MI
                                                                     MI            PAVA ME
                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                NC TX
                                                                                                  OH
                                                                                                     OH
                                                                                                     WA
                                                                                                    NV
                                                                                                    OH
                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                      IN
                                                                                                      TX AK
                                                                                                        TX CA
                                                                                                            OK
                                                                                                           MO
                                                                                                           AR  FLNY
                                                                                                                AZTX
                                                                                                                 CO
                                                                                                                  NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PA                               AZ FL
                                                                                                    GA
  Vote share




                                                                                                                                                         Vote share




                                                                       UTIAWI PA         WA          MI NY
                                                                                                 IL NJ VA
                                                                                                 MI      TX
                                                                                                          VA NJ NM      FL                                                    WI                                  MI
                                                              IA                            IL IA            NJ NY                                                                                                                                     NH                                         NV
                                                                                IL              PANH NETX UTNJTX  GA NV
                                                                                                                  AZ                                                                                                                        MN         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ME               VA
                                                                                       OR MNMI                         PA
                                                                CA                            NH NY  KS CA
                                                                                                        UT CT TX
                                                                                                          CT
                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                 FL
                                                                                                                  NY AZFL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CO
                                                                      OH                                CA              NV                                                                                                                                       DE
                                                                              GA MI OR PA               RI
                                                                                                                                                             40




                                                                                                IL CACA    CA
                                                                                                            CA           NY                                                                                                                                                 CT NJ
                                                                                           IN MO DE             MA  VA
                                                                                                                    FL                                                                                                                  OR                                                       NM
                                                                                                       MN                                                                                                                                                              RI
    40




                                                                                                       CA   CTNJ
                                                                                                               NYCOCA
                                                                                                                  MD   FLFL                                                                                                                       IL
                                                                     CA                       KY      IL
                                                                                                       NYTX
                                                                                                        UTCO
                                                                                                         ME  WA
                                                                                                            WA                                                                                                                                          WA
                                                                              PA                        MA TN   AZ FL
                                                                                                                   NYTX FL
                                                                                                                      FL                                                                                                                                                                     NY
                                             CA                                               VANY
                                                                                             OH
                                                                                                   WACA
                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                  IL  MA
                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                     CT   MA
                                                                                                          IN
                                                                                                           NJCT   TXNM                                                                                                                                                                        MD
                                                                               MS WA MIOR
                                                                              PA                  ILCA
                                                                                                     CO MARIMA CA
                                                                                                                FL
                                                                                                                PAMDFL
                                                                                                                     NM
                                                                                                                 TX MA
                                                                                                                       FL                                                                                                                                                              MA
                                                                                                           CAAZ
                                                                                                       IL NJ             NV                                                                                                                                      CA
                                                                                                            VA
                                                                                                             NJ       MD
                                                                                                                      NYMD                                                                                                                        VT                                                  HI
                                                                           NC                 VTSC CA MN       TX
                                                                                                               CA HI  HIMD
                                                                                      AL WI NCCA    CA  CA TXOH  NC          VA
                                                                                                   CACA
                                                                                                    CA         GA MA
                                                                                                    CATX
                                        Coeff = -425.80                         CA                CA CA
                                                                                                    CA ILIL CA PA
                                                                                                       TXCA WA    CO
                                                                                                                      Coeff = -464.313
                                                                                                                      CA
                                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                                            WI GA ORCAIL NJCA   AZ
                                                                                                                LA        NY
                                                                                                                      Std.Err. = 129.95
       20




                                        Std.Err. = 32.98                                                CA
                                                                                                        TXTN  CA MDMDNYVA
                                                                                         MI      MI IL TXTXMO
                                                                                                           MN         CAFL 2NY
                                        R2 = .221                                                  OH
                                                                                                    CA                R = .286
                                                                                                                       FL
                                                                                                                        NY NY
                                                                                                                       NY
                                                                                                     WAIL NJ GA MA
                                                                                                    CA
                                                                                                    CA                  NY
                                                                                                    CA
                                                                                                    CA                      NY
                                                                                                         IL                 CA
                                                                               PA                             CA
                                                                                                                             NY
                                                                                                                             NY                                                                                                                                                                                 DC
       0




                                                                                                                                                              0




               -.15                              -.1                    -.05                                                                   0                             -.08                                           -.06                   -.04                                                             -.02
                                               Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                                         Average real wage change (in %)



                                                                                                                  Tariff and uniform NTB
                                                                                                                                                              80
       80




                                                  AL                                        TX                      KY
                                                       GA                                                                                      TX
                                                            TN
               GA                                                NE                    MOTX
                                                                                       OK                 OK
                                                                    KY TN                          TX TXPATX                  TX      WV
                                                                                 IL MO PA                AL                              WY                                                                                                                                            WV                       WY
                                                                 KS                    VAOH             MS
                                                      TN
                                                           SC IN KY                  MO TN                         AZWV LA
                                                                                                                     LA      FL                                                                                                                         OK
                                                            TN AR OH     AL         MS  TNMO               PA       WVFL
                                                                                                                   OK    FL
                                                        IN            AL           INALKY         PA      TN
                                                                                                         LA                                                                                                                                                                                       ND
                                      OH            AR
                                                     MI           INGA                            IDAL                       ND                                                                            AL KY
                                                                                NCGA                   TXMDLA                                                                                                                     SD
                                                                                                                                                              60




                                                             OH AR MN                 MO                        PATX
                                                                                                                   FL FL                                                                      AR             TN
                                                                                        OK  SD
       60




                                                             IA SC NC                INPA MSIL GAGA TX NCLA                                                                                                    NE                ID
                                                  OH
                                                  IN                       MI  KS    VA    NY                        TX           FL                                                                                         MS                                          LA
                                                            NCWI
                                                           SC   WI          WA NCGA  NE PA MN
                                                                                       TX      SC CA   MI COAZ  AZ FLFL COFL
                                                                                                                                                                                                   IN        KS                MO                                                      MT
                                                        WI MI
                                                       WI           IL MI NY  OH NC  SC
                                                                                  KSNC          OHGA ORTX         FL CANJ MT                                                                              SC
                                                                                  KY NYTX NC IL
                                                                                             ID NY  OH NYCA    TXCA TX
                                                                    MN OH                  VA NCNC PA     CA MN SCCAFLTXOK
                                                                                                                        VA NY
                                                                                                                           FL                                                                                                                                     TX
                                                              MI MI        WI CA
                                                                                         MEOH  PAOH INTX MO
                                                                                                        WA
                                                                                                         TXTX AR FL
                                                                                                                 NY
                                                                                                                AZ    TXNVAK CO                                                              IA              OH              GA                                                         AK
                                                                                UT           WA
                                                                                            MI  MIIL       GA
                                                                                                           NY
                                                                                                            TX
                                                                                                             VANJNJ        FL        NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PA                             AZFL
                                                                               WI  PA
  Vote share




                                                                                                                                                         Vote share




                                                               IA      IA                 IL NH  IANENJ  NJ
                                                                                                         NJ VA  GANY                                                           WI                       MI
                                                                        IL                     PA          UT
                                                                                                           TX PA          AZ NV                                                                                                    NH                                                       NV
                                                                                        MNNHMI NY   CT  TCA
                                                                                                        OR
                                                                                                      CKS  UTTX  FL              TX                                                                                          MN             MEUT            VA
                                                                        OHCA MI               OR      RI CAWANY         AZ
                                                                                                                        FL
                                                                                                                         NY      NV                                                                                                                                    CO
                                                                                      GA IL  PA CA           CA CA
                                                                                                       CA                                                                                                                                     CTDE
                                                                                                                                                             40




                                                                                    IN          MN     DE         VACO FL
                                                                                                                 MA                                                                                                                                         NJ
     40




                                                                                                                            FL
                                                                                                                       CATXFL                                                                                                                                                                          NM
                                                                                         CA MO  KY
                                                                                                NY IL UTCT NYCA
                                                                                                         ME CO
                                                                                                                NJMDWA
                                                                                                                   FLWAFL   FL TX                                                                                                 IL          ORRI
                                                                               PA            NY WA  MA CATN      NY
                                                                                                                AZ             TX NM                                                                                                          WA                 NY
                                                             CA                        OH CTILMA     VA
                                                                                                      MA
                                                                                                       INCT
                                                                                                          CA
                                                                                                           CA
                                                                                                            NJ CA
                                                                                                    CA
                                                                            PA MS WA    MI     IL ORMA   RIMA CO  MD
                                                                                                                 MA FLFL
                                                                                                                   PA
                                                                                                                         FL
                                                                                                                       TXNM                                                                                                                                            MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MA
                                                                                                   IL NYNJ        CA
                                                                                                             VA AZMD MDNV
                                                                                                            NJ                                                                                                                                         CA
                                                                              NC                  SC
                                                                                                  VT  CA    MN      TXMD
                                                                                                                       HI                                                                                                                    VT                                   HI
                                                                                         WIALNC CA    CA CA   OHCANC
                                                                                                                            HI
                                                                                                  CA  CA
                                                                                                      CA        TX
                                                                                                               GA          VA
                                                                                                    CA TX   PA MA
                                                                                        CA         ILILCA
                                                                                                        TXCACACA
                                                                                                           WA
                                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                                 CO                                      Coeff = -174.52                                                                                                                                                   Coeff = -76.964
                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                   GAORNJ       AZCA NY
                                                                                                     IL CA LA
                                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                                    WI                         CA VA
       20




                                                                                            MI IL MN   MO
                                                                                                         CATX
                                                                                                       TX TX
                                                                                                            TN NY MD MD
                                                                                                                           NY                            Std.Err. = 23.27                                                                                                                                                  Std.Err. = 80.71
                                                                                    MI                        CA           FL
                                                                                           OH CA
                                                                                                                         FL                              R2 = .105                                                                                                                                                         R2 = .033
                                                                                                  CA ILNJ       NYNYNYNY
                                                                                                  CAWA         GAMA
                                                                                                  CA                     NY
                                                                                                  CA IL                    CA
                                                                                PA                             CA
                                                                                                                            NY
                                                                                                                            NY                                                                                                                                                              DC
       0




                                                                                                                                                              0




               -.45               -.4                -.35           -.3                                             -.25                      -.2                     -.35                                               -.3                    -.25                                                                 -.2
                                               Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                                         Average real wage change (in %)




Notes: This figure depicts the scatterplots of the average real wage change from revoking NAFTA and the
2016 Trump vote share by congressional district (left side) and state (right side), along the OLS fit. The
boxes report the coefficient, robust standard error, and the R2 of the bivariate regression. The model is
solved under θ = 2.5.
                                                                                                                                                    37
                                                      Figure A2: Real wage changes and 2016 Trump vote, θ = 8

                            Congressional district level                                                                                                                                                              State level

                                                                                                                      Tariff and NTB baseline




                                                                                                                                                             80
        80




                                      AL                               TX            KY
                                    GA                                                                                                   TX
                                   TN
                            GA             NE          TXMO
                                                                                           OK
                                           TN           KY OK TX TX TX                   TX            WV
                                                  MOMS    ILPA
                                                             AL                                               WY
                                                 KS PA             OH VALA
                                 INTN
                                   SCKY             TN
                                                   MO                 AZFL         WV LA                                                                                                                                                         WV                                               WY
                                                   TN          PA       FL
                        OH     IN TNAROH AR
                                        IN  GA
                                               MS
                                            ALAL KY MO
                                                AL       IN    TN
                                                              LA           PA WV
                                                                           FL  OK
                                                                                           ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OK
                              MI                       GA  ALTXPA  ID LA                                                                                                                                                                                                  ND
                                     OHAR MNNC     MO                            TX                                                                                             AL KY SD
                                                                 GANCFL
                                                                FL
                                                                 MD




                                                                                                                                                             60
                                                         ILSD
                                                            OKMS
        60




                                        SCNC
                                           IA KSIN PA    GA      TX             LA
                                                                               TX                                                                                              TN
                                                                                                                                                                               AR
                          OH IN                MIVANY
                                                    MNSC AZCA               FL                                                                                                    NEMS   ID
                           TX      WI SCWI NC
                                       NC         WA
                                                   PA
                                                  NEGA          AZFLFL  MI
                                                                       CO
                                                                      CO
                                                                      FL                                                                                                   IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA
                               WI
                              MI
                              WI          MIOHNC
                                         IL      SC
                                                  KSNCGAOH           OR
                                                                     TXFLCA MT
                                                                       NJ                                                                                                          KSMO                                     MT
                                               NY NY
                                                 KYNC      OH
                                                          IL ID  CACA
                                                                  NY TXTX                                                                                                     SC
                                       OH
                                        MN           TX
                                                      OH NCVA
                                                           NCNY
                                                             PACA
                                                              SCFL  FL
                                                                   CA TXVA
                                                                         FL MN
                                                                           NY       OK
                                                        IN           NY
                                   MI    WI
                                                   OHMI MEWA
                                                  CA         MO AZPATXTX
                                                                      TXTX
                                                                         AR       NV AK
                                                                                 CO                                                                                          OH                                       TX                             AK
                                   MI                            TXNYNJ
                                                                  GA
                                                                  NJ
                                                                  VA                          NM
                                                                                                                                                                             IA
                                                                                                                                                                                  NC GA
                                      IA IAWIPA     MIIL UTILWANJNJNY
                                                              VA        FL                                                                                                                              FLAZ
                                                         NEIAGA
                                                            NH                                                                                                                               PA
  Vote share




                                                                                                                                                        Vote share
                                          IL MN PA            NJ
                                                             PA
                                                              TXUTNV TX AZ                                                                                           WI     MI             NH
                                               CA NH   CTCTCA
                                                           MI KSFL OR
                                                                UT                      TX                                                                                                                       NV
                                           OHMI         OR
                                                          NYWA NY
                                                           CA
                                                           RI       FL AZNV
                                                                        NY
                                                                                                                                                                                        MN    UTVA
                                                                                                                                                                                              ME
                                                      PA
                                                     IL    CA
                                                          GA
                                                           CACA    CA                                                                                                                                           CO
                                    IN                     DE   VAMA FL                                                                                                                     DE NJ




                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                    MNMO             CO
      40




                                                            CT NY CA
                                                                  MDNJCAFL
                                                                       FL                                                                                                                  CT                                                        NM
                                                        IL UT
                                                       KY     ME    CA
                                                                 FLCO WA
                                                                       WA             TX
                                              PA WA    NY
                                                    NY MA     TNAZ
                                                               CA   NYFLFL          TXTX                                                                                                IL RI OR
                                        CA OH CT    IL MA   MA
                                                            CT
                                                         INMA  VA
                                                               CACA
                                                                 NJ                 NM                                                                                                     WA NY
                                             WA PAMSIL CA
                                                 MI        RI MA
                                                           OR
                                                                CA
                                                                MA
                                                                   FLCO
                                                                  MD
                                                                  FL   FL
                                                                       NM
                                                                      TX  PA                                                                                                                             MD
                                                         ILNY      CA
                                                                  NJ
                                                                  NV
                                                                   AZ
                                                                   MD MD                                                                                                                         MA
                                                         CA  VANJ                                                                                                                               CA
                                                 NC SCVT     MN  HI MD
                                                                HI
                                                                CA    TX                                                                                                                        VT HI
                                                   WINC  AL CAOH    NC
                                                        CA
                                                         CACA
                                                            CA     TXVA
                                                        CA CA GA
                                                              MA
                                                 CA IL ILCA PA     CA TX
                                              WI       IL
                                                         OR
                                                        CA
                                                         LA
                                                           WATXCA
                                                           GACA
                                                           CA   AZ
                                                                CA
                                                               NJ
                                                                  CA
                                                                  CO NY              Coeff = -6.73                                                                                                                                         Coeff = 40.621




                                                                                                                                                             20
        20




                                                               VA
                                              MI MI  ILMO
                                                        MN
                                                         CA
                                                             CA
                                                           CATN MD  NY
                                                           TX NY FLTX
                                                                      MDTX           Std.Err. = 19.87                                                                                                                                      Std.Err. = 19.88
                                                  OH CA
                                                                       FL            R =02                                                                                                                                                 R2 = .052
                                                      ILCA NJ      NY NY
                                                                  NY
                                                     WA CA  GAMANY
                                                        CA        NY
                                                      ILCA CA
                                                  PA         CA
                                                                   NY       NY                                                                                                                      DC
        0




                                                                                                                                                             0
                 -.4                                       -.2                      0                                                         .2                     -.3                                 -.2                   -.1              0                                                        .1
                                                         Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                        Average real wage change (in %)



                                                                                                                                          Tariff only
        100




                                                                                                                                                             80



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WV            WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OK
        80




                                           AL                                        TX               KY
                                                      GA                                                     TX                                                                                     AL     KY                                              ND
                                                                                TN                                                                                                                                           SD
                                                                                                                                                             60




                             GA                                 NE                    MO TX                                                                          AR                                           TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ID
                                                               KY                 TN OKTX
                                                                                        OK                  TX TXTX WV                                                                                        NEMS                                                          LA
                                                                                     ILMO                        AL     WYPA                                                                            IN KS                            MO
                                                            KS
                                                            TN                   VA     OH       PA     MS                LA FL                                                                             SC                                                                     MT
                                                                      SC    KY IN                MOTN         LAWVAZ
                                             AR            OH        TNIN
                                                                 IN AL  AR GA GAAL MS TN
                                                                                OH
                                                                                IN            ALMO
                                                                                                 KY
                                                                                                  PA      OK
                                                                                                           TN
                                                                                                           ND
                                                                                                              WV LA   PA FLFL                                                                                              OH GA                                  TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AK
                                                                        MI                NCID
                                                                                             MO         TX ALLA
                                                                                                              TX           PA                                                      IA
                                                              AR      MN OH                              MD             FLFL                                                                                                   NC
            60




                                                                IA         SC NC   MS KSPAINSD  GA ILOK LA      GATX
                                                                                                                   NC                                                                                                                     PA                                       AZ FL
                                                                OH                      VA           NYMN TX
   Vote share




                                                                                                                                                        Vote share




                                                         IN                            MI                                           FL                                            WI                                       MI
                                                          NC WI       WA         WINC NCNE     PA CA
                                                                                                   SC
                                                                                                    MI                  AZFLTX                                                                                                             NH
                                                              WI     SC
                                                                     WI MI IL KSGA     MI  OR
                                                                                           SCNC
                                                                                            OH    GA CO  TXOH
                                                                                                            OH   CA MT FL
                                                                                                                FL
                                                                                                               TX
                                                                                                                               CO
                                                                                                                              FLNJ                                                                                                   MN ME UT                     VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NV
                                                                                        KYNYTX
                                                                                         ID    IL NY NY CANCCA
                                                                                                            MN       CAVA
                                                                                                                    NY   FL     TX                                                                                                                                           CO
                                                                           MN          OH
                                                                                        WI
                                                                                        PAVA           NC
                                                                                                      NC   TX  PA
                                                                                                              OH
                                                                                                              IN
                                                                                                              AK  CA
                                                                                                                 AROK
                                                                                                                   MO
                                                                                                                  TX SC
                                                                                                                      FL NY
                                                                                                                         TX
                                                                                                                        AZ TXFL NY
                                                                         CA MIMI                            NVWATX     CO                                                                                                                                  DE
                                                                                                                                                            40




                                                                                            ME           OH O
                                                                                                            GA HVA
                                                                                                               NY
                                                                                                              MI  TX
                                                                                                                   NJ NM NJ                                                                                                                                               CT NJ
                                                                     IA      UTIAWI PA           WAIL IL   MI  NJ  VA
                                                                                                                    NJ   NY    FL                                                                                                    OR                                                  NM
                                                                                                     IAPANH
                                                                                                          NE TX           GA
                                                                                                                         AZ                                                                                                                     IL                   RI
                                                                                       IL
                                                                                             OR MN NH             UTNJTX    PANV
                                                                    CA        OH GA                   MI NYKS     CT FL
                                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                 UT
                                                                                                                 CT
                                                                                                                 WA       NYAZFL
                                                                                                                               NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WA                                NY
                                                                                                 OR PA
                                                                                                 MI         CA
                                                                                                        IL DE RICA
                                                                                                             CA   CACA FL       NY
                                                                                                                      MA    VA FL                                                                                                                                                        MD
  40




                                                                                                       MO     IN
                                                                                                               MNCTNY    COCA                                                                                                                                                     MA
                                                                           CA                          KY CA  IL
                                                                                                               ME
                                                                                                              NY TX
                                                                                                                UTCOWANJMD
                                                                                                                   WA      FL
                                                                                                                               FL
                                                                                                                              FLFL                                                                                                                          CA
                                                                                    PA                  NY
                                                                                                         WA   MA
                                                                                                              CA     TNAZNY
                                                                                                                        TX  TX                                                                                                             VT                                                HI
                                                      CA                                            VA OH CA
                                                                                                         IL MA
                                                                                                           CACT MAIN
                                                                                                                  NJCT      NM
                                                                                                                            FLFL
                                                                                     MSPA WA             ILCO
                                                                                                        MI
                                                                                                        OR    MARIMA   CA
                                                                                                                       FLMD
                                                                                                                         PA NM
                                                                                                                            MA
                                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                                  NJ   TX
                                                                                                               IL VA AZ
                                                                                                                      NJ     MD
                                                                                                                            NY NV
                                                                                                                                MD
                                                                                 NC                 VT SC CA MN       TX    HI MD
                                                                                              ALWI NCCA    CA
                                                                                                           CA CACATX OH
                                                                                                                       CA HI
                                                                                                                        NC          VA                                       Coeff = -430.152
                                                                                                            CAILTXCAGA
                                                                                                                                                             20




                                                Coeff = -406.64                      CA                       ILCAWA CO
                                                                                                               TX         PAMA                                               Std.Err. = 131.20
                                                                                                       CA CA
                                                                                                           CA    CA      LA CA
                                                                                                                        AZ
                                                                                                  WI GAOR                        NY
        20




                                                                                                                   NJ CA
                                                                                                                ILCA     CA
                                                Std.Err. = 31.99                                    MI      IL TX
                                                                                                           MI
                                                                                                                  TX
                                                                                                                 MOTN
                                                                                                                   MN
                                                                                                                  TX
                                                                                                                         MD   MD
                                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                                                NY VA
                                                                                                                               FL NY
                                                                                                                                                                             R2 = .255
                                                                                                           OH
                                                                                                           CA
                                                R = .218
                                                    2
                                                                                                                            NYFL
                                                                                                                            NYNY NY
                                                                                                            WAIL NJ GA
                                                                                                           CA                 MA
                                                                                                           CA
                                                                                                           CA                      NY
                                                                                                                IL                 CA
                                                                                         PA                           CA
                                                                                                                                    NY
                                                                                                                                   NY                                                                                                                                                                    DC
        0




                                                                                                                                                             0




                 -.15                                      -.1                    -.05                                                        0                           -.08                                     -.06                  -.04                                                          -.02
                                                         Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                        Average real wage change (in %)



                                                                                                                       Tariff and uniform NTB
                                                                                                                                                             80
        80




                                                          AL                         TX                 KY
                                                         GA                                                                        TX
                                                           TN
                            GA                                  NE                 TX
                                                                                   MO
                                                                                OK                   OK
                                                                     TNKY                      TX TX
                                                                                              TX                  TX      WV
                                                                           ILMOPA PAAL                                     WY
                                                       TN IN KS                      OH MS
                                                                                     VA                     LA                                                                                                                                                  WV                                WY
                                                          SC     KY          MOTN                     AZLAWV FL
                                                                                TN            PA          WVFL
                                      OH           MI AR
                                                        INTN ARGA  INALAL AL
                                                                   OH          KYMS
                                                                                IN MO PA    LA TN OKFL           ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OK
                                                                             NC
                                                                             MO GA             ID
                                                                                                AL  LA
                                                                                                 PA FLTX                                                                                                                                                                   ND
                                                            OH ARMN                        TX MD        FL                                                                                     ALKY       SD
                                                                                                                                                             60




                                                                          OKPA      SD MS   GA
        60




                                                            IA SCNCKSMI         INIL GA        TX     NCTXLA                                                                       AR         TN
                                                  OH IN                      VANY                                  FL                                                                        NE                       ID
                                                          WINC WI TX       WA
                                                                           NC PAMN
                                                                             NE              CA MI
                                                                                            SC    AZ
                                                                                                  AZ FLFL                                                                                                      MS                           LA
                                                           SC              SC GA            GA CONJ     COCA
                                                                                                       OR   FL MT                                                                       INKS             MO
                                                    WI MI IL MIOH
                                                    WI                  KSNC
                                                                     NY KYNY
                                                                             NC
                                                                                NC
                                                                                     OHILOH NY TX
                                                                                        ID          TX
                                                                                                       FL
                                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                      CA
                                                                                                     CA                                                                                    SC                                                              MT
                                                               MN OH              TXVA NC   NY CA   MNFL
                                                                                                     SCTX  VA
                                                                                                        NYOK
                                                        MI MI WI          CA OHMEIN
                                                                                     OHPAMO
                                                                                      NC    TX
                                                                                            PA TXFL
                                                                                              WA
                                                                                              TX   AR CA
                                                                                                   NY
                                                                                                  AZ
                                                                                                   NJ
                                                                                                        TXFLAK
                                                                                                             NV CO                                                          IA         OH                                           TX                      AK
                                                                                   MI           GA
                                                                                                NY
                                                                                               TXVA NJ                 NM                                                                        NC GA
                                                              IA IA       UT
                                                                         WI     MI WA
                                                                            PA IL        ILNJNJ VA         FL
                                                                                    IA
                                                                                     NE
                                                                                      NH       GA NY                                                                                                       PA                         FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AZ
  Vote share




                                                                                                                                                        Vote share




                                                                IL                 PA    NJ PAUT
                                                                                               TX FL        AZ NV                                                    WI            MI                    NH
                                                                                             TX
                                                                     OH CA MN   NH CTMINYCTKSCA
                                                                                              WA
                                                                                                UT
                                                                                                 NY OR   AZ
                                                                                                                    TX
                                                                                                                    NV                                                                             MN               UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ME      VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NV
                                                                      MI          PA OR
                                                                                 GA
                                                                                 IL      RI CA
                                                                                         CA            NY
                                                                                                       CAFL                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                            CA CAVAMA
                                                                                      INDE NYNJ             FL                                                                                             CT DE NJ
                                                                                                                                                            40




                                                                                 MN                  COCA FL
      40




                                                                                     MOCT         CA
                                                                                                  MD          FL
                                                                                                              TX                                                                                                                                                           NM
                                                                        PA         NYIL KY
                                                                                         CAME FL
                                                                                      MAUT CA
                                                                                                    COWA WA
                                                                                                         FLFL                                                                                       IL         RI OR
                                                                                 NYWA            NY
                                                                                                  AZ
                                                                                                  TN            TXTX
                                                                CA          OH
                                                                             CT ILILMA MA
                                                                                        CTINVA
                                                                                         CA   NJCACA
                                                                                                  MDCA FLFLNM      NM                                                                                         WA    NY
                                                                      PA WA  MI MAOR
                                                                            MS               MAMA
                                                                                            RI      CO
                                                                                                    PA FL
                                                                                                        TX                                                                                                                          MD
                                                                                      IL      NJ MD    CA                                                                                                             MA
                                                                                       NY NJ
                                                                                          CA   VA AZ MD NV                                                                                                             CA
                                                                        NC               SCVTMN CA   MDTX
                                                                                                        HI     HI                                                                                                    VT                              HI
                                                                               WINC  AL    CA   OH NC
                                                                                       CA CA CA       VA
                                                                                                     TX
                                                                                       CACAMA   GA
                                                                                CA IL ILCAPA
                                                                                           CA
                                                                                               TX CA
                                                                       WI              CANJ
                                                                                       GA
                                                                                       IL
                                                                                           TX
                                                                                            WACA
                                                                                           OR    CO
                                                                                                CA
                                                                                                LA
                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                   CANY
                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                  AZ             Coeff = -95.59                                                                                                                                                Coeff = -17.598
                                                                                                                                                             20
        20




                                                                                                   VA
                                                                         MI MI ILMN   MO
                                                                                         CACA
                                                                                        TX CA
                                                                                               TX
                                                                                                NY
                                                                                               TNMD
                                                                                                      NYMD
                                                                                                           FL
                                                                                                                 Std.Err. = 21.30                                                                                                                                              Std.Err. = 54.46
                                                                              OH CA TX                                                                                                                                                                                         R2 = .003
                                                                                                         FL      R = .048
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                      IL
                                                                                       NJ
                                                                                       CA GA    NYNYNY
                                                                                                     NY
                                                                                   WA  CA       MA
                                                                                       CA            NY
                                                                                       CA
                                                                                      IL                CA
                                                                          PA                      CA
                                                                                                       NY
                                                                                                        NY                                                                                                                                       DC
        0




                                                                                                                                                             0




                 -.4                               -.3                  -.2              -.1                                                  0                            -.25                                 -.2             -.15            -.1                                                     -.05
                                                         Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                        Average real wage change (in %)




Notes: This figure depicts the scatterplots of the average real wage change from revoking NAFTA and the
2016 Trump vote share by congressional district (left side) and state (right side), along the OLS fit. The
boxes report the coefficient, robust standard error, and the R2 of the bivariate regression. The model is
solved under θ = 8.
                                                                                                                                                   38
Figure A3: Real wage changes and the difference between 2016 Trump vote and the 2012
Romney vote

                                Congressional district level                                                                                                                                                                                 State level

                                                                                                                                  Tariff and NTB baseline
           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WV




                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                             IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ND
                                                              OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ME
                                                                                                                                                                                              OH                    RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SD
           10




                                                         MOPA                                                                                                                                                 MO
                     OH        MI  OH OH                                                                                                                                                IN
                                                                                                                                                                                             MI              MS
                                        IA MN                 NY            PAMN                                 WV
                                    IN
                                    WI IL           PA     MI
                                                           ME                                                                                                                                                                 HI
                                   IA                  ILIL                   NY WV WV                                                                                                                       KY
                          OH               IAMI KYPAIN RI               NY FL
                                 AL MN WI      OHNY                  NJVA
                                                                     NY                        ND                                                                                                                  DE
   Vote share diff




                                                                                                                                                                Vote share diff
                             WI                  MO              OK                                                                                                                                AL              PA
                                         NE NY NYNYPA
                                        MI                       PAPANY  FL
                                                                        FL
                                                                        MIFL             KY                                                                                       WI               TN                             NY
                                TNIN KYAR    IN
                                             MI
                                            MS NC
                                                       MO
                                                    NYCT   SD  CT      NY
                                                                         NJ
                          IN    TN OH IN TNAL     MO SC    OHPA HINJ   NY
                            IN
                             WI TN
                                ARSCSCOH NCOH MO
                                        IL       MS MNGASC MA RI FL NJ
                                                                     NJ    LA
                       GA            NC ALMI NC KYTN
                                                 MI
                                                  GAGA
                                                    OHNH
                                                      AL
                                                     TX MS
                                                         AL
                                                        PA
                                                         IL
                                                         MO
                                                             DE MD
                                                             IA
                                                              MS
                                                              NJ
                                                                      NC
                                                                      FL
                                                                     NY
                                                                    HI NYNY FL NY LA
                                                                           NJ
                                                                           FL              LA
                                                                                                                          WY                                                                                                     NJ
                                  MI      WI NC       ILOH      ME
                                                               NY   OR            MT
                                                VA
                                               AL OH
                                                  TN
                                                 KS
                                                  NCCT
                                                     GA  VA IL
                                                            IN
                                                            CT
                                                             NC
                                                             WA VANJ FL
                                                                      MD
                                                                      FL
                                                                      NV AZFL
                                                                        NY  NY
                                                                             NV TX
                                                                            NY
                                                                            FL       CO TX                                                                                                        SC               CT                                       MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA
         0




                            MI GA                NE PA   IL
                                                          MO           NY
                                                                       FL                                                                                                                                         NH




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                              NC
                                              KS   MI
                                                PANC     NY
                                                        MI   NH  PA
                                                                 OH
                                                              LATN  OR
                                                                    NJ   FLMD
                                                                           CA  TX TX
                                                                             PAFL        TX OK                                                                                                    AR         MN
                               TXMI            KY
                                               PA
                                              KS    OH OH  CA VT
                                                              TX GA
                                                                 WA
                                                                 LA
                                                                VA  CA
                                                                   ID NV
                                                                       MATX
                                                                        WA FL
                                                                          CO
                                                                         MD        OK NV TX TX                                                       TX                                                                                          NV
                                       SC GACA WA
                                              WI  WI             PA
                                                                VA
                                                                TX
                                                                 CAFL CO
                                                                      MD
                                                                        FL
                                                                         WA
                                                                          VA
                                                                         CO FL LA       NM              NM                                                                                                                         FL                                                                                               WY
                                                PAMIIL
                                                MN       OR
                                                          IL    CA
                                                                TN
                                                               MA     NY FL
                                                                     NJ
                                                                     MD
                                                                    CA     AR            AK                                                                                                             NC
                                     CA      WASC
                                                CA NC KY
                                                      OR  NC
                                                           CA GA CA
                                                                 GA
                                                                TX
                                                               WA
                                                               AL    CA
                                                                    CA
                                                                     FLNY
                                                                           TXTX AZ
                                                                          FLNY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VT
                                  WI AR PA TXIL          IN
                                                           CA
                                                           CA CA
                                                             OKGA
                                                                CAAZ
                                                                  NJ
                                                                  AZ
                                                                  CA
                                                                 TN
                                                                    CA
                                                                    MA
                                                                     CA
                                                                    CA
                                                                    FLCA
                                                                     CA
                                                                    VA TX
                                                                      AZTX     TX   TX      TX                                                                                                          NE
                                                CA ILPA     NE
                                                           CA   MO
                                                                SC
                                                                MN
                                                                CA
                                                                NJ CA   CO
                                                                       MD NM
                                                                         TXFL
                                                    WAIL
                                                     IL   MN
                                                           ORCA
                                                            CACA
                                                               MAAZ   COCO
                                                                       FL
                                                                        MD AZ
                                                                          TX                                                                                                                                                                                 OK
                                                      WA      MA
                                                             CA
                                                              WA    CA
                                                                   CA
                                                                  MA   NCCA
                                                                         TX
                                                                        NY             OK
                                                           GACA
                                                            CACACA MA
                                                                   TXTX
                                                                  CA
                                                    MN          CA
                                                                CTAZ
                                                                  MA TX TXFL                                                                                                                                                           MD
                                                         ILCA
                                                        IL    CA
                                                           ILCA
                                                                KSAZVA NY TX                                                                                                                                 IL
                                                              CA         VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Coeff = -3.371
           -10




                                                              IDCA  GA
                                                                   TX TX TX
                                                     IL CA   CATX CA
                                                                   VA      TX                                                  Coeff = -19.471                                                               GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OR VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CO                                          NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Std.Err. = 7.98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DC
                                                             GA        TX                                                      Std.Err. = 4.92                                                              KS                                                                       AK                        R2 = .002
                                                                                                                               R2 = .045
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MA




                                                                                                                                                                        -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ID                            TX
           -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CA

                       -.4                       -.3                 -.2           -.1                                                 0                  .1                                       -.3                                         -.2                  -.1                                                                 0
                                                             Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                                           Average real wage change (in %)



                                                                                                                                                      Tariff only
           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WV
                                                                                                                                                                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                                   IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ND
                                                                                                  OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OH SD                                         RI
           10




                                                                                                MO                      PA                                                                                                                                           MO
                                                                                      OH                                                                                                                                               MS MI
                                                             OH                MIOH                                                                                                                                IN
                                                                  IA           MN
                                                                                        IN                 PA NY MN              WV                                                                                                                                                                                      HI
                                                                 WI          IA               IL IL ME  ILPA MI                               NY                                                                             KY
                                                                 KY
                                                                  OH                       VA MI PA NY OH NDWV
                                                                                         INIA                             RIWV       NYFL
                                           AL                                      MN WI MIOK                                                                                                                                                                                        DE
                                                                                                                          NY NY
   Vote share diff




                                                                                                                                                                Vote share diff




                                                                                                    NY MO NY                   NJ                                                                                      AL                                                      PA
                                                               NE WI                KY                       MIKY                PA NJPAFLFL
                                                                                                                                     FL                                                           WI                                         TN                                                                     NY
                                                                               AR TN TN MS NC         INSDMO
                                                                                                           MI     INNY          CT
                                                        IN     TN             IN        OH
                                                                                        AL            MO     SC NYOH CT NJ PANY            NY
                                                AR                IN        WI
                                                                            SC SC       ILNC GA  MOOH
                                                                                                OH                MN
                                                                                                                  SC     LANJ
                                                                                                                        MA     RI FL HI
                                    GA                        NC            TN
                                                                            AL            GAMSMS         MI
                                                                                                          KY TN  PA
                                                                                                                NH
                                                                                                                MI MS
                                                                                                                    ALDE
                                                                                                                     MDLA      NC  WY
                                                                                                                                  NY NY
                                                                                                                                      FL FL NJ NY
                                                                                      MI NC GA    NC
                                                                                                  WI
                                                                                                   VATXAL
                                                                                                       AL GAIA
                                                                                                      OR
                                                                                                     VA         MO   OH
                                                                                                                   ILOHOH
                                                                                                                        LAME
                                                                                                                       ILCT
                                                                                                                           ILINNJFL
                                                                                                                               NJ  MT   HIFL
                                                                                                                                     MDNY NV
                                                                                                                                            NY
                                                                                                                                            NY NY
                                                                                                                                           FL                                                                                     SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NJ
                                                                                                  TX
                                                                                               KSNE   NCWA
                                                                                                      TN         NC           VA
                                                                                                                              CT AZCOFLFLNY                                                                                                                                                         CTLA   MT
                                                                                                                                        TX NV
                                                                                                                                            FL NY
         0




                                                                                  MI               PAPA      IL              MONJOH                                                                                                                                            NH
                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                       GA         KS                       NCOKKY
                                                                                          TX      PA OR              MI
                                                                                                                     NH  NY
                                                                                                                         TX
                                                                                                                         MI  CA
                                                                                                                            FL      PA
                                                                                                                                    TX
                                                                                                                                    LA      MD                                    AR                                                                             MN
                                                                                                  KSID GA
                                                                                                 PA           VT CO
                                                                                                              VA    OHCA
                                                                                                                      NV
                                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                                      CA
                                                                                                                      OK  TX
                                                                                                                         OH
                                                                                                                         WA   TNWA
                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                              TX  MA TX   MD
                                                                                                                                           NVFL FL                                                                                                                                                                 NV
                                                                            CAWA GA  MI
                                                                                    SC                     WI
                                                                                                            WI           TX TX
                                                                                                                             COWA
                                                                                                                               VA  NM
                                                                                                                                    VAFL
                                                                                                                                       NMPA
                                                                                                                                          COFL                                                                                                                                                                 WY FL
                                                                                                 PA       MN KY      OR
                                                                                                                      TN
                                                                                                                     MI  CANJ
                                                                                                                          AK AR
                                                                                                                            MA
                                                                                                                            IL    CA MD
                                                                                                                                      FL
                                                                                                                                      LA
                                                                                                                                     MD   FL                                                                                                            NC
                                                       CA                                     CA SC    WA OR    NC
                                                                                                                 NC   CA CA
                                                                                                                         IL  TX
                                                                                                                            TXCA     NY NY
                                                                                                                                     AZ                                                                                                                                VT
                                                                   AR              CA WI PA           TX   CA CA CA
                                                                                                                 TXGA CATX
                                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                                      CA   ALWA
                                                                                                                            IL     GA
                                                                                                                                   AZNY
                                                                                                                                   FL
                                                                                                                                NJTX
                                                                                                                                CA AZ     FL CA
                                                                                                                                      GA MA
                                                                                 CA                             PATX
                                                                                                               OK   CA
                                                                                                                    ILCA IN VA
                                                                                                                            TXCA
                                                                                                                              MO   FL
                                                                                                                                  TX
                                                                                                                                 TN
                                                                                                                                 AZ    NM                                                                                             NE
                                                                                                                     NECO
                                                                                                                      CA  TX CA  SC
                                                                                                                                MN
                                                                                                                                NJ CA    MDFL
                                                                                                             IL OR  IL
                                                                                                                     WA   CA
                                                                                                                         CA
                                                                                                                          MA   MN   CO
                                                                                                                                   TXCOAZ FL
                                                                                                                                         CAMD                                                                                                                        OK
                                                                                                                       WA
                                                                                                                      CA  MA CAOK
                                                                                                                               WACAAZ
                                                                                                                                 MA NCCA
                                                                                                                                       TX      NY
                                                                                                                      CA
                                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                                     TX  CAGATX   CA   MA
                                                                                                                          MN TX TX
                                                                                                                                CT AZTX   CA
                                                                                                                                         MA
                                                                                                                                         FL                                                                                                                                                                          MD
                                                                                                                      CACAKS
                                                                                                                         IL        AZ VA       NY
                                                                                                                          ILIL
                                                                                                                            CA CA               VA                                                                                                                        IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Coeff = -59.597
           -10




                                                                                                   ID                 GA CA                TX
                                                                                                                             TX
                                                     Coeff = -89.977                                              IL CA CATX TX TXCA           VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Std.Err. = 24.54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OR                             VA        CO          NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DC
                                                     Std.Err. = 9.85                                                      TX      GA                                                              R2 = .031 KS                                                                                AK
                                                     R2 = .153
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MA
                                                                                                                                                                        -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ID                                                     TX
           -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CA

                     -.15                                      -.1                    -.05                                                                0                              -.08                                               -.06                  -.04                                                              -.02
                                                             Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                                           Average real wage change (in %)



                                                                                                                                  Tariff and uniform NTB
           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WV
                                                                                                                                                                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                             IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ND
                                                                                               OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                         OH                      SD       RI
           10




                                                                          OH            MO PA                                                                                                          MI                     MO
                                         OH            MI       OH                                                                                                                                     IN                     MS
                                                                IA        MN                        NY
                                                                                                    PA        MN                            WV
                                                                IN WI IL                 PA
                                                                                          MEMI                                                                                                                                                                                 HI
                                                                  IA              IL         IL                      NY                                                                                                KY
                                                     OH AL              IAKY
                                                                           MI        IN
                                                                                      PA VA         RI NY NJ  NY WV
                                                                                WI MOOH
                                                                                      NY                             FL    ND                                                                                                                DE
   Vote share diff




                                                                                                                                                                Vote share diff




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AL                  PA
                                                        WI       NEMN MI    NY         OK                 NY
                                                                                                         MI PANJFLFL FLKY
                                                             TN ARKY TN           MI IN
                                                                                  NC
                                                                                        NY
                                                                                        INNY
                                                                                          MO
                                                                                           SD
                                                                                                NY CTPA  PA
                                                                                                              NY
                                                                                                                                                                                   WI                             TN                                       NY
                                                        INTN          INOH ALOH MO    MS
                                                                                     MO           SC
                                                                                                   OH
                                                                                                   CTPA    NYNJ
                                                        WI
                                                         ARINSC      NC OH
                                                                     IL                GAMN            RINJ  FLNC
                                                                                                             LA          HI
                     GA                                       SC
                                                              TN          AL       MS
                                                                              MI NCGA  KY
                                                                                       TN    MA   SCDEMS  NJ   NYNJ
                                                                                                                  FL NYFL                      WY
                                                               NC                     GA
                                                                                      MINH
                                                                                         OH PA
                                                                                           AL
                                                                                          TXMSIA
                                                                                              MO   NJ
                                                                                                  IL   ALNY
                                                                                                          MDNY      LA
                                                                                                                   HI
                                                                                                                   LA FL
                                                                                                                     FL                                                                                                                               NJ
                                                                  MI      WI     NCVAALCT  VA  OH ILNY
                                                                                                     INME
                                                                                                      NJ      OR
                                                                                                              FL
                                                                                                              MD    NY
                                                                                                                    NY FLMT   NV                                                                            SC                                                         LA           MT
                                                                                        OH IL   NCGA
                                                                                               CT
                                                                                               WA     TX VA AZ   NYFL FL NV                                                                                                       NH CT
                                                                                KS NC   TN                             MD TXCO
         0




                                                        GA MI KS                     NE
                                                                                      PA  ILNY    MO              NY
                                                                                                                 FL           TX
                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                               NCPA      MI MITX
                                                                                               NH  PA NJOH  OK
                                                                                                           LAORPAFLTXCA                                                                           AR                        MN
                                                                             PATX  KY WI  NC
                                                                                          OH OH  CAVT
                                                                                                    GA
                                                                                                    TXIDTX
                                                                                                       LA
                                                                                                        WATN   CA
                                                                                                            COMA WAMD  NVFL TX
                                                                                                                            NVFL                                                                                                                                                         NV
                                                              MI SCGA KS      CA                      VAPA   VA  OK   FLTX             NM            TX
                                                                                WA
                                                                                WIPA MN
                                                                                         MI      MA
                                                                                                 IL
                                                                                                IL
                                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                     OR  TN
                                                                                                        NJ CAMD
                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                             AR
                                                                                                            CA
                                                                                                            NY FL WA
                                                                                                              CO
                                                                                                              MD
                                                                                                                    COVA
                                                                                                                     FLFL
                                                                                                                        AK NM
                                                                                                                        LA
                                                                                                                       AZ                                                                                              NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FL                                                       WY
                                                                  CA                SC
                                                                                     WACA  NCNC KY
                                                                                               ORCA       TX
                                                                                                          CA
                                                                                                           TX    CANY                                                                                                                       VT
                                                                WI AR                    TXCAGA  CA
                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                      NJ
                                                                                                 ILINCA  WA
                                                                                                        ALCAGA
                                                                                                             NY
                                                                                                             AZ
                                                                                                            CA
                                                                                                           GA
                                                                                                           CAMA
                                                                                                             AZ
                                                                                                            TX
                                                                                                           VA   CAFL
                                                                                                                  TX CA
                                                                                                                 TX
                                                                                                                FL
                                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                         FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NE
                                                                               PA
                                                                                CA OK PA   IL NE CA   MO     TN
                                                                                                             TX
                                                                                                             COAZ     NM       TX
                                                                                        IL ILWA  MN
                                                                                                 MA
                                                                                                     NJ
                                                                                                    OR
                                                                                                         MNCA
                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                      CACACA
                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                              TX
                                                                                                             CO
                                                                                                               SC
                                                                                                                MD
                                                                                                                 CO
                                                                                                                 MD AZFL
                                                                                                                    FL
                                                                                                                   TX                                                                                                                                  OK
                                                                                               WA
                                                                                                MA CA   MA
                                                                                                        WA   AZ CA
                                                                                                               NC  CA
                                                                                                                  TXNYOK
                                                                                                   CA
                                                                                                   GACA
                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                      TX    MA
                                                                                                           CA
                                                                                                          TX   CA TX
                                                                                            MNILCA   CT    MA
                                                                                                          TX AZ
                                                                                                            CA TX    FL                                                                                                                                           MD
                                                                                                      KS
                                                                                                      CA      VA
                                                                                                             AZ   NY
                                                                                                 IL CA
                                                                                                IL     CA           VA                                                                                                       IL
           -10




                                                                                                          GACA TX
                                    Coeff = -40.566                                       IL IDCA CA    TXTX
                                                                                                         TX CA  VA                                                                                                          GA                                    CO                                NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OR VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DC
                                    Std.Err. = 5.25                                                       TXGA                                                                                               KS                                                                      AK                              Coeff = -15.618
                                    R2 = .109                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Std.Err. = 12.94
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA                                                                R2 = .012
                                                                                                                                                                        -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ID                  TX
           -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CA

                            -.4                                   -.3                    -.2                                                              -.1                     -.3                                       -.25               -.2              -.15                                                                    -.1
                                                             Average real wage change (in %)                                                                                                                                    Average real wage change (in %)




Notes: This figure depicts the scatterplots of the average real wage change from revoking NAFTA and the
difference between the 2016 Trump vote share and the 2012 Romney vote share by congressional district
(left side) and state (right side), along the OLS fit. The boxes report the coefficient, robust standard error,
and the R2 of the bivariate regression.                39
    Table A1: List of countries
Country              Country code
Australia                AUS
Austria                  AUT
Belgium                  BEL
Bulgaria                 BGR
Brazil                   BRA
Canada                   CAN
Switzerland              CHE
China                    CHN
Cyprus                   CYP
Czech Republic           CZE
Germany                  DEU
Denmark                  DNK
Spain                     ESP
Estonia                   EST
Finland                   FIN
France                   FRA
United Kingdom           GBR
Greece                   GRC
Croatia                  HRV
Hungary                  HUN
Indonesia                IDN
India                    IND
Ireland                   IRL
Italy                     ITA
Japan                     JPN
Korea                    KOR
Lithuania                LTU
Latvia                   LVA
Mexico                   MEX
Netherlands              NLD
Norway                   NOR
Poland                   POL
Portugal                 PRT
Romania                  ROU
Slovakia                 SVK
Slovenia                 SVN
Sweden                   SWE
Taiwan                   TWN
United States            USA
Rest of the World        ROW




               40
                                  Table A2: List of sectors
Sector description                                                             WIOD sector
Crop and animal production, hunting                                                1
Forestry and logging                                                               2
Fishing and aquaculture                                                            3
Mining and quarrying                                                               4
Manufacture of food products, beverages and tobacco products                       5
Manufacture of textiles, wearing apparel and leather products                      6
Manufacture of wood and of products of wood and cork, except furniture             7
Manufacture of paper and paper products                                            8
Printing and reproduction of recorded media                                        9
Manufacture of coke and refined petroleum products                                10
Manufacture of chemicals and chemical products                                    11
Manufacture of basic pharmaceutical products and pharmaceutical preparations      12
Manufacture of rubber and plastic products                                        13
Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products                                14
Manufacture of basic metals                                                       15
Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except machinery and equipment          16
Manufacture of computer, electronic and optical products                          17
Manufacture of electrical equipment                                               18
Manufacture of machinery and equipment n.e.c.                                     19
Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers                         20
Manufacture of other transport equipment                                          21
Other manufacturing, repair and installation of machinery and equipment          22-23
Energy, AC; Water ; Sewerage and waste management services                       24-26
Construction                                                                      27
Wholesale and retail trade                                                       28-29
Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles                            30
Land transport and transport via pipelines                                        31
Water transport                                                                   32
Air transport                                                                     33
Warehousing and support activities for transportation; Postal activities         34-35
Accommodation and food service activities                                         36
Publishing, telecommunications, computer, information service                    37-40
Financial and insurance service activities and auxiliaries                       41-43
Real estate, legal, accounting, consultancy, scientific, veterinary activities   44-49
Administrative and support service activities                                     50
Public admin. and defense; compulsory social security; Education                 51-52
Human health and social work activities                                           53
Other service activities; Activities of households as employers                   54




                                       41
Table A3: Assumed changes in US tariffs and NTB on Canada and Mexico if NAFTA is
revoked
               WIOD Sector ∆τj,CAN USA ∆τj,MEX USA ∆η j,mUSA
                     1           3.447         3.440      7.651
                     2           3.898         3.362        0
                     3           0.088         0.324        0
                     4           0.003         0.006     27.997
                     5           3.526         4.992      5.076
                     6           3.006         4.323        0
                     7           0.620         5.371      9.606
                     8           0.225         1.812      6.609
                     9           0.020         0.001     23.593
                    10           3.677         4.815      7.506
                    11           2.741         2.918      8.056
                    12           0.176         0.370      4.795
                    13           1.962         1.491     11.365
                    14           1.816         3.927      0.606
                    15           1.043         0.999      8.637
                    16           1.844         3.190     16.779
                    17           2.094         1.846      1.782
                    18           2.482         2.772      9.840
                    19           0.982         1.400      3.134
                    20           2.406         6.288     12.682
                    21           0.188         1.206      7.074
                   22-23         1.573         1.803        0
                   24-26         0.800         4.118      9.734
                    27             0             0        7.660
                   28-29           0             0       25.964
                    30             0             0       32.112
                    31             0             0       10.204
                    32             0             0        9.840
                    33             0             0        4.741
                   34-35           0             0       12.830
                    36             0             0          0
                   37-40         0.004         0.002     15.182
                   41-43           0             0       14.974
                   44-49           0             0       17.838
                    50             0             0          0
                   51-52           0             0          0
                    53             0             0       27.396
                    54           0.364         1.677      4.424
Notes: This Table reports the change in sectoral tariffs on Mexico and Canada, and the change in the NTBs
imposed by the US on Mexico and Canada, if NAFTA is revoked, expressed in percentage points. The
sector key is in Table A2.



                                                   42
           Table A4: Top and bottom 10 U.S. districts (Tariff and NTB baseline)
                                        Top 10
         District                Real wage change, % Wage+tariff revenue, %
         Texas, 11th                      0.08                      0.18
         Wyoming (at large)              -0.04                      0.07
         West Virginia, 3rd              -0.08                      0.04
         New Mexico, 2nd                 -0.11                      0.01
         North Dakota (at large)         -0.14                     -0.02
         Oklahoma, 3rd                   -0.14                     -0.03
         Texas, 19th                     -0.15                     -0.03
         Texas, 23rd                     -0.15                     -0.03
         Louisiana, 3rd                  -0.15                     -0.04
         Kentucky, 5th                   -0.16                     -0.04
                                      Bottom 10
         District                 Real wage change          wage+tariff revenue
         Ohio, 4th                       -0.41                     -0.30
         Georgia, 14th                   -0.40                     -0.28
         Ohio, 5th                       -0.40                     -0.28
         Indiana, 2nd                    -0.39                     -0.28
         Michigan, 10th                  -0.38                     -0.26
         Indiana, 3rd                    -0.38                     -0.27
         Michigan, 2nd                   -0.38                     -0.27
         Wisconsin, 6th                  -0.38                     -0.27
         Wisconsin, 8th                  -0.37                     -0.26
         Texas, 14th                     -0.37                     -0.25

         Average                                  -0.27                         -0.15
         Median                                   -0.27                         -0.16
         Standard deviation                        0.04                         0.05

Notes: This Table reports the real wage changes of the top 10 and bottom 10 US congressional districts with
the largest/smallest real wage changes.




                                                    43
