                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     A GLOBAL SAFE ASSET FOR AND FROM EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES

                                       Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                          Lunyang Huang

                                         Working Paper 25373
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w25373


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2018




We are grateful for comments from Mark Aguiar, José de Gregorio, Sam Langfield, our discussant
Carlos Viana De Carvalho, and participants at the Central Bank of Chile conference, Princeton University,
the IMF-SNB conference, and the Asian Monetary Policy Forum. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25373.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by Markus K. Brunnermeier and Lunyang Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Global Safe Asset for and from Emerging Market Economies
Markus K. Brunnermeier and Lunyang Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 25373
December 2018
JEL No. E42,E43,F32,F33

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper examines how a newly designed global safe asset can mitigate international capital
flows induced by flight-to-safety. In the model domestic investors have to co-invest in a safe
asset along with their physical capital. At times of crisis, investors replace the initially safe
domestic government bonds with safe US Treasuries and re-sell part of their capital. The
reduction in physical capital lowers GDP and tax revenue, leading to increased default risk
justifying the loss of the government bond's safe-asset status. We compare two ways to mitigate
this self-fulfilling scenario. In the “buffer approach” international reserve holding reduces the
severity of a crisis. In the “rechannelling approach” flight-to-safety capital flows are rechannelled
from international cross-border flows to flows across two EME asset classes. The two asset
classes are the senior and junior bond of tranched portfolio of EME sovereign bonds.


Markus K. Brunnermeier
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08540
and CEPR
and also NBER
markus@princeton.edu

Lunyang Huang
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton University
lunyangh@princeton.edu
1    Introduction
International capital flows are fickle. Short-term debt funding is especially subject
to sudden stops. Sudden flight into safe-haven currencies can cause large disruptions
and sharp currency movements, ultimately leading to a crisis. When markets shift
from a risk-on to a risk-off mood, cross-country capital flows are triggered if the
safe asset is not supplied symmetrically across counties. Advanced economies, which
supply safe assets, experience capital inflows, while most emerging economies suffer
sudden outflows. Hence, the design of global safe assets is paramount in creating a
stable global financial architecture.
    The focus of the international monetary system has, so far, been on leaning
against these flight-to-safety capital flows. The International Monetary Fund offers
various lending facilities that allow governments to borrow in order to counterbal-
ance these capital outflows. Similarly, international swap line arrangements among
various central banks allow central banks to offset sudden capital outflows. Absent
these facilities, countries’ primary precautionary strategy is to acquire large reserve
holdings in good times that they can deploy in crisis times in order to lean against
sudden outflows. The South East Asia crisis in 1997 was a wake-up call for most
emerging economies. IMF funding was attached with conditionality and hence was
not very popular in Asia. Many emerging countries subsequently opted for a self-
reliant precautionary buffer approach by building-up large reserve holdings. This
resulted in global imbalances, which possibly distorted interest and exchange rates.
Holding reserves also incurs carry cost for the emerging economy, as the interest on
safe foreign reserve assets is typically significantly lower than on domestic assets.
This drains resources, lowers a country’s fiscal space, and hence paradoxically can
make a crisis more likely. However, when a crisis occurs, reserve holdings soften the
severity of a crisis as they can be used to lean against the sudden capital outflows.
    An alternative, more direct approach is to address the root of the problem,
namely, that safe assets are asymmetrically supplied, since only a few advanced
economies supply them. We analyze the alternative institutional arrangement which
involves introducing sovereign bond-backed securities (SBBS) in order to rechannel
the destabilizing flight-to-safety capital flows. Instead of facing cross-border flows
from emerging economies to some advanced economies, one could redirect these cap-
ital flows to move across different asset classes.
   Even a single country on its own could create SBBS by setting up a special-
purpose vehicle (SPV) that buys some of the country’s sovereign bonds and tranches
them into a senior and a junior bond. The junior bond absorbs the losses and protects

                                          2
                          the senior bond. As long as the junior bond tranche is sufficiently thick and covers
                          the maximum haircut of the sovereign debt, the senior bond is free of default risk,
                          and can acquire safe-asset status. With SBBS, investors can at times of crises flee
                          into the senior bond instead of, say, the US dollar.
                             Tranching a diversified pool of emerging-market government bonds, instead of
                          those of a single country, exploits diversification benefits if the pool contains bonds
                          from sufficiently heterogeneous countries. This allows for a “thinner” junior bond
                          tranche without sacrificing the safety of the senior bond. The senior bond serves as
                          an additional global safe asset.

                                                        A                           L

                                                                          Senior




                                                                                          Tranching
                                              Pooling




                                                          Pool of          Bond
                                                         Sovereign
                                                           Bonds
                                                                           Junior
                                                                            Bond


                                                        Figure 1: Structure of GloSBies

                              Such a global safe asset follows the same idea as the SBBS or the European Safe
Brunnermeier & Sannikov




                          Bonds (ESBies) proposal for the Euro area, proposed by Brunnermeier et al. (2011).
                          The Euro area suffered similar flight-to-safety capital flows from its peripheral coun-
                          tries to a few core countries. While within the Euro area there is no exchange rate
                          risk, for the global SBBS the junior bond also has to absorb currency risk if the
                          underlying national bonds are denominated in local currency. SBBS have a second
                          advantage besides rechanneling flight-to-safety capital flows: as shown in Brunner-
                          meier et al. (2016), SBBS can eliminate the doom (diabolic) loop between sovereign
                          and banking risk that arises when banks hold domestic sovereign bonds that are sub-
                          ject to default risk. As default risk rises and the sovereign bond price tanks, banks
                          suffer losses, thus increasing the likelihood that the government will have to bail
                          them out, which in turn lowers the sovereign bond price. Brunnermeier et al. (2017)
                          studies diversification and contagion interactions, carries out numerical simulations,


                                                                      3
and analyzes various implementation details of SBBS for Europe.1
    In Asia, the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP)2 ,
is involved in the so-called Asian Bond Fund. This fund pools bonds from 11 coun-
tries, but does not tranche the pooled cash flows into a senior bond that could serve
as a regional safe asset3 .
    Metaphorically, tranching is like building a second, stronger line of defense within
a fort. With only a single defense line, some knights might be tempted to flee for
safety, thereby weakening the overall defense of the fort. Having a “safe haven”
within the same fort, e.g., the keep of a castle, to withdraw to lowers the knights’
temptation to flee and thereby reduces the fort’s overall vulnerability.
    In this paper, we formally examine the flight-to-safety mechanism. Firms and
banks hold safe assets in addition to physical capital for precautionary reasons. The
domestic bond is considered safe if its default probability is very small (say, below
1%). Since the domestic bond’s yield is significantly higher than that of the US
Treasury, firms prefer the former as their safe asset in normal times. After an adverse
shock, the probability of domestic sovereign bond default rises and the domestic bond
loses its safe-asset status. Consequently, firms try to swap all their domestic bond
holdings for US Treasuries. By doing so, they suffer losses on their bond position,
which also forces them to shed some of their physical capital at fire-sale prices. As
they scale back their production capacity, the domestic government’s tax revenues
also decline. This, in turn, leads to a partial default of the sovereign bond, which
justifies the initial loss of the domestic bond’s safe-asset status.
    Going beyond the baseline setting, we analyze the implications of foreign-reserve
holdings, the “buffer approach,” whose objective is to insulate the economy from
sudden stops. If the government initially issues more sovereign bonds in order to
hold US Treasuries as reserves, it has to pay the interest rate differential but enjoys
capital gains after an adverse shock. The “buffer approach” lowers the severity of a
crisis, but the interest rate differential makes it an expensive proposition. In contrast,
the “rechanneling approach” involves tranching the domestic sovereign bond into a
junior and a senior bond. Since the latter does not lose its safe-asset status, this is a
strictly superior solution. After an adverse shock, firms hold on to their senior bond
and fire-sales are avoided. Production capacity (and with it tax revenue) remains
high and consequently a default is also averted.
  1
     The European Union Commission refined the SBBS proposal and proposed in May 2018 the
necessary regulatory changes.
   2
     See http://www.emeap.org.
   3
     In 2009 the introduction of a similarly structured Latin America Bond Fund was studied.

                                             4
    As the safe-asset status plays a crucial role in our analysis, it begs the question
of what defines a safe asset. In our setting, an asset is considered safe if its Value-at-
Risk entails no losses, i.e., losses occur only with a probability smaller than, say, 1%.
Brunnermeier and Haddad (2012) argue that safe assets possess the following two
characteristics: the “good friend analogy” and the “safe asset tautology”. Similar to
a good friend who is around when needed, a safe asset is valuable and liquid exactly
when needed. Like gold, a safe asset holds its value or even appreciates in times of
crisis. While a risk-free asset is risk-free at a particular horizon, e.g., overnight or
over 10 years, a safe asset is valuable at an ex-ante random horizon, when one needs
it. They are, therefore, held as a precautionary buffer in addition to risky assets.
Indeed, holding a safe asset allows one to scale up risky investment. The second
property of safe assets is the safe-asset tautology. A safe asset is safe because it is
perceived to be safe. Paradoxically, a safe asset might appreciate even though its
fundamental value declines. For example, in August 2011 the US Congress seemed
likely to refuse to lift the US debt ceiling; US Treasuries were about to default
and the S&P rating agency downgraded them; nevertheless, the same Treasuries
appreciated in value. Similarly, the German Bund gained in value during the Euro
Crisis even though Credit Default Swap (CDS) spreads indicated that the German
bund default risk was rising. In sum, safe assets share some features of bubbles or
multiple equilibria. That is, the link to the assets’ fundamentals is weak.
    Dang et al. (2010) emphasize the feature that safe assets are informationally
insensitive to shifts in fundamentals. Hence, asymmetric information frictions like
Akerlof’s lemons problem are limited. Gorton et al. (2012) argue that the share of
safe assets as a fraction of total assets is roughly stable over time. In Caballero
et al. (2017), safe assets are held by very risk-averse individuals who do not want
to hold any risky investments, and a shortage of safe assets arises when monetary
policy is constrained by the zero lower bound. He et al. (2017) model the safe-asset
tautology in a global games framework. Our paper is also related to the literature
on international debt crisis featuring multiple equilibria, e.g., Calvo (1988) and Cole
and Kehoe (2000). While this strand of literature emphasizes the strategic default
of the government due to limited commitment friction, our work focuses on the safe-
asset demand of domestic entrepreneurs and the default in our model is a mechanical
outcome of tax revenue (output) losses.




                                            5
2     Baseline Model
In our baseline model, domestic entrepreneurs demand safe assets to complement
their risky capital investment. Initially, the domestic sovereign bond is more attrac-
tive, since it offers a higher yield than the US Dollar Treasury. After an adverse
shock, one of two possible equilibria can emerge. In the flight-to-safety equilibrium,
the public suddenly expects that the domestic bond might default. Hence, it loses
its safe-asset status and entrepreneurs flee to dollars to meet their demand for safe
assets. The price of the domestic bond drops as more patient domestic investors
dump domestic bonds to less patient foreign investors. If the decline in the domestic
bond price is severe, proceeds from selling the domestic bond are not sufficient to
buy enough US Treasuries as safe assets. Domestic entrepreneurs are thus forced to
fire-sell capital to foreigners as well. The economy’s output (and with it the govern-
ment’s tax revenue) declines, justifying the possible default of the domestic bond.
This vicious cycle makes the flight-to-safety equilibrium self-fulfilling. In the second
equilibrium, the fundamental equilibrium, no fire-sales occur, production and tax
revenue remain high, and the absence of any default ensures that the domestic bond
does not lose its flight-to-safety status.
     In this section we study the baseline model before examining the implications of
reserve holdings (“the buffer approach”) in Section 3, national tranching in Section 4,
and pooling and tranching in Section 5. We evaluate and compare these settings
according to two criteria: (i) vulnerability/likelihood of a flight-to-safety crisis and
(ii) severity of the crisis.


2.1    Model Setup
Consider a small open economy with three dates t ∈ {0, 1, 2} and three types of
agents: domestic entrepreneurs, domestic households, and foreign investors.
   Physical capital produces At K1 units of a single output good at date t = 2, where
Kt is the physical capital employed in period t and At is the random productivity of
that capital. Productivity can take one of the following three values:

                                     A < A < A.                                     (1)
Uncertainty unfolds over time as depicted in Figure 2.
   At t = 1, either the “worry-free” productivity state A realizes or an adverse shock
occurs with probability π1 . In that case, uncertainty remains and is only resolved at

                                           6
                                                                                       A
                                      −π
                                         1
                                  1
                                                                                       A
                                                                            1 − π2
                                       π1                                     π2




                                                         ,s
                                                      π1
                                                 1−
                                                                                       A




                                                 Sun
                                                      π 1,s
                                                                                       A
                                                                            1 − π2




                                                           spo
                                                               t
                                                                              π2

                                                                                       A
                       t=0                   t = 1−                t = 1+            t=2


                                Shock 1         Sunspot: Shock 2
                                               equilibrium
                                                selection

                                       Figure 2: Timeline


the final date t = 2: Productivity will either be A or A with probability π2 . It turns
out that, in the case at t = 1 in which uncertainty remains, two subgame equilibria
can arise: a fundamental equilibrium and a flight-to-safety equilibrium. We assume
that a sunspot arriving with probability π1,s selects the flight-to-safety (subgame)
equilibrium. Both fundamental shocks and the sunspot shock are assumed to be
independent.4


2.1.1    Assets

Agents can trade three assets in the economy: physical capital, domestic bonds, and
a foreign safe asset, the US dollar. All assets pay off only at t = 2 and cannot be
sold short.
   4
     Note that we introduce the adverse shock at time t = 1 only to ensure the adverse scenario is
sufficiently unlikely such that the domestic bond enjoys safe-asset status at t = 0.




                                                  7
Real investment. Domestic entrepreneurs have investment opportunities to build
physical capital at time t = 0. The investment is a constant return to scale, and
one unit of capital requires a physical investment of the consumption good at time
t = 0. Both domestic entrepreneurs and foreign investors can trade physical capital
at t = 0 and t = 1. At t = 2, output is produced. Domestic entrepreneurs have
projects that pay off Ã consumption goods per unit of capital, where Ã is the state-
dependent productivity at time t = 2 specified above. In contrast, foreign investors
face lower productivity levels; they produce only a fraction η < 1 of output Ã per
unit of capital.


Domestic bonds. At time t = 0, the government issues zero-coupon domestic
bonds with a total face value of B0 , which mature at time t = 2. At time t = 0,
the price is p0 . At time t = 1, in the “worry-free” (uneventful) state, i.e., when
no adverse shock hits at t = 1, the debt price is p1,u . After an adverse shock, the
fundamental price at t = 1 is p1,f and, if a sunspot occurs, the flight-to-safety price at
t = 1 is denoted by p1,s . For convenience, we also use subscripts {1, u}, {1, f }, {1, s}
to distinguish various variables across the scenarios in t = 1.
   Our analysis will show that the domestic bond fully pays off its face value B at
t = 2, except in the flight-to-safety (subgame) equilibrium. In the flight-to-safety
equilibrium, domestic bonds may partially default and only repay a fraction 1 − h
proportion of their face value. That is, a haircut h is subtracted since government
tax revenue is not sufficient to fully pay off the debt.
   The government can levy a lump-sum tax up to τ fraction of potential output at
t = 2. Specifically, total “fiscal space” is

                                         T2 = τ ÃK1E ,                                       (2)

where K1E is the capital held by domestic entrepreneurs at the end of t = 1 and Ã is
the realized productivity at t = 2. If the collected tax revenue falls short of the bond’s
face value, the domestic government bond defaults and pays off only partially. For
simplicity, we assume that capital that was “fire-sold” to foreign investors is shipped
abroad and therefore does not contribute to domestic tax revenue.5


US Dollar Treasury. There is an outside storage technology in the form of US
Treasuries offering return R$ in every period regardless of the state. That is, dollar
   5
    This assumption is innocuous. If the government can also tax output produced with foreign-held
capital, one obtains a qualitatively similar outcome.

                                                8
Treasuries are always perfectly safe.


2.1.2    Agents

There are three groups of investors: domestic entrepreneurs, domestic households,
and foreign investors. They trade at times t = 0 and t = 1.


Domestic entrepreneurs. The continuums of domestic entrepreneurs are risk-
neutral and have a time-preference discount factor β:

                                   max E0 [C0 + βC1 + β 2 C2 ].                                    (3)

Entrepreneurs have an initial wealth W0E at t = 0 at their disposal and can invest in
all three assets.
   Importantly, they have to complement physical investment with some safe-asset
holdings. Specifically, they have to hold a quantity of safe assets in their portfolio
that exceeds a risk measure α times their capital holdings, i.e.,

                                        StE ≥ (β 2−t )αKtE ,                                       (4)

where StE is the market value of holdings of safe assets. This “safe-asset requirement”
can be justified simply by bank regulation or as a shield to fend off bank runs.
    Our analysis focuses on parameter values for which both the domestic bond and
US Treasuries are safe at t = 0. Strictly speaking, domestic bonds still have default
risk as long as π1,s > 0, but an asset is considered safe as long as its default risk is
negligible. For example, an asset is considered safe as long as its Value-at-Risk is suf-
ficiently low, where the Value-at-Risk neglects tail risk that occurs with a probability
of less than, say, 1 %.6


Domestic households. Households are similar to entrepreneurs. They have the
same preferences, but they cannot produce with or hold physical capital. Also, their
initial wealth W0H at time t = 0 is large enough such that they are able to buy all
residual domestic bonds net of demand from entrepreneurs. This allows us to vary
the total indebtedness of the country without affecting the initial domestic bond
price.
   6
    Formally, we can define the safe asset as an asset with default probability lower than  threshold.
With sufficiently small probability of π1 π1,s , this condition always holds.

                                                  9
Foreign investors. Foreign investors can buy all three assets. They are also risk-
neutral, but less patient than domestic agents. They solve

                                         max E0 [C0 + β ∗ C1 + (β ∗ )2 C2 ].         (5)

Foreign investors that are potentially invested in the emerging country are less patient
than domestic investors. They also find the low US Treasury yield R$ unattractive,
that is,
                                       1
                                         > β > β ∗.                                   (6)
                                      R$
Patient home investors value assets more than less patient foreign/international in-
vestors. When domestic investors dump assets to foreign investors a fire-sale discount
arises. The dollar is a perfectly safe but unattractive outside option. Its yield is very
low since “other investors” that are never active in our emerging economy enjoy some
convenience yield from holding the US Treasury.
    Let B0 be the face value of the domestic bond and B0E and B0H the part of the face
value of the bond held by entrepreneurs and households. The key state variable in
our model is the country’s debt-to-GDP ratio, which is proportional to the country’s
indebtedness relative to physical capital. We denote the debt-to-capital ratio with d
and the ratio held by entrepreneurs and households by bE and bH , respectively. That
is,
                                  B0 E B0E H         BH
                             d=      ,b =      ,b = 0 .                            (7)
                                  K0        K0       K0
Note that
                                      d = bE + bH ,                                (8)
where we refer to the ratio d simply as the total bond level outstanding and bE and
bH as bond positions held by entrepreneurs and households, respectively.
Assumptions: We make the following parametric assumptions:
                                                 ∗              ∗
  1. α < d < d =: τ A, A < A (ηβηβ  E1 [A]+(1−π2 )β α
                                ∗ E [A]+αβ)−τ Aβ ∗ π α ,
                                   1                2               τA

                  β
  2. τ A <        β∗
                     α,

  3. β > β ∗ (1 + α) and β 2 {(1 − π1 )A + π1 E1 [A]} > 1 ,

  4. W0H > β 2 (B0 − αK0 ),
        1          E1 [A]+αβR$           1
  5.   ηβ ∗
              >   β ∗ η E1 [A]+αβ
                                    >   β∗
                                           ,

                                                        10
  6. π1,s = 0 (unanticipated crisis),

where E1 [A] = π2 A + (1 − π2 )A. Assumption 1 guarantees that fire-sales of physical
capital are necessary for the domestic bond to partially default. Assumption 2 en-
sures that there exists d such that there are multiple equilibria whenever d ∈ [α, d].
Assumption 3 ensures entrepreneurs choose to hold capital with safe assets at t = 0
instead of selling capital to foreigners, buying US Treasuries, or consuming. Assump-
tion 4 ensures households have enough initial wealth to buy all residual domestic
bonds at t = 1. Assumption 5 concerns the behavior of entrepreneurs in the debt
crisis. It posits that entrepreneurs prefer to hold capital with a binding safe-asset
constraint to holding price-depressed domestic bonds. Assumption 6 states that the
flight-to-safety crisis due to a sunspot occurs with zero probability. This assumption
significantly simplifies the analysis but can be relaxed. In Appendix A.3 we show
that our main results continue to hold for a sufficiently small but strictly positive
likelihood of a crisis.


2.2    Equilibrium
This section characterizes the equilibrium allocation and prices for our baseline set-
ting, in which there are no reserve holdings, tranching, or pooling.


Equilibrium at t = 0. Assumptions 3 and 4 imply that domestic entrepreneurs
invest their initial wealth W0E in physical capital and hold along with it β 2 αK0E
of the domestic bond at t = 0 as an accompanying safe-asset investment. Since
entrepreneurs perceive little risk in the future, they reduce their low-yielding safe-
asset holdings to the minimum given by the safe-asset constraint (4). Formally,
entrepreneurs’ bond holdings are
                                        bE = α.                                    (9)
Meanwhile, the domestic bond, which is not expected to default, carries a price of

                                        p0 = β 2 .                               (10)

   Consequently, the initial physical capital holding is

                                                  W0E
                                K0 = K0E =               .                       (11)
                                                1 + αβ 2


                                           11
Since initial capital investment is a deterministic function of initial wealth, we will
use K0 instead of initial wealth W0 as the key exogenous parameter hereafter. Al-
ternatively, capital K0 could be viewed as an initial endowment.
   Domestic households buy the remaining supply of the domestic bond and plan to
hold it until maturity. They consume the rest of their wealth, since US Treasuries are
unattractive as a saving vehicle. To ensure that domestic households are indifferent
between consuming at t = 0 and buying a domestic bond and consuming in t = 2,
the equilibrium return of the domestic bond over two periods is β12 . Hence,

                                        p0 B0E = αβ 2 K0E .                                     (12)

The following proposition summaries our results for time t = 0.

Proposition 2.1. The time t = 0 equilibrium allocation is

             K0E = K0 ,                   K0H = 0,                           K0∗ = 0,
             B0E = bE K0 ,                B0H = B0 − bE K0 ,                  B0∗ = 0,
              $E
               0 = 0,                      $H
                                            0 = 0,                             $∗0 = 0.         (13)

Debt ratios are
                                     bE = α,     bH = d − α.                                    (14)
The equilibrium domestic bond price is p0 = β 2 .

   Next, we analyze three subgame equilibria: First, the subgame at t = 1 when
no initial adverse shock, i.e., A = A realizes. After an adverse shock the expected
total factor productivity (TFP) is E[A], and either a fundamental equilibrium or a
sunspot equilibrium with flight to safety can arise.


A-Subgame Equilibrium at t = 1. If at t = 1 no adverse shock occurred, the
economy’s fundamentals are sufficiently positive to rule out any crisis. In this sub-
game, capital and domestic bonds have the same return β1 . Domestic agents will
be indifferent between holding the asset and consuming. Foreign investors strictly
prefer not to buy any assets. Proposition 2.2 summarizes the result.7
   7
     Note that there are also other (subgame) equilibria with the same allocation but different equi-
librium prices. For example, any capital price ηβ ∗ A < q1,u < βA would be a valid equilibrium price.
In these equilibria, domestic entrepreneurs prefer to invest in projects but are wealth-constrained.
This equilibrium price indeterminacy is innocuous to our result.


                                                 12
Proposition 2.2. (A-Equilibrium at t = 1) Absent an adverse shock, the allocation
remains unchanged compared to t = 0. The price of capital changes to

                                          q1,u = βA.                                        (15)

The price of domestic bonds changes to

                                           p1,u = β                                         (16)

due to time discounting.

    After an initial adverse shock, two possible subgame equilibria can emerge: a
fundamental equilibrium and a self-fulfilling flight-to-safety equilibrium with (partial)
default. If no sunspot occurs, the subgame ends up in the “fundamental equilibrium”
at t = 1.


Fundamental E1 [A]-Equilibrium at t = 1. The fundamental equilibrium re-
sembles the A-equilibrium and results in the same allocation. Also, the domestic
bond and dollar bond are default-free. Only the economic fundamentals are worse,
since expected productivity is E1 [A] instead of A. Proposition 2.3 characterizes the
fundamental (subgame) equilibrium.8

Proposition 2.3 (Fundamental equilibrium at t = 1). After an adverse t = 1
shock, a (default-free) fundamental equilibrium exists for debt levels d ∈ [α, τ A]. The
equilibrium allocation remains unchanged compared to t = 0 while equilibrium prices
adjust to
                                   q1,f = β E1 [A],                                  (17)
and
                                           p1,f = β.                                        (18)



Flight-to-Safety Equilibrium at t = 1. For a high enough debt level, there also
exists a flight-to-safety equilibrium after a negative shock at t = 1. The domestic
bond partially defaults and hence loses its safe-asset status. As a consequence, only
   8
     Similar to the A-Subgame Equilibrium, there is an indeterminacy in equilibrium prices, which
is irrelevant to our results.


                                               13
US Treasuries remain as safe assets. Domestic entrepreneurs fire-sell their domestic
bonds and scale back their physical capital holdings as well. This lowers total output
and tax revenue, which in turn is the cause of the partial default. As foreigners
become the marginal investors in physical capital and domestic bonds, their prices
drop to

                                  q1,s = β ∗ η E1 [A],                               (19)
                                  p1,s = β ∗ (1 − π2 h).                             (20)

Recall that foreigners are less patient (β ∗ < β) and less productive at operating
physical capital by a factor η.
    Since holding the dollar bond yields a low return, domestic entrepreneurs hold
just enough dollars to satisfy the safe-asset constraint S1 ≥ αβK1E . That is, for each
unit of capital, the entrepreneur must spend q1,s for capital plus αβ on US Treasuries.
With a net worth of q1,s K0 + p1,s B0 in crisis times, the entrepreneur can only hold
capital
                  E    q1,s K0 + p1,s B0   β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ (1 − π2 h)bE
               K1,s  =                   =                                 K0 .    (21)
                           q1,s + αβ              β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ
Due to the flight to safety, the capital holdings of entrepreneurs are linearly decreasing
in entrepreneurs’ expectations of the haircut h. Recall that the government only
collects tax revenue proportional to entrepreneurs’ capital holdings. The tax revenue
in the lowest productivity state (Ã = A) thus is also decreasing in h:
                                            E
                                T (h) = τ AK1,s (h)/K0 .                             (22)

     Figure 3 illustrates how the domestic bond haircut h is determined in equilibrium.
The green dot is the fundamental E1 [A] equilibrium. Since the minimal tax revenue
τ A is larger than the required debt repayment d, the domestic bond remains safe,
i.e., h = 0.
   There is another possibility, namely, the flight-to-safety equilibrium denoted by
the red dot. The black line plots the government’s debt repayment after a partial
default, d(1 − h). The dashed red line plots tax revenue T (h) against the haircut.
The equilibrium haircut level h∗ can be seen as a result of a vicious loop between
tax revenue and the debt haircut. This loop occurs in four steps:

   1. With the possibility of any haircut h > 0, domestic bonds become unsafe.
      Entrepreneurs then no longer have a reason to hold them and sell them off to
      impatient domestic investors, who value them less (at price β1∗ (1 − h)).

                                           14
              Minimal tax revenue in normal times τ A




                                Debt repayment d(1 − h)



         T1

                                                                                E
                                        Minimal tax revenue in crisis times τ AK1,s (h)/K0
         T2
         T3
        T∗




                           h1      h2 h3 h∗                      Haircut h

                 Figure 3: Determination of domestic bond haircut h

  2. Entrepreneurs take losses on their domestic bond positions and are forced to
     sell capital.

  3. Tax revenue declines and the government faces a shortfall on its debt repay-
     ment.

  4. The expected haircut on government debt increases, after which the loop
     restarts from step (2).

     In Figure 3, the revenue shortfall after the initial fire-sale of capital (when the
debt is considered unsafe but the perceived haircut is near zero) is the distance
between the black line and the point (0, T1 ). Once investors realize the government
will not be able to repay its debt, the perceived haircut is updated to h1 . Then
entrepreneurs take further losses and sell more capital, which decreases revenues to
T2 , and so forth. This continues until the haircut reaches h∗ such that

                                     d(1 − h∗ ) = T (h∗ ).                                   (23)

Proposition 2.4 (Flight-to-safety equilibrium at t = 1). The flight-to-safety equilib-
rium at t = 1 exists only if d ∈ [max{d, α}, τ A] (d defined below). In this equilibrium

                                               15
the domestic bond loses its safe-asset status, and entrepreneurs fire-sell the domestic
bond and physical capital to foreign investors, causing a loss of output and with it
a decline in tax revenues, which, in turn, causes the partial default of the domestic
bond. The equilibrium allocation is

 E            ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ bE                H                 ∗           E
K1,s =                                      E K0 ,        K1,s = 0,         K1,s = K0 − K1,s ,
          ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bEb+bH
 E                                                         H                 ∗
B1,s = 0,                                                 B1,s = B0 − αK0 , B1,s = αK0 ,
                  ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ bE
$E
 1,s = βα                                       E K0 ,     $H
                                                            1,s = 0,         $∗1,s = 0     (24)
              ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bEb+bH

with bE = α, bH = d − α. Foreign investors are the marginal holders of both capital
and domestic bonds and hence the asset prices are

                                       q1,s = β ∗ η E1 [A],                                (25)
                                       p1,s = β ∗ (1 − π2 h),                              (26)

with a haircut of domestic bonds
                       E
      E   H       τ A K1,s                ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ bE
 h(b , b ) = 1− E          = 1−τ A                                             . (27)
               b + bH K 0          (bE + bH )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE
The minimal debt level for the flight-to-safety crisis d is
                                             β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ α
                                    d = τA                        .                        (28)
                                             β ∗ η E1 [A] + βα

                                                                 E
   Equation (27) reveals that the haircut is decreasing with K1,s  /K0 , the fraction of
physical capital that entrepreneurs can retain after their fire-sales.


2.3       Crisis Vulnerability and Severity
We evaluate various domestic bond market settings based on two criteria: (i) the
vulnerability of the economy to a crisis and (ii) the severity of the crisis.
Definition 2.1. For an emerging economy parameterized by x,
(i) the crisis vulnerability region is the set of debt-to-capital ratios d defined as

               V(x) = [α, τ A] ∩ {d | A flight to safety equilibrium exists},              (29)

                                                 16
(ii) the crisis severity S(d, x) is defined as the fraction of physical capital that has
to be fire-sold, i.e.,
                                                 E
                                              K1,s (d, x)
                               S(d, x) ≡ 1 −              .                         (30)
                                                  K0

    Note that in our model, alternative measures of crisis severity such as total debt
                                               KE
losses (bE +bH )h = dh or output losses A(1− K1,s0
                                                   ) all map one-to-one to our measure
S, which is based on the fraction of fire-sold capital.
    As a benchmark, Proposition 2.5 derives the crisis vulnerability region and sever-
ity denoted with a superscript B for baseline setting.

Proposition 2.5.
(i) The crisis vulnerability region is V B = [max{d, α}, τ A], and
(ii) the crisis severity in the baseline model is

                                        ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ α
                    S B (d) = max{0,                                   }.              (31)
                                       ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ − τ Aβ ∗ π2 αd

   The following sections show that central bank reserve holdings, tranching, and
pooling and tranching alter the crisis vulnerability region as well as the severity of
the crisis.


3       Reserve Holdings: The “Buffer Approach”
Financial crises associated with fight to safety capital flows have historically led to
large economic dislocations and social hardship. The Southeast Asia crisis of 1997
and the Euro crisis beginning in 2008 are two prominent examples of crises in which
flight to safety played a significant role. Especially after the Southeast Asia crisis,
many emerging economies in Asia decided to accumulate large holdings of foreign
reserves as a precautionary measure. By 2018, these holdings amounted to 6.45
trillion dollars, of which 3.42 trillion are held by China.9 Emerging economies try to
fend off crises, but also to mitigate the consequences of cross-border flight-to-safety
capital flows. This section analyzes the implications of holding safe assets in the form
of foreign reserves as a precautionary measure. Specifically, we examine, within our
    9
    The source is IMF data template on International Reserves and Foreign Currency Liquidity
(IRFCL). See http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/ir/IRProcessWeb/index.aspx.


                                            17
model, how US Treasury holdings funded by the issuance of extra domestic bonds
affect equilibrium outcomes. Interestingly, we find that foreign reserve holdings do
not necessarily reduce the likelihood of a crisis, but they do make the crisis less severe
when it occurs.


3.1    Model Setup with Official US Treasury Holdings
We generalize our baseline model by allowing the government to raise some additional
funds. It can now issue additional domestic bonds at t = 0 and promise to repay an
additional bR K0 at t = 2. Since households have sufficient wealth at t = 0, they cut
back their t = 0 consumption as long as the bond yields a (gross) interest rate of
1/β. The government invests the proceeds of (1/β)2 bR K0 into US Treasuries yielding
R$ per period. That is, reserve holdings come with a cost of carry of (1 − (βR$ )2 ).
Total debt is now d = bE + bH + bR , where bE is held by entrepreneurs and bH + bR
by domestic households.


3.2    Equilibria
Fundamental Equilibrium. Absent any flight to safety, the equilibrium alloca-
tion and prices are essentially the same as in the baseline model, but with an impor-
tant difference: the cost of carry of US Treasuries funded by issuing extra domestic
bonds reduces the government’s “fiscal space,” as part of the tax revenue has to be
used to finance the extra carry costs. This additional fiscal burden lowers the max-
imal sustainable debt level. Moreover, domestic households consume less in t = 0
and hold a larger amount of the domestic bond.
Proposition 3.1. The (non-flight-to-safety) fundamental equilibrium with a reserve
policy bR exists if and only if d ∈ [α, τ A−(1−(βR$ )2 )bR ], i.e, the maximal sustainable
debt level is lower than the one in the baseline model. Households’ domestic bond
holdings increase to (bR + b0 − α)K0 , and
(i) at t = 0 the allocation and prices are as in Proposition 2.1,
(ii) at t = 1 after a positive shock, the A-equilibrium is as in Proposition 2.2,
(iii) at t = 1 after a negative shock, the fundamental E1 [A]-equilibrium is as in
Proposition 2.3.


Flight-to-Safety (Subgame) Equilibrium at t = 1. Reserve holdings help to
mitigate the flight-to-safety crisis. As before, in a flight-to-safety equilibrium domes-

                                           18
tic entrepreneurs sell off domestic bond holdings and reduce their physical capital
to
               E
                     q1,s K0 + ps1,s B0E   β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ (1 − π2 hR )bE
             K1,s =                      =                                   K0 , (32)
                          q1,s + αβ                β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ
where hR denotes the haircut for the case with government reserve holdings. The
government budget constraint in the low fundamental state (when A realizes in t = 2)
now generalizes to
                                                   E
                      E      H     R         R
                                                  K1,s
                   (b + b + b )(1 − h ) = τ A          + bR (βR$ )2 ,                        (33)
                                                  K0
                                                   E
                                                  K1,s
              ⇔ (bE + bH )(1 − hR ) − bR hR = τ A      − bR [1 − (βR$ )2 ],
                                                  K0
where the second equation simply rearranges terms such that the left-hand side
reflects the government’s repayment after debt restructuring in the baseline model
minus the debt reduction that arises from partial default on the extra debt raised
for reserve holdings, and the right-hand side reflects tax revenue minus the cost of
carry. Next, we modify Figure 3 to be the new Figure 4. The debt repayment after
restructuring is reduced by bR hR , i.e., the slope of the block solid line becomes more
negative compared to the baseline model. The dashed red line reflects the minimum
tax revenue in crisis time, which now has to be further reduced by the cost of carry
bR [1 − (βR$ )2 ], hence the parallel shift in the dotted red line.
    The fact that the fundamental equilibrium (green dot in Figure 4) is now closer
to the black debt-repayment line reflects the fact that the cost of carry reduces the
sustainable debt level.
   Formally, Equations (32) and (33) lead to an endogenous haircut with reserve
holdings of
                                                                  $ 2

  R   E   H   R
                            ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ bE + bR (βR
                                                                 τA
                                                                    )
                                                                      (β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ)
 h (b , b , b ) = 1 − τ A                                                                   . (34)
                                 (bE + bH + bR )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE

    Note that the new haircut hR is only lower than the one in the baseline model h
if the latter exceeds the cost of carry. In this case, the benefit from haircut reduction
outweighs the extra cost of carry.

Lemma 3.1. If equilibrium haircuts absent reserve holdings are sufficiently large,
then reserve holdings reduce the haircut in case of a flight-to-safety crisis. Formally,


                                              19
                        Minimal tax revenue in normal times τ A


    Carry Cost
  bR (1 − (βR$ )2 )
                                         Debt repayment d(1 − h)




    Carry Cost
  bR (1 − (βR$ )2 )                                                                       E
                                                  Minimal tax revenue in crisis times τ AK1,s (h)/K0




                                          hR     h∗                        Haircut h

                      Figure 4: Determination of domestic bond haircut h


  (i) hR (bE , bH , bR ) < h(bE , bH )           ⇔ h(bE , bH ) > 1 − (βR$ )2 .

 (ii) hR (bE , bH , bR ) is decreasing in bR ⇔ h(bE , bH ) > 1 − (βR$ )2 .


    We defer to the appendix the full characterization of the flight-to-safety (sub-
game) equilibrium at t = 1, as it does not add much economic insight beyond that
discussed above.


3.3     Crisis Vulnerability and Severity with Reserves
Interestingly, the cost of carry of foreign reserve holdings makes the economy more
vulnerable to a flight-to-safety crisis. Importantly, however, the severity of the crisis
is lower if the haircut exceeds the cost of carry. Proposition 3.2, which follows directly
from Lemma 3.1, states these results formally.

Proposition 3.2. Reserve holdings bR lead to
(i) a vulnerability region that is at least as large as in the baseline model due to


                                                  20
reserves’ cost of carry,

                              V R (bR ) ⊃ V B = [max{d, α}, τ A].                               (35)

(ii) a reduced crisis severity compared to the baseline model if and only if the haircut
in the baseline model is greater than the cost of carry 1 − (βR$ )2 ,

                            S R (d, bR ) ≤ S B (d) ⇔ h ≥ 1 − (βR$ )2                            (36)



    The fact that the reserve holdings bR reduce the severity of the flight-to-safety
crisis raises the question of why individual households do not hold US Treasuries on
their own. Why does it require a government intervention to hold reserves? Recall
that the US Treasury’s yield is very low compared to the expected yield of the (safe
but ultimately tail risk afflicted) domestic bond. This makes individual investors
reluctant to hold US Treasuries despite their awareness that the total holding of US
Treasuries reduces the severity of a possible flight-to-safety crisis. Each household
prefers to free-ride on other households’ US Treasury holdings. Individually, they
do not internalize the positive externality that reserve holdings would have on the
whole economy.10


4      Tranching
Instead of building up reserves, a country could split its debt into a senior and a
junior bond. While it might be legally difficult for a country to commit to a specific
seniority structure, it is always possible for an international private-sector bank to
set up special purpose vehicles (SPV) that purchases some of a country’s government
bond and issues a senior and a junior bond. The issued securities are referred to as
Sovereign Bond-Backed Securities (SBBS). Any losses due to partial default are then
first absorbed by the junior bond. Only after the junior bond is fully wiped out does
the senior bond begin to take losses. It is easy to see that the senior bond (with a
yield higher than that of the US Treasury) is much less likely to lose its safe-asset
status. Hence, domestic entrepreneurs, who hold the senior bond as a safe asset,
do not have to fire-sell any bond or any physical capital. They can keep operating
  10
    In a more general model, households might even want to undo government reserve holdings by
taking on a carry trade that shorts the low-yielding US Treasury and investing in the higher-yielding
domestic government bond.

                                                 21
at full capacity and consequently tax revenues will be high enough to fully pay off
not only the senior bond but even the junior bond as well. Our main result in this
section is that the government’s debt capacity with tranching is the same as if the
country had only senior bonds outstanding.


4.1     Model Setup with Tranching of Domestic Bonds
In a setting with tranching, we maintain the assumptions of the baseline model of
Section 2. For simplicity, we switch off the reserve holdings, i.e., bR = 0. We denote
the (total) face value of the senior bond by B0S = sK0 in total and hence the junior
bond’s face value is B0J = B0 − sK0 = (d − s)K0 . We assume there is a sufficient
amount of the senior bond outstanding such that entrepreneurs can fully satisfy their
safe-asset requirement, i.e., s ≥ α, and focus on the case in which the entrepreneurs
only hold senior debt at time t = 0. For convenience, we use the capital letters S and
J as superscripts for variables related to the senior and junior bonds, respectively.
For example, the debt holdings (relative to K0 ) of entrepreneurs and households are
bS,E , bS,H , bJ,E , bJ,H .


4.2     Equilibria Outcomes with Tranching
Tranching makes the senior bond a much more stable asset. Since it is protected by
the junior bond, it is much less likely to default and, if it does so, the haircut hS is
smaller.


Allocation and fundamental equilibrium. At time t = 0, the fundamental
equilibrium allocation is the same as in the baseline model. We only have to ad-
just households’ and entrepreneurs’ bond holdings. Note that with unanticipated
sunspots (π1,s = 0), investors consider the senior and junior bonds as perfect sub-
stitutes. We assume that entrepreneurs have a slight preference for the senior bond
at time t = 0.11 The remaining senior bonds and all junior bonds are purchased by
households. Formally, the fundamental equilibrium is summarized by the following
proposition.
  11
    In the more general case with positive sunspot probability, entrepreneurs strictly prefer senior
bonds. As one lets the sunspot probability π1,s go to zero, entrepreneurs maintain this preference.
In short, our assumption would be the natural outcome of a refinement argument.



                                                22
Proposition 4.1. The (non-flight-to-safety) equilibrium with tranching features a
debt capacity as if only senior bonds were outstanding and
(i) at t = 0 the allocation and prices are as in Proposition 2.1,
(ii) at t = 1 after a positive shock, the A-equilibrium allocation is as in Proposi-
tion 2.2,
(iii) at t = 1 after a negative shock, the fundamental E1 [A]-equilibrium is as in
Proposition 2.3,
while debt holdings and prices with tranching are
          S,E                          S,H                                   S,∗
         B1,f = bS,E B0 ,             B1,f = sK0 − bS,E K0 ,                B1,f = 0,
          J,E                          J,H                                   J,∗
         B1,f = 0,                    B1,f = B0 − sK0 ,                     B1,f = 0.   (37)

with bS,E = α. Bond prices are

                          pSt = β 2−t ,   pJt = β 2−t ,   t ∈ {0, 1}.                   (38)




Flight-to-safety (subgame) equilibrium at t = 1. Despite the fact that the
senior bond, the safe asset supplied by the emerging market economy in this section,
is protected by the junior bond, it might still be subject to default and suffer a
haircut of hS . In this (more extreme) case, entrepreneurs fire-sell physical capital
and senior bonds to foreign investors, who have a lower discount factor β ∗ . The
senior bond price is then given by

                                    pS1,s = β ∗ (1 − π2 hS ).                           (39)

Since this will only happen if junior bonds are completely wiped out, the government
only repays senior bonds partially. The government budget constraint in the lowest
productivity state, A, is then

                                  sK0 (1 − hS ) = τ AK1,s
                                                      E
                                                          .                             (40)

Note that compared to Equation (23) in the baseline model, we now have sK0 instead
of dK0 .
The share of physical capital retained by the domestic entrepreneurs is

            E
                     q1,s K0 + pS1,s B0S,E   β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ (1 − π2 hS )bS,E
           K1,s =                          =                                     K0 ,   (41)
                          q1,s + αβ                    β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ

                                               23
which differs from Equation (21) in the baseline model: now we have a smaller haricut
hS on the senior bond and bE is replaced by bS,E . In fact, the debt haircut function
hS is
                  hS (bS,E , bS,H , bJ,H ) = hS (bS,E , bS,H ) = h(bS,E , bS,H ), (42)
that is, the senior bond’s haircut depends only on senior bond holdings. This obser-
vation leads to the following proposition:
Proposition 4.2. For α < s < d < τ A, after an adverse shock at t = 1 a flight-
to-safety equilibrium can exist. The equilibrium allocation and senior bond price are
as in the baseline flight-to-safety equilibrium of Proposition 2.4 after replacing the
total debt d with only the senior debt s. The junior bonds are held by households and
foreigners with a flight-to-safety price

                                  pJ1,s = β ∗ (1 − π2 ).                           (43)



    Proposition 4.2 states that the flight-to-safety equilibrium with tranching is al-
most as if junior bonds do not exist. To understand the intuition, recall that in times
of crisis the entrepreneurs sell capital and domestic bonds to gain enough liquidity to
buy safe assets. Domestic bonds have two roles. First, domestic bonds are quasi-safe
assets backed by the government’s fiscal capacity. At t = 1 they might lose their
safe-asset status. Second, the domestic bond also serves as a liquid asset at t = 1
that can be counted on even when the only remaining safe asset is the US Treasury.
In other words, even when the price of the senior bond is somewhat depressed it
can still be sold and transformed into US Treasury holdings. The junior bond plays
neither role in the flight-to-safety equilibrium.
     Note also that entrepreneurs only hold senior bonds, the amount of junior bonds
is irrelevant for the liquidity entrepreneurs receive when they fire-sale bonds. In sum,
junior bonds neither act as a fiscal burden ex-post at t = 2 nor provide liquidity in
the interim period t = 1. As a result, they play no role in the fire-sale of capital
and consequently in most aspects of the equilibrium. We relegate to the appendix a
full characterization of equilibrium, including the more general case with a strictly
positive sunspot probability.


4.3    Crisis Vulnerability and Severity with Tranching
The next proposition follows directly from Proposition 4.2.

                                           24
Proposition 4.3.


    1. With tranching into a senior and junior bond,

        (i) if α ≤ d, the optimal tranching policy is s ∈ [α, d]. The crisis region is
            empty following optimal tranching policy.

       (ii) if α > d, the optimal tranching policy is s = b = α, for which the crisis
            vulnerability region is
                                        V T (s) = [α, τ A].                     (44)

    2. The crisis severity S T (d, s) is as if the senior s is the only debt in the baseline
       model,
                                    S T (d, s) = S B (s) ≤ S B (d).                     (45)


    Tranching can either completely eliminate crises or mitigate the magnitude of
the flight to safety. Interestingly, higher total outstanding debt does not make the
economy more crisis-prone as long as the additional debt is financed with the junior
bond. This is the case, since the junior bond can be wiped out without adverse
consequences. The junior bond provides a cushion and ensures that the senior bond
maintains its safe-asset status. As a result, tranching shrinks the crisis vulnerability
region. Moreover, even if a flight to safety occurs nevertheless, the haircut of the
senior bond is significantly smaller, as the junior bond is fully wiped out first. This
feature reduces the fire-sale of physical capital and stabilizes the overall economy.
   Finally, note that s = bS,E = α is the best tranching policy among all the
possible ones. Setting s = α as the tranching point (subordination level) maximizes
the size of the loss-absorbing cushion provided by the junior bond, while ensuring
that entrepreneurs’ total demand, α, for safe assets is met by the senior bond supply.


5      Pooling and Tranching
So far, we have focused on a single country. Next, we turn to an international setting
with many countries to show that pooling several countries’ government bonds and
subsequently tranching the pool exploits in additional some diversification benefits.
The pooling and tranching can be done by an international bank setting up an SPV

                                             25
acquiring government bonds from several countries (weighted according to relative
GDP) and issuing a senior and a junior bond.


5.1    Model Setup with Pooling and Tranching

                                                                                             A
                            −π
                               1
                        1
                                                                         a
                                                                                             A
                                                                1 − π2               i
                                                                                     π2
                             π1                                     π2a         1−

                                              ,s
                                             π1                                   π2i
                                        1−
                                                                                             A
                                        Sun


                                                                         a
                                                  π 1,s

                                                                                             A
                                                                1 − π2               i
                                             spo



                                                                                     π2
                                                                                1−
                                              t




                                                                    πa
                                                                                  π2i
                                                                                             A
              t=0                  t=   1−                t=   1+                         t=2


                      Aggregate Sunspot: Aggregate                           Idiosyncratic
                       Shock 1 equilibrium Shock 2                               Shock
                                selection

                            Figure 5: Timeline for pooling case

    To study pooling and tranching, we generalize our baseline framework to a set-
ting with a continuum of ex-ante identical countries indexed by m. The environment
within each country is the same as in the baseline framework. However, we modify
the structure of shocks: (i) sunspot shocks are perfectly correlated across coun-
tries, while (ii) productivity A-shocks are imperfectly correlated. The fundamental
productivity shock at t = 1 is assumed to be perfectly correlated and occurs with
probability π1 . After an adverse shock, the productivity shock at t = 2 follows in
two waves. The first wave at t = 2 is an aggregate shock and hits all countries the
same way with probability π2a . Meanwhile, the second wave is purely idiosyncratic
across countries occurring with probability π2i . If the aggregate shock is not realized,
no further idiosyncratic shock happens and all countries enjoy a productivity level of


                                                          26
A. The details of the shock structure are depicted in Figure 5. We assume emerging
economies do not trade with each other. Within each country, three groups of agents
trade with each other at the beginning of time t = 0 and time t = 1.


5.2       Crisis Vulnerability and Severity with Tranching and
          Pooling
Combining pooling and tranching does make a difference. The economic intuition
is that combining both policy tools exploits the fact that ex-post there is only a π2i
fraction of countries that truly default. In this case, we need a much smaller cushion
to ensure the safety of senior bonds. We retain earlier superscripts S and J for the
two classes of bonds. Let GloSBies be the superscript for this global safe-asset policy.
Recall d defined in Equation (28) is the threshold of the crisis vulnerability region in
the baseline model.
Proposition 5.1. Combining pooling and tranching yields the following:

   1. With tranching into a senior and junior bond,12
          (i) If α ≤ (1−π2i )d+π2i d, the optimal tranching policy is s ∈ [α, (1−π2i )d+π2i d]
              and the crisis vulnerability is eliminated.

         (ii) If α > (1 − π2i )d + π2i d, the optimal tranching policy is s = bS,E = α and
              the economy is still vulnerable to a less severe crisis.
   2. Whenever a crisis exists after adopting any tranching policy s, the crisis sever-
      ity S GloSBies (d, s) is
                                             β ∗ π2a αd(1 − π2i )
         S GloSBies (d, s) = S B (s) −∗                       ∗   a i
                                                                      ≤ S B (s) ≤ S B (d),
                                    (β η E1 [A] + αβ)s − β π2 π2 τ Aα
                                                                                      (46)
        where S B (·) is defined in Equation (31) with π2 = π2a π2i .
  12
       In the appendix, we also show the vulnerability region is
                                                         s − π2i d
                     V GloSBies (s) = [max{α, d}, min{             τ A}],   d ≥ s ≥ α.
                                                          1 − π2i
We find such a measure is less intuitive for comparison purposes, since the crisis existence condition
α ≤ (1 − π2i )d + π2i d is better described in the two-dimensional (s, d) space. In contrast, crisis region
is defined as the set of possible d for a fixed policy s.

                                                    27
    Notice that with pooling, the tranching-only threshold for the vulnerability region
d is replaced by (1 − π2i )d + π2i d. Recall that without pooling, the relevant condition
to eliminate the crisis vulnerability was α ≤ d (Proposition 4.3), and for d ≤ d there
was no crisis vulnerability even in the benchmark economy (see Section 2.3). In the
nontrivial case d ≥ d, pooling yields a relaxed condition compared to the tranching-
only case. The intuition for this is straightforward: to avoid a flight to safety, we
need to guarantee a sufficient supply of safe assets α even during a crisis. A fraction
(1 − π2i ) of countries that do not default repay their full debt of d, while a fraction
π2i of countries defaulting in a crisis repay only d, the amount of tax revenue the
governments in these countries can collect. Combining both improves their capacity
to back safe assets. Given a total demand α of safe assets, the required supply of
safe assets is

            (1 − π2i )           d
                                |{z}              +π2i          d              ≥         α
                                                                                        |{z}           .   (47)
                                                               |{z}
                             repayment of                   repayment of           safe asset demand
                         default-free countries          defaulted countries

Notice that the global safe-asset policy precisely exploits the fact that ex-post some
country will be safe and thus a good supplier of safe assets. The same intuition
extends to the case when a crisis does occur. The sovereign bonds that do not
default provide a good source of liquidity. Entrepreneurs can sell these sovereign
bonds in exchange for dollars at a favorable price. Consequently, entrepreneurs need
to sell less capital and the severity of the crisis is mitigated.


6     Conclusion
Flight to safety is a major contributor to financial crises. This paper sets up a simple
three-period model in which entrepreneurs hold a safe asset in addition to physical
capital. When the domestic government bond loses its safe-asset status, domestic
entrepreneurs shed it and replace it with US Treasuries. The resulting losses force
entrepreneurs to also reduce their productive capital holdings. The associated loss in
aggregate output and tax revenue makes a default in government bonds likely, which
justifies the initial loss of the safe-asset status.
   The current global financial architecture relies on a “buffer approach” to avoid
cross-border flight-to-safety capital flows. The most prominent such method is self-
insurance via a buildup of precautionary foreign reserves, to a large extent in the
form of US Treasury holdings. This is, however, costly as they yield a lower interest


                                                         28
rate compared to the domestic government bond. These extra costs do not make
crises less likely, but they do significantly reduce their severity.
    This paper examines in detail the less costly and self-stabilizing “rechanneling
approach.” This approach requires a global safe asset that is symmetrically supplied,
including by emerging economies. Sovereign Bond-Backed Securities could be such
a global safe asset. While the sovereign bond of an emerging economy might lose
its safe-asset status after an adverse shock, a senior bond that is backed by several
sovereign bonds does not. Hence, flight-to-safety capital flows do not have to leave
the country. By pooling many sovereign bonds and tranching the pool, governments
can exploit diversification benefits and increase the size of the senior tranche, thereby
increasing the total quantity of safe assets (GloSBSies) supplied by and for emerging
economies.




                                           29
References
Brunnermeier, M., Garicano, L., Lane, P. R., Pagano, M., Reis, R., Santos, T.,
  Thesmar, D., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and Vayanos, D. (2011). European safe
  bonds (esbies). Euro-nomics.com.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Garicano, L., Lane, P., Pagano, M., Reis, R., Santos, T.,
  Thesmar, D., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and Vayanos, D. (2016). The sovereign-bank
  diabolic loop and ESBies. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
  106(5):508–512.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and Haddad, V. (2012). Safe assets. Available at https://www.
  newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/aboutthefed/pdf/FAR_Oct2014.pdf.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Langfield, S., Pagano, M., Reis, R., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and
  Vayanos, D. (2017). Esbies: Safety in the tranches. Economic Policy, 32(90):175–
  219.

Caballero, R. J., Farhi, E., and Gourinchas, P.-O. (2017). The safe assets shortage
  conundrum. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(3):29–46.

Calvo, G. A. (1988). Servicing the public debt: The role of expectations. The
  American Economic Review, pages 647–661.

Cole, H. L. and Kehoe, T. J. (2000). Self-fulfilling debt crises. The Review of
  Economic Studies, 67(1):91–116.

Dang, T. V., Gorton, G., and Holmström, B. (2010). Financial crises and the opti-
 mality of debt for liquidity provision. Working Paper.

Gorton, G., Lewellen, S., and Metrick, A. (2012). The safe-asset share. American
 Economic Review, 102(3):101–06.

He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., and Milbradt, K. (2017). A model of safe asset determi-
  nation. Working Paper.




                                        30
A         Appendix

A.1        Detail on the flight-to-safety equilibrium under different
           policies
Proposition A.1 characterizes the flight-to-safety equilibrium with reserves policy.

Proposition A.1. (Assume unexpected crisis) The flight-to-safety equilibrium at
t = 1 exists if and only if d ∈ [max{dR (bR ), α}, τ A]. The minimal threshold for total
debt level dR (bR ) is defined as

                                      hR (α, dR − α, bR ) = 0.                                       (A.1)

The equilibrium allocation is
                                                               $ 2

               E
                       ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ bE + bR (βRτ A) ) (β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ)
              K1,s =                                                       E              K0 ,
                                  ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE +bbH +bR
                                H                                      ∗           E
                               K1,s = 0,                              K1,s = K0 − K1,s ,
               E                H                                      ∗
              B1,s = 0,        B1,s = bR K0 + B0 − αK0 ,              B1,s = αK0 ,
                                                                     $ 2
                           ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ bE + bR (βRτ A) ) (β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ)
               $E
                1,s = βα                                                       E              K0 ,
                                      ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE +bbH +bR
                               $H
                                1,s = 0,                                   $∗1,s = 0.
                                                                                                     (A.2)

with bE = α and bH = d − α. Foreign investors are the marginal holders for both
domestic bonds and capital and hence the asset prices are

                                q1,s = β ∗ η E1 [A],                                                 (A.3)
                                           ∗           R             R
                               p1,s = β (1 − π2 h (α, d − α, b )),                                   (A.4)

with a haircut of domestic bonds hR (bE , bH , bR ) defined in Equation (34).

Proof . See section A.2.

       Proposition A.2 characterizes the flight-to-safety equilibrium with tranching pol-
icy.

                                                  31
Proposition A.2. (Assume unexpected crisis) For α < s < d < τ A, a flight-to-
safety equilibrium exists if and only s ∈ [max{d, α}, τ A]. The equilibrium allocation
is

 E        ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ bS,E                   H                       ∗           E
K1,s =                                  S,E K0 ,           K1,s = 0,               K1,s = K0 − K1,s ,
         ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ − τ Aβ ∗ π2 b s
 S,E                                                        S,H                    S,∗
B1,s = 0,                                                  B1,s = sK0 − bS,E K0 , B1,s = bS,E B0 ,
 J,E                                                        J,H                     J,∗
B1,s = 0,                                                  B1,s = B0 − sK0 ,       B1,s = 0,
              ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ bS,E
 $E
  1,s = βα                                  S,E K0 ,        $H
                                                             1,s = 0,               $∗1,s = 0,
             ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ − τ Aβ ∗ π2 b s
                                                                                             (A.5)

with bS,E = α. Foreign investors are the marginal holders for both domestic bonds
and capital and hence the asset prices are

                                 q1,s = β ∗ η E1 [A],                                        (A.6)
                                            ∗
                                pS1,s   = β (1 − π2 h(α, s − α)),                            (A.7)
                                pJ1,s   = β ∗ (1 − π2 ).                                     (A.8)



Proof . See section A.2.


A.2       Proofs of Results in Main Text
To ease exposition, we introduce two lemmas first.
Lemma A.1. Households always hold domestic bonds they bought at t = 0 to matu-
rity (t = 2). Entrepreneurs hold their asset position unchanged at t = 1 as long as
there is no fire-sale.

Proof . We argue households will not sell domestic bonds in time 1. There are two
cases. First, if foreigners hold some domestic bonds at t = 1, the bonds must have
expected return β1∗ since foreigners are risk neutral and wealth unconstrained. Since
β > β ∗ > R1$ , households prefer holding domestic bonds over holding dollars and
consumption. Second, if foreigners hold no bonds at t = 1, there are no fire-sales in
both capital and bonds. By assumption, entrepreneurs weakly prefer holding capital

                                                  32
over holding bonds. They do not sell capital unless the bonds are unsafe in the first
place. As a result, there is no resource exchange between the domestic economy
and the foreigners. Since there is no production in t = 1, the total consumption of
domestic agents at t = 1 is zero. Since entrepreneurs do not sell their capital or
consume, they do not have extra wealth to buy additional bonds. We therefore have
entrepreneurs and foreigners buy no additional bonds. Entrepreneurs’ asset positions
are unchanged at t = 1. To clear the bonds market, households must keep their bond
holdings unchanged.
Lemma A.2. In time 0, the domestic bonds price is
                                       p0 = β 2 ,                                (A.9)
and bond positions held by entrepreneurs are
                                       bE = α.                                  (A.10)



Proof of Lemma A.2. The proof is already outlined in the main text. By as-
sumptions, entrepreneurs are not wealthy enough to buy all domestic bonds at t = 0.
The residual bonds must be purchased either by households or the foreigners. With
short-sales constraint, the households have a higher discount rate and therefore buy
residual domestic bonds. Because domestic bonds have finite supply, households
consume the rest of their wealth.
    The above discussion together with Lemma A.1 implies households consume only
at t = 0 and t = 2. They must be indifferent about consuming at t = 0 and at t = 2.
Explicitly, they face a reduced optimization problem between date 0 and date 2.
                                  max C0 + β 2 C2 ,
                            subject to W0 = C0 + p0 B0H ,
                                       B0H = C2 .
The Euler equation between t = 0 and t = 2 is
                                 1
                              β 2 = 1 ⇒ p0 = β 2 .
                                 p0
This proves the first part. For the second part, notice that entrepreneurs have binding
safe-asset constraints at t = 0,
                     p0 B0E = αβ 2 K0 ⇒ β 2 bE     2   E
                                             0 = αβ ⇒ b0 = α.




                                          33
Proof of Proposition 2.1. Following Lemma A.2 , bE = α and bH = d − α. This
gives the allocation of domestic bonds. For capital allocation, we verify that en-
trepreneurs strictly prefer to hold capital instead of selling it to foreigners at t = 0.
The return of a portfolio of capital and safe assets from t = 0 to t = 1 is
                                                           1)
                                          E(q1 ) + αβ 2 E(p
                                                         p0
                                                                .
                                               1 + αβ 2
At t = 0, for each unit of capital, entrepreneurs invest 1 into capital and αβ 2 in
domestic bonds. E(p1 )/p0 = β1 is the expected return of domestic bonds since default
is unexpected at t = 0. E(q1 ) is the expected price of capital. It is also the expected
return of capital because of the unit marginal cost of investment at t = 0. If capital
is sold to foreigners, the selling price of capital at t = 0 would be β ∗ E(q1 ) due to
their impatience. Entrepreneurs prefer holding capital if13
                                        E(q1 ) + αβ
                                    β            2
                                                    > β ∗ E(q1 ),
                                         1 + αβ
which holds under Assumption 3, β > β ∗ (1 + α). We therefore know entrepreneurs
hold all capital at t = 0. At last, no agents would prefer to buy dollars due to their
low yield (Equation (6)).

Proof of Proposition 2.2. By Assumption 1, there are no fire-sales with suffi-
ciently good fundamentals. By Lemma A.1, entrepreneurs and households keep their
asset positions unchanged at t = 1. The equilibrium allocation is the same as in
Proposition 2.1. Also notice that, given the asset prices in Proposition 2.2, house-
holds and entrepreneurs will be indifferent between consumption and holding assets.
Any finite demand is possible. Consequently, the asset market clears.

Proof of Proposition 2.3. An argument similar to that for Proposition 2.2 gives
the equilibrium allocation. The capital price is different now since the expected
dividend of unit capital changed even though the expected return from t = 1 to
t = 2 is still β1 . The bond price is β as there is no default. For the existence
result, a negative fundamental equilibrium can be constructed as specified in the
proposition. It is straightforward to verify the optimization problems and market-
clearing conditions.
  13
    Implicitly here we assume the marginal utility of the wealth of entrepreneurs is 1, which is
the case when entrepreneurs are not wealth constrained in any future states. In a flight-to-safety
equilibrium at t = 1, entrepreneurs are indeed wealth constrained when there are price-depressed
assets available to purchase. However, since a crisis is unexpected, this case has a probability weight
of 0 ex-ante.

                                                  34
Proof of Proposition 2.4. Substituting Equations (21) and (22) into Equation
(23), we have
                                         β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ (1 − π2 h(bE , bH ))bE
             (bE + bH )(1 − h) = τ A                                               ,
                                                     β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ
from which we solve the haircut h(bE , bH ),
                                        ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ bE
         h(bE , bH ) = 1 − τ A                                               .         (A.11)
                                 (bE + bH )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE
The haircut can be rewritten as
                                        τ A − (bE + bH )         1
                       h(bE , bH ) =                         ∂T (h)
                                                                           ,
                                            bE + bH        − ∂h
                                                                      −1
                                                           bE +bH

with − ∂T∂h(h) being the sensitivity of tax revenue to the bond haircut h (in absolute
value), which highlights the haircut spiral. Given the haircut h(bE , bH ), we can solve
  E
K1,s from Equation (21). The entrepreneurs’ dollar holdings follow from the binding
safe-asset constraint $E            E
                        1,s = βαK1,s . Households have their domestic bond positions
unchanged by Lemma A.1. Because foreigners demand return 1/β ∗ for both capital
and domestic bonds, the asset prices follow from discounting the expected dividend
at t = 2 ( 1 − π2 h for domestic bonds and E1 [A] for capital).
    It remains to be verified that the government (partially) defaults and domestic
investors fire-sale part of their physcial capital, i.e., h(bE , bH ) > 0 and K1,s
                                                                               E
                                                                                   < K0 .
                  E       H
Since at t = 0, b = α, b = d − α. For a fixed α, the haircut function h(α, d − α)
is increasing in d. That is, a higher ex-ante total debt level leads to a larger ex-post
default. To see that, define h2 (d) as
                                                  ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ α
            h2 (d) = h(α, d − α) = 1 − τ A                                       .
                                               d(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 α
By Assumption 1 and 2, the denominator d(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE is positive
and to verify ∂h∂d
                2 (d)
                      > 0 is straightforward. Since h(α, d − α) is increasing in d, there
is a unique debt level d such that h(α, d − α) = 0. Solving d yields Equation (28).
Assumption 1 and 2 ensure d ≤ τ A. By definition,
                                  h(α, d − α) > 0 ⇔ d > d.
From Equation (21),
                                            E
                                   h > 0 ⇒ K1,s /K0 < 1.
Together the flight-to-safety equilibrium exists if and only if d ∈ [max{d, α}, τ A].

                                              35
Proof of Proposition 3.1. We first show the characterization of equilibrium al-
location and prices assuming equilibrium existence and then proceed to verify the
condition for equilibrium existence.
   At t = 0, the only difference between the setup with reserves and the baseline
model is the extra domestic debt issuance. Similar to the baseline model, households
buy all the residual old debt and all new debt at t = 0, i.e.,
                                   B0H = B0 − αK0 +             bR K 0       .
                                         | {z }                 | {z }
                                         Residual old debt   All new debt

This proves the first claim.
    At t = 1, note that Lemma A.1 still holds. Conditional on no fire-sales, domestic
agents keep their positions unchanged. The equilibrium allocation follows from the
t = 0 allocation. It is straightforward to verify that equilibrium prices are the same
as those in the baseline model. This proves the second and third claims.
    For the existence result, we need to check that domestic bonds do not default
in the state with the lowest productivity at t = 2, i.e., the lowest tax revenue plus
reserves is enough to cover maturing debt.
                       τ AK0 + β 2 bR K0 (R$ )2 ≥            dK         +        bR K 0    .
                       | {z }  |      {z      }              |{z}0               | {z }
                     tax revenue         Reserves        the old debt       the new debt

Rearrange the equation to get
                                     d ≤ τ A − (1 − β 2 (R$ )2 )bR ,                           (A.12)
which is the upper bound for the existence region. The lower bound follows from the
model’s assumption.

Proof of Lemma 3.1. To prove the first claim, notice that the difference between
the two haircut functions is
hR (bE , bH , bR ) − h(bE , bH )
                      bR (ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ){τ A(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ bE )
=
 [(bE + bH )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE ][(bE + bH + bR )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE ]
                        −[(bE + bH )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE ](βR$ )2 }
 + E
    [(b + bH )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE ][(bE + bH + bR )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE ]
 bR (ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ)(1 − h(bE , bH ) − (βR$ )2 )
= E                                                 .
 (b + bH + bR )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE

                                                    36
It follows
               hR (bE , bH , bR ) − h(bE , bH ) < 0 ⇔ 1 − (βR$ )2 < h(bE , bH ).
                                                     ∂hR (bE ,bH ,bR )
For the second claim, the partial derivative               bR
                                                                         is
           ∂hR (bE , bH , bR )   (1 − hR (bE , bH , bR ) − (βR$ )2 )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ)
                               =                                                       ,
                 bR               (bE + bH + bR )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE
which implies
                   ∂hR (bE , bH , bR )
                                       < 0 ⇔ 1 − (βR$ )2 < hR (bE , bH , bR ).
                         bR
Also notice
hR (bE , bH , bR ) − (1 − (βR$ )2 )
                                  (βR$ )2 − 1 + h(bE , bH )
= E                                                                                               ,
 [(b + bH )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE ][(bE + bH + bR )(ηβ ∗ E1 [A] + αβ) − τ Aβ ∗ π2 bE ]
which implies
  ∂hR (bE , bH , bR )
           R
                      < 0 ⇔ 1 − (βR$ )2 < hR (bE , bH , bR ) ⇔ 1 − (βR$ )2 < h(bE , bH ).
         b
Together, the second result is proved.

Proof of Proposition A.1. We first show the equilibrium allocation and prices as-
suming equilibrium existence. Then we proceed to verify the condition of equilibrium
existence.
    The proof here is similar to the one for Proposition 2.4. Substituting Equation
                                   E
(32) into Equation(33), we solve K1,s and hR (Equation (34)). Entrepreneurs’ dollar
holdings can be solved from the binding safe-asset constraint. Households have their
domestic bond positions from t = 0 unchanged by Lemma A.1. Because foreigners
demand return 1/β ∗ for both capital and domestic bonds, the asset prices follows
from discounting the expected dividend at t = 2 ( 1 − π2 h for domestic bonds and
E1 [A] for capital).
     For the existence result, we need to verify that domestic bonds have default risk,
i.e., hS > 0. From equation (34), the equilibrium haircut hR (α, d−α, bR ) is increasing
in d. Define dR (bR ) as the unique solution of
                                      hR (α, dR − α, bR ) = 0.                             (A.13)
The flight-to-safety equilibrium exists if and only if d ∈ [max{α, dR }, τ A].

                                                37
Proof of Proposition 3.2. For the first claim, we can compute the crisis region
directly. Following Proposition A.1, the crisis region with tranching policy bR is
V R (bR ) = [max{α, dR (bR )}, τ A] whereas the one in the baseline is V B = [max{α, d}, τ A].
It therefore suffices to show
                                        dR (bR ) ≤ d.                              (A.14)
It can be verified that hR (α, d − α, 0) = h(α, d − α). It follows that dR (0) = d. We
show that dR (bR ) is decreasing in bR and the conclusion follows. By implicit function
theorem,
                                             ∂hR (bE ,d(bE ,bR )−bE ,bR )
                    ∂d(α, bR )                              R
                               = − ∂hR (bE ,d(bE ,bR )−bE∂b,bR )
                       ∂bR                       H               |bH =d(bE ,bR )−bE
                                               ∂b
By the second result in Lemma 3.1, the numerator is positive. It is straightforward
                 R E H R
to check that ∂h (b∂b,bH ,b ) > 0. Consequently, the denominator in the equation above
is also positive. We have
                                      ∂d(α, bR )
                                                 < 0,
                                         ∂bR
which proves the first claim.
    For the second claim, we note that the share of fire-sold capital S R (d, bR ) is linked
to haircut hR (α, d−α, bR ) through entrepreneurs’ wealth. Specifically, Equation (32)
implies
                     E
      R      R
                    K1,s     β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ (1 − π2 hR (α, d − α, bR ))α
    S (d, b ) = 1 −      =1−                                                 .      (A.15)
                    K0                      β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ

The counterpart for the baseline is

                                   β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ (1 − π2 h(α, d − α))α
                   S B (d) = 1 −                                            .       (A.16)
                                                β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ

Therefore
                                        S R (d, bR ) < S B (d)
                     ⇔ 1 − π2 hR (α, d − α, bR ) > 1 − π2 h(α, d − α)               (A.17)
                                R               R
                           ⇔ h (α, d − α, b ) < h(α, d − α).

By Lemma 3.1,

            h(α, d − α) − hR (α, d − α, bR ) < 0 ⇔ h(α, d − α) < 1 − (βR$ )2 .


                                              38
We therefore conclude that

                S R (d, bR ) < S B (d) ⇔ hR (α, d − α, bR ) > 1 − (βR$ )2 ,

which proves the second claim.

Proof of Proposition 4.1. Since the crisis is unexpected at t = 0, junior bonds
and senior bonds are perfect substitutes at t = 0. All results except for bond holdings
in Proposition 2.1 hold, with the additional restriction on entrepreneurs’ preference
for senior bonds. The bond holdings are naturally pinned down. A similar argument
holds for all non-flight-to-safety equilibria at t = 1.

Proof of Proposition 4.2. Similar to the baseline, the haircut of senior bonds hS
can be solved from equations (40) and (41), which is

                hS (bS,E , bS,H ) = hS (bS,E , s − bS,E ) = h(bS,E , s − bS,E ).   (A.18)

The equilibrium allocation and prices other than the part for junior bonds follows the
same argument for Proposition 2.4 with the replacement of domestic bonds as senior
bonds. For the allocation and price of junior bonds, one feasible equilibrium is that
households hold all junior bonds at t = 1 and the junior bonds have a return equal
to 1/β ∗ . In this case, the households are indifferent between junior bonds and senior
bonds, but they prefer holding bonds over consumption and holding dollars. The
market clears since households simply hold their initial bond positions unchanged.
    In general, we argue that junior bonds and senior bonds are perfect substitutes in
the flight-to-safety equilibrium. By perfect substitutes, we mean that they both are
risky assets and have the same return 1/β ∗ . They are equivalent as far as portfolio
choice is concerned. The idea is as follows. Since entrepreneurs prefer to hold no
domestic bonds, bonds are held by households and foreigners. To trigger a flight
to safety, there have to be some bonds sold to foreigners, which have an expected
return 1/β ∗ . Therefore households can obtain returns no lower than 1/β ∗ by invest-
ing in particular bonds. As a result, households strictly prefer holding bonds over
consumption and holding dollars. Since households’ wealth is stored in bonds at the
beginning of t = 1, they have to buy the same market value of bonds from the market.
This implies that they must hold both junior bonds and senior bonds as their initial
wealth is larger than the total market value of junior bonds. This happens only when
the expected return is equalized between the two bonds. The pricing of junior bonds
immediately follows from their expected return β1∗ and expected dividend 1 − π2 .


                                              39
   The above discussion shows that there is equilibria indeterminacy up to the bond
holdings that divides between households and foreigners. In all these equilibria, both
senior bonds and junior bonds have the same expected return β1∗ and asset price. The
indeterminacy is innocuous to our main insight.

Proof of Proposition 5.1. The characterization of non-crisis states are standard
following the discussion in the baseline model. We focus on the flight-to-safety equi-
librium here. When the adverse t = 2 aggregate shock hits, the global junior bonds
are wiped out and the global safe assets default partially. This leads to a flight to
safety at t = 1. The price of the global senior bond at t = 1 is

                                          pS1,s = β ∗ (1 − π2a hS )

As in the case of a single economy with tranching, entrepreneurs sell all of their
senior bonds in exchange for dollars. The capital holdings at the end of t = 1 are

         E
                 q1,s K0 + pS1,s B0S,E   β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ (1 − π2a hS )bS,E
        K1,s   =                       =                                      K0 .                     (A.19)
                      q1,s + αβ                    β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ
Because the crisis is unanticipated, we know bS,E = α following the argument in the
case of a single- economy model with tranching. After the adverse t = 2 aggregate
shock, the idiosyncratic shock follows. 1 − π2i fraction of countries have final produc-
tivity A. They do not default and repay their debt in full value dK0 . In contrast, the
remaining π2i fraction of countries have final productivity A. They default and repay
                     E
recovery value τ AK1,s . We have the balance sheet identity for SUV sector (scaled)
as
                                                 E
                                                K1,s
                          (1 − π2i )d + π2i τ A      = (1 − hS )s.                (A.20)
                                                K0
We can solve hS from Equations (A.19) and (A.20), which is
                                                                     d(1−π2i )
                        τ A(β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ (1 − π2a )α) +           π2i
                                                                               (β ∗ η E1 [A]   + αβ)
      hS (d, s) = 1 −                                                                                  .
                                           (β ∗ η E1 [A] +   αβ) πsi − β ∗ π2a τ Aα
                                                                   2


We need to verify hS (d, s) ≥ 0 and τ AK1,s
                                        E
                                            /K0 < d. The second condition states that
countries experience adverse idiosyncratic shock default. This condition coincides
with the first haircut condition in the case of a single country. The first condition
can be simplified as
                                             β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ α
               s > (1 −   π2i )d   +    i
                                       π2 τ A ∗                       = (1 − π2i )d + π2i d.
                                             β η E1 [A] + βα

                                                     40
                                                                           E
Notice s ≤ d. The first condition implies d < d, which further implies τ AK1,s /K0 <
d. Therefore,
                                s > (1 − π2i )d + π2i d                        (A.21)
is the necessary sufficient condition for flight-to-safety equilibrium existence. The
existence condition can be written in terms of vulnerability region V GloSBies (s):

                                               s − π2i d
          V GloSBies (s) = [max{α, d}, min{              , τ A}],   d ≥ s ≥ α.             (A.22)
                                                1 − π2i

The first claim follows naturally from the above more general results. As for the
second claim, the share of fire sold capital S GloSBies (d, s) is computed from Equation
(A.19) once we know hS (d, s):

                         β ∗ η E1 [A] + (1 − π2 )β ∗ α                 β ∗ π2a αd(1 − π2i )
S GloSBies (d, s) = 1 −                                   −
                       β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ − β ∗ π2 τ A αs    (β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ)s − β ∗ π2a π2i τ Aα
                                       β ∗ π2a αd(1 − π2i )
                = S B (s) − ∗
                              (β η E1 [A] + αβ)s − β ∗ π2a π2i τ Aα
                                                                                            (A.23)
                                                       ∗              ∗
The last equality follows from S B (d, s) = 1− ηβηβ∗ E1E[A]+αβ−β
                                                         1 [A]+(1−π2 )β α              a i
                                                                  ∗ π τ A α with π2 = π2 π2 .
                                                                      2   s




A.3      Extension to Anticipated Flight to Safety
In this appendix, we (partially) relax the assumption that flight to safety is unantic-
ipated at t = 0. ur major results hold as long as the ex-ante probability of flight to
safety is sufficiently small. This can be due to either the fundamental being strong
(π1 is small) or a sunspot unlikely (π1,s is small). The interpretation is that no shock
outcome captures normal times, and the t = 1 productivity shock is ex-ante unlikely
to be initial bad news, from which things might grow worse.
    We maintain all earlier assumptions except for the assumption of unanticipated
crisis. In addition, we restrict ourselves to equilibria that two more properties hold.
First, entrepreneurs optimally choose to hold capital at t = 0. Second, households
optimally choose to hold only domestic bonds at t = 0. The first property requires
that the investment opportunity of capital have sufficiently high yield compared to
other means. The second property requires that the perceived likelihood of crisis in




                                               41
                                                                                 14
t = 0 is low such that dollar is not too attractive even in t = 0.                    . We verify that
the two properties hold for sufficiently small π1 π1,s .


A.3.1     Baseline Model

To fix ideas, recall that π1,s is the sunspot probability. For π1,s > 0, we have a new
lemma generalizing the results in Lemma A.2.
                                                                                                15
Lemma A.3. Suppose equilibria exist. At t = 0, the domestic bonds price is
                        p0 = β 2 (1 − π1 π1,s π2 max{0, h(bE , d − bE )}),                      (A.24)
and entrepreneurs’ bond positions are
                                                    α
                           bE =                                          .                      (A.25)
                                  1 − π1 π1,s π2 max{0, h(bE , d − bE )}


Proof . Notice Lemma A.1 still holds since the argument is only about equilibrium at
t = 1. Following the same argument for Lemma A.2, households must be indifferent
between consuming at t = 0 and t = 2. The only difference here is that households
expect bonds to default with probability π1 π1,s π2 . Therefore, a bond with unit face
value is sold at price p0 at t = 0 and gives full face value 1 when debt is safe and
recovery value 1 − h when there is default at t = 2. The expected payoff at t = 2 is
                     1(1 − π1 π1,s π2 ) + (1 − h)π1 π1,s π2 = 1 − π1 π1,s π2 h.
The Euler equation for households between t = 0 and t = 2 is
                           1 − π1 π1,s π2 h
                      β2                    = 1 ⇒ p0 = β 2 (1 − π1 π1,s π2 h),
                                p0
which gives the price of domestic bonds at t = 0. Since entrepreneurs have a binding
safe-asset constraint,
                                                                      α
        p0 B0E = αβ 2 K0 ⇒ β 2 (1 − π1 π1,s π2 h)bE     2   E
                                                  0 = αβ ⇒ b0 =                  .
                                                                1 − π1 π1,s π2 h

  14
     The two properties listed make sure that t = 0 is a tranquil period for the economy. If any of
the properties are not true, then flight to safety already happens at t = 0, which is ill-suited for our
purpose of characterizing a possible flight to safety at t = 1.
  15
      The max operator is to incorporate the case where no flight-to-safety equilibrium exists. In
such a case, the equation has solution bE = α and h(α, d − α) < 0.

                                                  42
    At t = 0, the likelihood of flight to safety is π1 π1,s . As the likelihood of flight to
safety increases, the ex- ante price of domestic bonds decreases to reflect the crisis
and entrepreneurs buy more bonds as safe assets.16 Formally, define entrepreneurs’
endogenous bond positions at t = 0 as functions of probability of flight to safety and
total debt (ratio): bE (π1 π1,s , d). We have following lemma.
Lemma A.4. For each α ≤ d ≤ τ A, there exists a threshold for the probability of
flight to safety π ∗ (d). For π1 π1,s ∈ [0, π ∗ (d)], there exists a solution bE (π1 π1,s , d) ∈
[α, d] to Equation (A.25).

Proof . Rewrite Equation (A.25) as

                        bE (1 − π1 π1,s π2 max{0, h(bE , d − bE )}) = α.                 (A.26)

Since h(bE , d − bE ) is decreasing in bE (see Equation (27)), the left-hand side of the
above equation is strictly increasing in bE . The equation therefore has at most one
solution. To ensure bE ∈ [α, d], we show this holds if and only if π1 π1,s ∈ [0, π ∗ (d)]
for some threshold level π ∗ (d). For π > π ∗ (d), the domestic bonds are so cheap that
entrepreneurs buy all domestic bonds and might even buy additional dollars to meet
the safe-asset constraint.
       Define function F (b, Π, d) to be

                      F (b, Π, d) = b(1 − Ππ2 max{0, h(b, d − b)}) − α.                  (A.27)

F (b, Π, d) is nonincreasing in Π and strictly increasing in b. For given Π and d,
function F (b, Π, d) = 0 has at most one solution for b∗ (Π, d). Notice F (α, Π, d) ≤ 0
and F (d, 0, d) = d − α > 0. There are two cases. First, if F (d, 1, d) > 0, we know

                                 0 < F (d, 1, d) ≤ F (d, Π, d).

Intermediate value theorem applies and there exists unique solution b∗ (Π, d) ∈ [α, d]
for Π ∈ [0, 1]. Second, if F (d, 1, d) < 0, we can define π ∗ (d) such that

                                      F (d, π ∗ (d), d) = 0                              (A.28)

since F (d, 0, d) > 0 and the function is continuous in Π. In this case, for Π ∈
[0, π ∗ (d)], we know that

                   F (α, Π, d) ≤ 0 and F (d, Π, d) ≥ F (d, π ∗ (d), d) = 0.
  16
   Entrepreneurs still buy the same market value of bonds, but the total face value of bonds they
bought increases.

                                               43
Apply the intermediate value theorem to augment b of function F (b, Π, d). We have
unique solution b∗ (Π, d) ∈ [α, d]. If we defined the thresholds, π ∗ (d) = 1 for the first
case. We have shown the claim.

    The following propositions characterize results parallel to those in Section 2 when
π1 π1,s is strictly positive but sufficiently small.

Proposition A.3. We obtain following results regarding the baseline model with the
anticipated flight to safety.

  1. For sufficiently small π1 π1,s , the flight-to-safety equilibrium exists (crisis vul-
     nerability region) if and only if h(bE (π1 π1,s , d), d − bE (π1 π1,s , d)) > 0. The
     characterization of equilibria in Propositions 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4 hold as long
     as bE and bH are replaced with a unique pair of solutions from equations
                                                 α
                          bE =                                        ,             (A.29)
                               1 − π1 π1,s π2 max{0, h(bE , d − bE )}
                          bH = d − bE                                               (A.30)

      and the bond price at t = 0 is replaced with the one in Lemma A.3.

  2. The result is continuous at π1 π1,s = 0 provided π1 > 0.


Proof . It is straightforward that the second claim follows from the first claim.
    For the first claim, we have following observation. If we assume entrepreneurs
optimally choose to hold capital and bonds at t = 0 and households optimally choose
to hold bonds at t = 0, the allocation and prices at t = 0 are by construction pinned
down as long as we know bE and p0 , which are provided in Lemma A.3. Besides, the
arguments for Proposition 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4 go through as long as we replace bE with
the one defined in Equation A.25. Lemma A.4 shows that bE exists for sufficiently
small π1 π1,s < π ∗ (d).
   To finish the proof, we must verify the optimality of entrepreneurs’ and house-
holds’ choices at t = 0. In the non-flight-to-safety equilibria at t = 1, both types of
agents have marginal utility of wealth (MUW) of 1. However, when flight to safety
happens, entrepreneurs invest all their wealth in capital and dollars for the high re-
turn in times of asset fire-sales. Households invest all their wealth in domestic bonds
similarly. The optimality of such actions is ensured by Assumption 5. Consequently,


                                            44
the marginal utility of wealth in crisis times is higher than 1 for both agents. For
households, their MUW is
                                     H     β
                                   ξ1,s = ∗ > 1,
                                           β
                                                              1
since domestic bonds have an expected return                 β∗
                                                                  in a flight-to-safety episode. For
entrepreneurs, their MUW is

                            E          E1 [A] + R$ αβ       H
                           ξ1,s =β                       > ξ1,s > 1,
                                       β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ
                                                       E      E      H      H
where letter ξ stands for marginal utility of wealth. ξ1,u = ξ1,f = ξ1,u = ξ1,f = 1.
    At t = 0, households optimally choose to consume and buy domestic bonds
instead of buying dollars, which requires
                                                   p1
                               1 = β E(ξ1H            ) > β E(ξ1H R$ ).
                                                   p0
The first equality states that households are indifferent between consumption and
holding domestic bonds.
     For entrepreneurs, their available options are 1) holding capital and using do-
mestic bonds as safe assets, 2) building capital and selling to foreigners, 3) holding
domestic bonds only, 4) holding dollars only, and 5) consuming only. We need to
ensure they optimally choose to hold capital and use domestic bonds as safe assets,
i.e., the marginal utility of wealth from holding capital and using domestic bonds as
safe assets is the highest among the five possible choices. We have four inequalities:

                                q1   + αβ 2 pp10                q1   + αβ 2 R$
                      β   E(ξ1E                    )>β    E(ξ1E                )             (A.31)
                                 1 + αβ 2                           1 + αβ 2
                               q + αβ 2 pp01
                              E 1
                      β E(ξ1                       ) > β ∗ E(q1 )                            (A.32)
                                 1 + αβ 2
                               q + αβ 2 pp01
                              E 1
                      β E(ξ1                       )>1                                       (A.33)
                                 1 + αβ 2
                               q + αβ 2 pp01
                              E 1
                      β E(ξ1                       ) > β E(ξ1E R$ )                          (A.34)
                                 1 + αβ 2
Notice all inequalities hold strictly if π1,s = 0 by Assumptions 1-5. In that case, the



                                                     45
inequalities reduce to
                              β E(A) + αβ     β E(A) + αβ 2 R$
                            β             > β
                                1 + αβ 2          1 + αβ 2
                              β E(A) + αβ
                            β          2
                                          > β ∗ E(A)
                                1 + αβ
                              β E(A) + αβ
                            β          2
                                          > 1 > βR$ .
                                1 + αβ
By continuity, there exists a threshold π ∗∗ (d) ≤ π ∗ (d) such that Equations (A.31)-
(A.34) hold.17

    Proposition A.3 shows that our main results hold in the neighborhood of an
unanticipated flight to safety for a sufficiently small ex-ante likelihood of flight to
safety.
    For future reference, we characterize the crisis vulnerability and crisis intensity
for the baseline model in the following proposition.
Proposition A.4. We obtain the following results regarding crisis vulnerability and
intensity.

   1. The crisis vulnerability region V B is
                                       V B = [max{α, d∗ }, τ A],                            (A.35)
      where d∗ is the unique solution of h(bE (π1 π1,s , d∗ ), d∗ − bE (π1 π1,s , d∗ )) = 0.
   2. The crisis intensity S B is
                    E
               B
                   K1,s     β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ (1 − π2 h(bE , d − bE ))bE
             S =1−      =1−                                               .                 (A.36)
                   K0                     β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ

Proof . We only need to verify
                     h(bE (π1 π1,s , d), d − bE (π1 π1,s , d)) > 0 ⇔ d > d∗ .
The rest follows from earlier analysis. It suffices to show h(bE (π1 π1,s , d), d−bE (π1 π1,s , d))
is increasing in d. We only sketch the key steps here. By using the implicit function
theorem in (A.25), we can show bE (π1 π1,s , d) is increasing in d. The result then
follows as h must decrease if bE increases to ensure Equation (A.25) holds .
  17 ∗∗
    π (d) ≤ π ∗ (d) is required to ensure that the valid solution bE exists for Equation (A.25).

                                                46
A.3.2     Reserves

The analysis for the reserves case is similar. Lemma A.5 characterizes bond holdings
and pricing at t = 0.

Lemma A.5. Suppose equilibria exist. At t = 0, the domestic bond price is given by

                    p0 = β 2 (1 − π1 π1,s π2 max{0, hR (bE , d − bE , bR )}),               (A.37)

and bond positions held by entrepreneurs are
                                                  α
                       bE =                                                 .               (A.38)
                              1 − π1 π1,s π2 max{0, hR (bE , d − bE , bR )}

where haircut hR (bE , bH , bR ) is defined in Equation (34).

Proof . The same proof of Lemma A.3 applies here with haircut h(bE , d−bE ) replaced
by haircut function hR (bE , d − bE , bR ) under reserve policies.

   Lemma A.6 shows Equation (A.38) has unique solution for a sufficiently small
probability of crisis π1 π1,s .

Lemma A.6. For each α ≤ d ≤ τ A and given reserve policy bR , there exists a
threshold for the probability of flight to safety π R,∗ (d, bR ). For π1 π1,s ∈ [0, π R,∗ (d, bR )],
there exists a solution bE (π1 π1,s , d, bR ) ∈ [α, d] to Equation (A.38).

Proof . Notice in the proof of Lemma A.4 that we only need the comparative static
that h(b, d − b) is decreasing in b. The same comparative static is true for function
hR (bE , d − bE , bR ). As a result, we can apply the proof of Lemma A.4 with function
h(bE , d − bE ) replaced by hR (bE , d − bE , bR ).

   Proposition A.5 characterizes the flight-to-safety equilibrium, which generalizes
Proposition A.1.

Proposition A.5. We obtain the following results regarding the case of an antici-
pated flight to safety with reserve policies.

   1. For sufficiently small π1 π1,s , the (non-flight-to-safety) fundamental equilibrium
      exists if and only if d ∈ [α, τ A − (1 − β 2 (R$ )2 )bR ], whereas the flight-to-safety
      equilibrium exists if and only if hR (bE , d − bE , bR ) > 0. The characterizations

                                                47
      of equilibria in Propositions 3.1 and A.1 hold as long as bE and bH are replaced
      with a unique pair of solutions from equations
                                                 α
                        bE =                                               ,             (A.39)
                             1 − π1 π1,s π2 max{0, hR (bE , d − bE , bR )}
                        bH = d − bE .                                                    (A.40)

  2. Result 1 is continuous at π1 π1,s = 0 provided π1 > 0.


Proof . The proof is almost the same as the one for Proposition A.3. The result of
equilibria at t = 1 in Proposition A.1 is still valid as long as we pin down endogenous
domestic bond positions bE at t = 0. And we already show there is a solution to the
bE given in Lemma A.5 if π1 π1,s ≤ π R,∗ (d, bR ) (Lemma A.6). At last, we can check
that the optimality of entrepreneurs’ and households’ actions at t = 0 holds given
sufficiently small π1 π1,s .

   Notice Lemma 3.1 still holds, as only function hR is concerned. The follow-
ing proposition gives the policy implication of the reserves policy, which generalizes
Proposition 3.2.

Proposition A.6. Given a reserve policy bR , in equilibria characterized in Proposi-
tion A.5,

  1. the crisis vulnerability region is not smaller than the crisis vulnerability region
     in the baseline model,

                                V R (bR ) ⊃ V B = [max{d∗ , α}, τ A],                    (A.41)

  2. the crisis intensity is less than that in the baseline model if and only if the
     haircut before implementing the policy is greater than 1 − (βR$ )2 ,

          S R (π1 π1,s , d, bR ) ≤ S B (π1 π1,s , d) ⇔ h(bE , d − bE ) ≥ 1 − (βR$ )2 ,   (A.42)

      where bE is implicitly defined in Equation (A.38).


Proof . To prove the first claim, define function F (d, bR ) as

              F (d, bR ) = hR (bE (π1 π1,s , d, bR ), d − bE (π1 π1,s , d, bR ), bR ).   (A.43)

                                                48
Similar to dR in Proposition 3.2, define dR,∗ (bR ) as F (dR,∗ (bR ), bR ) = 0. The crisis
region now becomes [max{α, dR,∗ (bR )}, τ A]. It can be verified that dR,∗ (0) = d. It
suffices to show that dR,∗ (bR ) is decreasing in bR . By implicit function theorem,
                                                                      R
                                     ddR,2 (bR )  − ∂F∂b
                                                       (d,b )
                                                         R
                                          R
                                                 = ∂F (d,bR )                                                (A.44)
                                       db
                                                                 ∂d

Taking the partial derivative of both sides of Equation (A.38) and rearranging the
terms18 , we have

                     ∂F (d, bR )   1 − π1 π1,s π2 hR ∂bE        1        ∂bE
                                 =                       =                   ,
                       ∂bR           π1 π1,s π2 bE ∂bR     π1 π1,s π2 bE ∂bR

                                  ∂F (d, bR )        1        ∂bE
                                              =                   .
                                     ∂d         π1 π1,s π2 bE ∂d
Notice that
                ∂F (d, bR )   ∂hR (bE , d − bE , bR ) ∂bE ∂hR (bE , d − bE , bR )
                            =                             +                       .
                  ∂bR                  ∂bE            ∂bR          ∂bR
                  ∂bE
We can solve      ∂bR
                        as
                                                ∂hR (bE ,d−bE ,bR )
                              ∂bE                        R
                                  = − ∂hR (bE ,d−bE ,b∂b
                                                      R)                                .
                              ∂bR               E          −                  1
                                               ∂b                     π1 π1,s π2   bE

                                                         R   E        E   R                 ∂hR (bE ,d−bE ,bR )
From Lemma 3.1 and hR = 0, we know ∂h (b ∂b
                                          ,d−b ,b )
                                            R       > 0 and                                        ∂bE
                                                                                                                  < 0.
As a result,
                        ∂bE        ∂F (d, bR )
                            >  0 ⇒             > 0.
                        ∂bR          ∂bR
Similarly,

                ∂F (d, bR )   ∂hR (bE , d − bE , bR ) ∂bE ∂hR (bE , d − bE , bR )
                            =                            +                        .
                   ∂d                  ∂bE            ∂d            ∂d
And it follows that
                                                ∂hR (bE ,d−bE ,bR )
                              ∂bE
                                  = − ∂hR (bE ,d−bE ,bR∂d)                              .
                              ∂d                E          −                  1
                                               ∂b                     π1 π1,s π2   bE

 18
      Since hR = 0, we take a one-sided derivative due to the max operator.

                                                    49
           ∂hR (bE ,d−bE ,bR )
We know            ∂d
                                 > 0. Therefore

                                     ∂bE     ∂F (d, bR )
                                         >0⇒             > 0.
                                     ∂d         ∂d
Combine the above two comparative statics and Equation (A.44). The first claim is
proved.
   Now we move on to the second claim. For convenience, we omit the argument for
endogenous function bE (π1 π1,s , d, bR ) whenever there is no ambiguity. From Equation
(32), S R is
                             E
                            K1,s     β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ (1 − π2 hR (bE , d − bE , bR ))bE
      S R (d, bR ) = 1 −         =1−                                                      .
                            K0                        β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ

And S R (π1 π1,s , d, 0) = S B (π1 π1,s , d). Define function G(d, bR ) = (1 − π2 hR (bE , d −
bE , bR ))bE . It suffices to show that

      G(d, bR ) ≤ G(d, 0) ⇔ h(bE (π1 π1,s , d, 0), d − bE (π1 π1,s , d, 0)) ≥ 1 − (βR$ )2 .

We prove the sufficient condition

        ∂G(d, bR )
                   > 0 ⇔ h(bE (π1 π1,s , d, 0), d − bE (π1 π1,s , d, 0)) ≥ 1 − (βR$ )2 .
          ∂bR
Taking the partial derivative of Equation (A.38) again, we have

                                   ∂G(d, bR )     1 − π1 π1,s ∂bE
                                              = −                 ,
                                     ∂bR            π1 π1,s ∂bR

which implies
                            ∂G(d, bR )         ∂bE
                                       > 0 ⇔        > 0.
                               ∂bR             ∂bR
Note earlier that we proved the following result in proving the first claim:

                  ∂F (d, bR )       ∂bE       ∂hR (bE , d − bE , bR )
                              > 0 ⇔     > 0 ⇔                         > 0.
                    ∂bR             ∂bR                ∂bR
Also from Lemma 3.1,

       ∂hR (bE , d − bE , bR )
                               > 0 ⇔ F (d, bR ) = hR (bE , d − bE , bR ) < 1 − (βR$ )2 .
                ∂bR

                                                  50
                                                       ∂F (d,bR )
From the above two inequalities, we have                 ∂bR
                                                                    > 0 ⇔ F (d, bR ) < 1 − (βR$ )2 . We
guess this equivalence implies

   ∂F (d, bR )
               > 0 ⇔ F (d, 0) = h(bE (π1 π1,s , d, 0), d − bE (π1 π1,s , d, 0)) < 1 − (βR$ )2 .
     ∂bR
If the guess is correct, it immediately follows that

  G(d, bR ) ≤ G(d, 0) ⇔ h(bE (π1 π1,s , d, 0), d − bE (π1 π1,s , d, 0)) < 1 − (βR$ )2 , (A.45)

which is the second claim.
     It remains to show that our guess is correct. We prove by contradiction. Suppose
∂F (d,bR )
  ∂bR
          > 0 and F (d, 0) ≥ 1 − (βR$ )2 . By mean value theorem, there exists b0 ∈
     R
[0, b ] such that

             ∂F (d, bR )            F (d, bR ) − F (d, 0)
                         (d, b0 ) =                       < 0 ⇐ F (d, b0 ) > 1 − (βR$ )2 .
               ∂bR                            bR
We can construct a sequence {bn }∞    n=1 by repeating mean value theorem between point
bn and bR . Since bn ∈ [bn−1 , bR ], the sequence is non-decreasing. It has limit b∗ . By
continuity of F (d, bR ), F (d, b∗ ) ≥ 1 − (βR$ )2 . If b∗ 6= bR , we can construct b0 < b∗ by
applying mean value theorem once more, which contradicts b∗ being the lower bound
of the sequence. If b∗ = bR , it contradicts F (d, bR ) < 1 − (βR$ )2 . Together, the only
possibility is that the assumption is not true.


A.3.3        Tranching

Similar to Lemmas A.3 and A.5, Lemma A.7 characterizes the bond holdings and
pricing in t = 0 in the case with tranching.

Lemma A.7. At t = 0, the domestic senior bond price pS0 and junior bond price pJ0
are

                       pS0 = β 2 (1 − π1 π1,s π2 max{0, hS (bS,E , s − bS,E )}),                (A.46)
                       pJ0       2
                             = β (1 − π1 π1,s π2 ).                                             (A.47)

Entrepreneurs have senior bond positions
                                                        α
                         bS,E =                                                 ,               (A.48)
                                     1 − π1 π1,s π2 max{0, h(bS,E , s − bS,E )}

                                                      51
and junior bond positions
                                             bJ,E = 0,                                     (A.49)
where hS = h(bS,E , bS,H ) is the haircut for senior bonds in the flight-to-safety equilib-
rium.

Proof . For bond prices, the same argument in the proof of Lemma A.3 can be
applied to senior bonds and junior bonds separately. For their bond positions at t =
0, entrepreneurs strictly prefer to hold senior bonds over junior bonds to fulfill their
safe-asset constraints. The reason is that compared to households, entrepreneurs
have higher marginal utility of wealth in a crisis state due to their ability to manage
capital. While households are indifferent between the two types of bonds on the
margin, entrepreneurs would strictly prefer the one offering the higher return in a
crisis state. Formally, households’ indifference condition is
                                               pS1           H p1
                                                                 J
                                 1 = β E(ξ1H       ) = β E(ξ1      ).
                                               pS0             pJ0
Comparing the marginal utility of wealth between entrepreneurs and households, we
have ξ E ≥ ξ H with strict inequality in a crisis state (A.3.1). Also notice that junior
bonds get wiped out in a crisis, pS1,s > pJ1,s = 0. Combining both inequalities, we
have entrepreneurs’ valuation of both types of bonds at equilibrium price,

            pS1                              pS1,s                            pJ1,s            J
                                                                                            E p1
  β E(ξ1E       ) = 1 + π  π   (ξ E
                          1 1,s 1,s − ξ H
                                       1,s )       > 1 + π  π   (ξ E
                                                           1 1,s 1,s − ξ H
                                                                        1,s )       = β E(ξ1 J ).
            pS0                              pS0                              pJ0             p0
Consequently, entrepreneurs hold no junior bonds as safe assets at t = 0, bJ,E = 0.
The position in senior bonds can be derived similarly as in the proof of Lemma
A.3.

   Equation (A.48) implicitly defines entrepreneurs’ endogenous bond positions at
t = 0 as a function of the likelihood of crisis and the tranching policy: bS,E (π1 π1,s , d, s).
Note that the total debt-to-capital ratio d is irrelevant here, just like in the model
with an unanticipated crisis (Equation (42)). Similar to Lemma A.4, the following
lemma establishes the existence of solution bS,E in Equation (A.48).
Lemma A.8. For each α ≤ s ≤ d ≤ τ A, there exists a threshold for the probability of
flight to safety π ∗ (s). For π1 π1,s ∈ [0, π ∗ (s)], there exists a solution bS,E (π1 π1,s , s) ∈
[α, s] to Equation (A.48).

Proof . Apply Lemma A.4 with s = d.

                                                 52
   Lemma A.8 is the same as Lemma A.4 except the total debt ratio d is replaced by
total senior debt ratio s. This is consistent with the results in section 4 of the main
text. It is the amount of senior debt s instead of the amount of total domestic bonds
d that matters. Moreover, we have a proposition corresponding to Proposition A.3.
Proposition A.7. We obtain the following results regarding the model with antici-
pated flight to safety and tranching policy.

  1. For sufficiently small π1 π1,s , the flight-to-safety equilibrium exists (crisis vul-
     nerability region) if and only if h(bS,E , s − bS,E ) > 0. The characterization of
     equilibria in Propositions 4.1, 4.2, and A.2 hold as long as bS,E and bS,H are
     replaced with a unique pair of solutions from equations
                                                   α
                       bS,E =                                            ,         (A.50)
                              1 − π1 π1,s π2 max{0, h(bS,E , d − bS,E )}
                      bS,H = s − bS,E ,                                            (A.51)
      and the bond price at t = 0 is replaced with the one in Lemma A.7.
  2. The result is continuous at π1 π1,s = 0 provided π1 > 0.

Proof . We point out that Proposition 4.2 holds in the anticipated crisis case, since
the proposition is about t = 1. The rest of the proof is the same as the proof for
Proposition A.3 but replaces d with s. Again, we need to verify all optimality of
asset positions held by entrepreneurs and households. These conditions hold as long
as π1 π1,s is sufficiently small.

    Proposition A.7 shows that our main results in tranching still hold in the neigh-
borhood of unanticipated flight to safety as long as the ex-ante likelihood of flight
to safety is sufficiently small. Proposition A.8 characterizes the policy implication of
tranching. It shows that the results in Proposition 4.3 are robust.
Proposition A.8. Given a feasible tranching policy s, consider the equilibria char-
acterized in Proposition A.7. One of the following cases holds:

  1. The flight-to-safety equilibrium does not exist.
  2. The flight-to-safety equilibrium exists. In the flight-to-safety equilibrium, the
     share of fire-sold capital S T (d, s, π1 π1,s ) will be the same as that in the baseline
     model with total debt level s,
                      S T (d, s, π1 π1,s ) = S B (s, π1 π1,s ) ≤ S B (d, π1 π1,s ).   (A.52)

                                               53
Proof . Suppose the first case does not hold. From Proposition A.7, we know
h(bS,E , s − bS,E ) > 0. Similar to the argument for Proposition 4.3, we link the
share of fire-sold capital S T to the haircut of senior bonds hS = h(bS,E , s − bS,E ).
Specifically, Equation (40) gives
                                              E
                                     S
                                             K1,s
                             (1 − h )s = τ A      = τ A(1 − S T ),
                                             K0
which still holds in our case. We obtain
                                                    (1 − hS )s     (1 − h(bS,E , s − bS,E ))s
   S T (d, s, π1 π1,s ) = S T (s, π1 π1,s ) = 1 −              =1−                            ,
                                                       τA                    τA
where the first equality follows from the irrelevance of d. A similar equation holds
for the baseline case,

                                                     (1 − h(bE , d − bE ))d
                          S B (d, π1 π1,s ) = 1 −                           ,
                                                             τA

where bE is implicitly defined by Equation (A.25). Comparing the expression of the
share of fire-sold capital in both cases, we know that

                                 S T (s, π1 π1,s ) = S B (s, π1 π1,s ).

It remains to show that S B (d, π1 π1,s ) is increasing in argument d. Thereafter the
inequality in the claim would follow. We note that the result is nontrivial as bE
endogenously depends on d. For convenience, in the following discussion we omit the
argument (π1 π1,s , d) in function bE (π1 π1,s , d) whenever there is no ambiguity. From
Equation (21),
                                  E
                                 K1,s     β ∗ η E1 [A] + β ∗ (1 − π2 h(bE , d − bE ))bE
       S B (d, π1 π1,s ) = 1 −        =1−                                               .
                                 K0                     β ∗ η E1 [A] + αβ

It thus is equivalent to show (1 − π2 h(bE , d − bE ))bE is decreasing in d. To do that,
we note bE (π1 π1,s , d) is strictly increasing in d when h(bE , d − bE ) > 0, which we
mentioned in the proof of Proposition A.4. From Equation (A.25), we have

                   (1 − π1 π1,s )bE + π1 π1,s (1 − π2 h(bE , d − bE ))bE = α,

provided h(bE , d − bE ) > 0. Now suppose h(bE , d − bE ) > 0. Notice the first term
in the left-hand side is increasing in d and the right-hand side is a constant. It

                                                    54
must be that the second term π1 π1,s (1 − π2 h(bE , d − bE ))bE is decreasing in d. Or
(1−π2 h(bE , d−bE ))bE is decreasing in d. It also follows that h(bE , d−bE ) is increasing
in d.
    Notice that for the second case we have h(bS,E , s − bS,E ) = h(bE (π1 π1,s , s), s −
bE (π1 π1,s , s)) > 0, since t ∈ [s, d], h(bE (π1 π1,s , t), t−bE (π1 π1,s , t)) ≥ h(bE (π1 π1,s , s), s−
bE (π1 π1,s , s)) > 0. Our assumption therefore holds for all t ∈ [s, d]. Consequently,
(1 − π2 h(bE (π1 π1,s , t), t − bE (π1 π1,s , t)))bE (π1 π1,s , t) is increasing in t for t ∈ [s, d].
The second claim follows.



    Proposition A.8 shows tranching is still effective as long as the ex-ante likelihood
of flight to safety is sufficiently small.




                                                  55
