NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REINSURANCE, REPAYMENTS, AND RISK ADJUSTMENT
IN INDIVIDUAL HEALTH INSURANCE:
GERMANY, THE NETHERLANDS AND THE U.S. MARKETPLACES
Thomas G. McGuire
Sonja Schillo
Richard C. van Kleef
Working Paper 25374
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25374

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

This research was partially supported by a grant from the Laura and John Arnold Foundation. The
views presented here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Laura and John
Arnold Foundation, its directors, officers, its staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The authors are grateful to Savannah Bergquist, Mike Chernew, Frank Eijkenaar, Randy Ellis,
Tim Layton, Joseph Newhouse, Marvin Oeben, Mieke Reuser, Wynand van de Ven, Suzanne van
Veen, René van Vliet, Anja Withagen-Koster, Anna Zink, and seminar participants in Essen,
Germany, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, and Tel Aviv, Israel for helpful comments on an earlier
draft. Monica Farid of Harvard contributed ideas for analysis as well as provided outstanding
research assistance. The authors are also grateful to the Dutch Ministry of Health, Welfare and
Sports, and the Dutch Association of Health Insurers for providing data for this study.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Thomas G. McGuire, Sonja Schillo, and Richard C. van Kleef. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reinsurance, Repayments, and Risk Adjustment in Individual Health Insurance: Germany,
The Netherlands and the U.S. Marketplaces
Thomas G. McGuire, Sonja Schillo, and Richard C. van Kleef
NBER Working Paper No. 25374
December 2018
JEL No. I10,I11
ABSTRACT
Reinsurance can complement risk adjustment of health plan payments to improve fit of payments
to plan spending at the individual and group level. This paper proposes three improvements in
health plan payment systems using reinsurance. First, we base reinsurance payments on spending
not accounted for by the risk adjustment system, rather than just high spending. Second, we
propose pairing reinsurance for individual-level losses with repayments for individual-level
profits. Third, we optimize the weights on the risk adjustors taking account of the presence of
reinsurance/repayment. We implement our methodology in data from Germany, The Netherlands
and the U.S. Marketplaces, comparing our modified approach to plan payment with risk
adjustment as currently practiced in the three settings. The combination of the three
improvements yields very substantial improvements in the individual-level fit of payments to
plan spending in all three countries.
Thomas G. McGuire
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Richard C. van Kleef
Institute of Health Policy and Management
Erasmus University Rotterdam
PO Box 1738
3000 DR Rotterdam
The Netherlands
vankleef@bmg.eur.nl

Sonja Schillo
Institute for Healthcare Management and Research
CINCH - Health Economics Research Center
Weststadttürme Berliner Platz 6-8
45127 Essen
Germany
Sonja.Schillo@uni-due.de

1. Introduction
Reinsurance -- extra payments a health plan receives once spending for an individual exceeds
a pre-defined threshold1 -- can complement risk adjustment of health plan payments to improve fit
of payments to plan spending at the individual and group level. Reinsurance can reduce selection
incentives not corrected by risk adjustment and mitigate a plan’s business risk. Where used,
however, reinsurance payments typically make up a small share of total plan payments.2 The reason
is two-fold. First, like other forms of risk sharing, reinsurance dilutes incentives for cost control.
Second, reinsurance payments must be financed, either by reducing the funds available for risk
adjustment or by external sources. Nonetheless, even when reinsurance is only a very small share of
total payments, because it targets the highest-cost cases, a little reinsurance goes a long way to
reducing the variation in health care costs not accounted for by risk adjustment (Swartz, 2006).
This paper proposes three improvements in health plan payment systems using reinsurance.
First, we base reinsurance payments on spending not accounted for by the risk adjustment system, which we
refer to as residual spending, rather than just high spending. Targeting reinsurance to residuals rather
than spending is more effective at reducing variation in individual-level profits and losses.
Second, we pair reinsurance with repayments. It is well-known that risk adjustment payment
models underpay for individuals with extremely high spending by amounts that can rise to millions
of dollars or Euros. But there is another side to the mismatch of payments to spending.
Sophisticated disease-based risk adjustment algorithms (as are in place in the three countries studied
here) generate plan payments for individuals with (multiple) disease indicators that can run into the
hundreds of thousands of dollars or Euros. And sometimes, recording of disease indicators in
health claims notwithstanding, plans spend little to treat the individuals predicted to be expensive. For
some individuals, plan spending is much less than plan revenue.3 A repayment policy that limits plan
gains along with a reinsurance policy that limits plan losses further improves fit of the payment
1

This has also been referred to as ‘excess loss compensation’ (Van de Ven et al., 2000).

An exception is reinsurance in the free-standing prescription drug plans in Medicare Part D where
reinsurance payments make up more than half of total plan payments. The original design of the Part D
reinsurance program was not intended to constitute such a large share of payments, and various reforms have
been proposed to reduce the share of reinsurance payments. Medicare Payment Advisory Commission
(March, 2014).
2

Risk adjustor variables are imperfect signals of an individual’s health status. For example, use of home care
in the prior year (one of the risk adjustor variables used in the Netherlands) identifies people with very
different risk types, e.g. young people recovering from an incidental hospital treatment and elderly people
with progressive end-of-life health problems. A compensation based on the average predicted spending for
these risk types likely generates substantial overpayments for the first group.

3

2

system. Furthermore, pairing repayments with reinsurance has the attractive feature that pay-ins
from plans on highly profitable enrollees help finance the pay-outs to plans for the enrollees with
very large losses.
Third, we optimize the weights on the risk adjustors taking account of the presence of
reinsurance/repayment. Risk adjusted payments to plans are intended to cover spending which is the
responsibility of the health plan. Risk adjusted payments need not cover spending that will be taken
care of by reinsurance. We show that a simple iteration optimizes the regression weights predicting
plan spending net of reinsurance/repayment and optimizes the upside and downside thresholds
where reinsurance and repayment, respectively, should kick in. The benefits of this integrated
approach to estimation can be illustrated with a simple example. Imagine a risk adjustment model
that includes a morbidity indicator x which identifies a group of people with high spending on
average but with considerable variation around the average. A payment weight for this indicator
based on the average incremental spending in the group will underpay some people and overpay
others. Our integrated estimation procedure accounts for the presence of reinsurance which directly
improves fit for the group members with spending much above the group average. The consequent
reduction in the estimated payment weight indirectly improves fit for those with lower than average
costs. A similar argument could be made for the beneficial effects of the repayment component.
We implement our methodology in data from Germany, The Netherlands and the U.S.
Marketplaces, comparing our modified approach to plan payment with risk adjustment as currently
practiced in the three settings. The combination of 1) targeting reinsurance/repayment to residual
spending rather than absolute spending, 2) supplementing reinsurance with repayments for highly
overpaid enrollees, and 3) optimizing regression weights in the presence of reinsurance/repayment
yields very substantial improvements in the individual-level fit of payments to plan spending in all
three countries. Conducting empirical risk adjustment research in parallel in three countries is a
novel contribution. Similar results in the three distinct individual health insurance markets supports
the generality of our findings about the impacts of health plan payment alternatives considered.
Previous research in the three countries and elsewhere has investigated the properties of
supplementing risk adjustment with reinsurance or other forms of risk sharing. Studies in the US,
including a number focusing on the Marketplaces,4 have found that conventional reinsurance,

The following papers all use payment systems modelled on the Marketplaces. Geruso and McGuire (2016)
use MarketScan data from 2008-09, and Zhu et al., (2013) and Layton, McGuire and Sinaiko (2016) use data
from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) with characteristics matching likely Marketplace
4

3

defined on spending rather than residuals, improves fit at the person level as well as at the level of
groups defined by use of certain services. Consistent findings emerge in research in Israel (BrammliGreenberg, Glazer and Waitzburg, 2018) the Netherlands (Van Barneveld et al., 1998, 2001), and
Switzerland (Schmid and Beck, 2016). As far as we know, Schillo et al. (2016), in a paper on
Germany, are the first to propose and check a reinsurance system based on residual spending – also
highly effective at improving fit of the payment model.5
A limitation on gains at the individual level (as is done with a repayment feature) has been
paired with a limitation on losses (the reinsurance function) in U.S. Medicare payment models for
hospital and home health care. Medicare pays hospitals prospectively on the basis of DiagnosisRelated-Groups (DRGs), but if the cost of a stay exceeds a fixed loss threshold, Medicare covers
80% of the cost above the threshold. On the other side of the realized cost distribution, if a patient
is transferred and their length of stay at the transferring hospital is lower than the DRG-specific
geometric mean, Medicare pays a per diem rate – in effect, requiring a repayment from the DRGbased payment.6 For long-term care (LTC) hospitals, ‘short-stay outliers’ receive less than full
payment.7 A short-stay outlier is a stay length that is less than or equal to 5/6th of the LTC-DRG
specific geometric mean length of stay. For these cases, Medicare pays roughly the LTC-DRG per

participants. Using an updated version of the data used for calibration of the ACA risk adjustment models -the same data are used in this paper -- Layton, Ellis, McGuire and Van Kleef (2017) show that reinsurance
paired with prospective risk adjustment produces an individual-level fit of payments to costs much higher
than concurrent risk adjustment with no reinsurance.
In a related approach some research groups have studied including a variable representing “high cost” as a
risk adjustor directly. Schillo et al. (2016) study including an indicator for high-cost groups, Layton and
McGuire (2017) propose including costs above the reinsurance attachment point as a risk adjustor, and Van
Kleef and Van Vliet (2012) include an indicator of persistent high cost in multiple previous years as an
adjustor, an approach subsequently incorporated in the Dutch risk adjustment model.

5

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). "Medicare Claims Processing Manual. Chapter 3Inpatient Hospital Billing. (2018) Section 20.1.2.4 https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-andGuidance/Guidance/Manuals/downloads/clm104c03.pdf. The Medicare Learning Network (MLN). Acute
Care Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment System. March 2018 https://www.cms.gov/Outreach-andEducation/Medicare-Learning-Network-MLN/MLNProducts/downloads/acutepaymtsysfctsht.pdf
6

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). "Medicare Claims Processing Manual. Chapter 3Inpatient Hospital Billing. (2018) Section 150.9.1.1 https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-andGuidance/Guidance/Manuals/downloads/clm104c03.pdf. Long-term care hospitals specialize in providing
care to patients with complex needs (often transferring from an intensive care unit) who usually stay more
than 25 days. https://www.medicare.gov/Pubs/pdf/11347-Long-Term-Care-Hospitals.pdf
7

4

diem amount.8 Finally, in the home health setting also, reinsurance supplements payments for cases
for which spending during the 60-day episode greatly exceeded the 60-day case-mix adjusted
payment. On the other hand, beneficiaries whose episode consisted of four or fewer visits are paid a
standardized amount per visit rather than the full 60-day adjusted episode payment.9 In this light,
our paper imports the idea of reinsurance/repayment from these other areas, with the added
features that we designate thresholds based on spending residuals, and we optimize the risk adjusted
payment amount for the presence of the up and down-side risk sharing.
Section 2 contains a brief overview of risk adjustment and risk sharing in health plan
payment in the three countries as well as a description of the data used for the empirical application.
In the case of The Netherlands and the Marketplaces, the data are those actually used to calibrate the
national risk adjustment system. The data from Germany are from a large sickness fund operating
nationwide. In all countries, we split the data into equal-sized “training” and “test” samples to avoid
overfitting problems. All estimation, including reinsurance thresholds, is done on the training
samples. All outcome measures are calculated on the test samples.
Section 3 presents the results in step-wise fashion in order to isolate the contribution of
each modification we propose. All simulations are balanced-budget, meaning any risk sharing is
financed by reducing funds available for the risk-adjusted payment. Our baseline is current practice:
a risk adjustment model estimated on total spending without regard for any reinsurance or other risk
sharing features. We then add conventional reinsurance – i.e. based on spending – equal to 2% of
total spending in each country.10 By choosing the same percentage devoted to reinsurance we can
more readily compare results across the three health insurance markets. We next target reinsurance
to residual spending. Next, we add a repayment feature defined on negative residual spending (where
risk adjustment payments exceed spending) and set the repayments equal to 2% of total spending.
Finally, in the context of residual-based reinsurance and repayments, we reestimate the risk
adjustment weights and simultaneously optimize the weights and the up and down-side thresholds
The Medicare Learning Network (MLN). Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 Inpatient Prospective Payment
System(IPPS) and Long Term Care Hospital (LTCH) PPS Changes. October 2017
https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Guidance/Manuals/downloads/clm104c03.pdf

8

CMS.gov website, Home Health PPS. https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-ServicePayment/HomeHealthPPS/index.html
9

In this paper we choose the shares of spending allocated by reinsurance (and repayments) for purposes of
illustration. In practice, the regulator might set these parameters in the light of the tradeoffs involved in
improving selection-related incentives at the expense of reducing incentives for cost control. We make some
comments on this tradeoff in the context of reinsurance and repayment policy later in the paper.
10

5

for reinsurance and repayment. After this exercise for a fixed share devoted to reinsurance, we
show results for various combinations of reinsurance and repayment, all with optimized regression
weights. Specifically, we study the four combinations of reinsurance at 1% and 2% and repayment
at 0% and 1%. All this is done in parallel in the three countries to compare the impacts of identical
policies in different health insurance markets.
We find that in spite of major differences in patterns of health care spending and risk
adjustment practices in the three countries, residual-based reinsurance and repayment has powerful
and remarkably similar impacts on individual-level fit across settings. In the optimized systems, 2%
residual-based reinsurance paired with 2% residual-based repayments leads to improvements in
individual-level payment fit varying from about 30 percentage points in the Netherlands and the
Marketplaces to about 40 percentage points in Germany. Section 4 comments on the practical
application of our findings and discusses some potential next steps in research. Methodologically,
the primary takeaway from our paper is that full optimization of payment system parameters
requires teamwork between risk-adjustment weights and reinsurance/repayments. Empirically, the
primary takeaway is that modifying payment systems using 2% reinsurance/2% repayment based on
residual spending and optimized risk adjustment weights approximately doubles the individual-level
fit of conventional risk adjustment models.
2. Health Plan Payment in Germany, The Netherlands and the U.S. Marketplaces
Individual health insurance markets in Germany, The Netherlands and Marketplaces in the
U.S. are organized around principles of regulated (or managed) competition, as first proposed by
Enthoven (1980). Belgium, Colombia, Israel, Switzerland, and Medicare Advantage (the private
option for Medicare beneficiaries in the U.S.) among other countries and sectors, share some similar
features.11 Regulated competition puts health plans in competition with the goal of generating
incentives for cost containment and efficient plan design.12 In policies that differ country-bycountry, regulators promote competition by allowing health plans some, but limited, discretion
about plan design (e.g. in terms of provider network and cost sharing options). At the same time,
McGuire and Van Kleef, eds. (2018) contains descriptions of the individual health plan markets structured
as regulated competition in 14 countries and sectors.

11

By ‘health plan competition’ we mean competition among health insurers who offer one or multiple health
plans. A ‘health plan’ refers to a health insurance product. All consumers who have the same ‘health plan’
have an identical contract with the same insurer concerning benefits coverage, cost-sharing, quality, services,
etc. Since objectives and strategies of insurers can differ across health plans (primarily in the U.S. and The
Netherlands), this paper will speak of health plans instead of insurers as decision makers.

12

6

the regulators manage competition in order to guarantee public objectives such as affordability and
accessibility. In all three countries, enrollee premiums do not differ according to the health status of
individuals while some form of risk adjustment of plan payment is done centrally to transfer funds
to plans enrolling more costly individuals. Risk adjustment is designed to ensure plan viability, but
more importantly, to counter plan incentives to attract the healthy and deter the sick from joining
the plan.
2.1 Germany
The public health insurance system in Germany is the largest individual health insurance
market in the world, both in terms of the number of lives covered and in the total plan payments
(Wasem et al., 2018). In 1996, free choice of sickness funds was introduced for all members of the
social health insurance system. Two years prior, in 1994, risk adjustment was established to provide
equal opportunities for sickness funds with diverging risk profiles of their insured. In 2009, the
formerly mostly demographic risk adjustment system became morbidity-based. Since then the
payments to the sickness funds are calculated by an individual-level least squares regression weighted
by the fraction of the year the individual is insured in the social health insurance system. Risk
adjustors (see Table 1) are included in the form of dummy-variables. The model is prospective:
expenditures from one year are explained by demographic characteristics from the same year but the
morbidity characteristics are taken from the previous year.13 From 2002 until 2009, risk adjustment
was complemented by reinsurance from a high expenditure pool through which sickness funds were
reimbursed 60% of spending above a certain individual threshold. With the introduction of the
morbidity-based risk adjustment the high expenditure pool was abolished. Debate continues about
reintroduction of elements of reinsurance.14
Data from Germany used in this paper are from one large national insurer.15 Table 2
summarizes some features of the German data as well as for the other countries.
2.2 The Netherlands
Since 2006, The Netherlands have had a national health insurance system based on
principles of regulated competition, with a risk adjustment system that has been improved over time.
In the early years, the risk adjustment system was supplemented with reinsurance to mitigate

13

The German regression is run on cost per day which is equivalent to an annualization.

14

See for example Drösler et al. (2017).

15

More description of the data source is contained in Schillo et al. (2016).
7

selection incentives remaining after risk adjustment and to mitigate plans’ business risk due to
financial uncertainties surrounding specific healthcare system reforms. As risk adjustment was
improved and the health insurance market stabilized, reinsurance thresholds were increased; in 2014,
reinsurance was abolished altogether. In 2018, the Dutch risk adjustment system consists of three
different models, one for each of the following categories: somatic care, mental health care, and outof-pocket payments due to the mandatory deductible of 385 Euros per adult per year (Van Kleef et
al., 2018a). For simplicity, our analyses will be based on the model for somatic care only. This
model accounts for about 85% of total spending and includes 193 risk classes, which are described
in Table 1. Risk classes take the form of dummy variables indicating whether an individual is a
member of a class or not. Currently, risk adjustor coefficients are derived by an individual-level
weighted least squares regression of annualized expenditures in 2015 on demographic variables from
year 2015 and the disease indicators listed in Table 1 from 2014 or before. Data on expenditures
and characteristics cover the entire Dutch population with a health plan in 2015. Prior to
estimation, some modifications are applied to make the available data representative for 2018 (e.g.
including modifications for changes in the benefits package).16
Data from The Netherlands are those actually used for calibration of plan payment models,
and have been used in a number of research papers.17
2.3 U.S. Marketplaces
The U.S. Marketplaces, created as part of the Affordable Care Act (2010) and popularly
known as “Obamacare,” began enrolling individuals and families in 2014 (Layton, Montz and
Shepard, 2018). These markets, organized at the state level, are intended to provide affordable
health insurance for those who do not receive insurance through their employers or through public
programs providing coverage for the elderly (Medicare) or for low-income families (Medicaid). The
law included a number of reforms which shifted the individual health insurance market toward a
version of regulated competition, including income-related subsidies, (partial) community rating of
premiums, mandated coverage of a basket of “essential health benefits,” and guaranteed issue and
renewal provisions prohibiting plans from rejecting applicants based on their health status. As of
In the regression model expenditures are annualized and the observations weighted by the fraction of the
year an individual was enrolled in 2015 (which can be smaller than 1.0 due to birth, death, migration and
other factors). For example, a person with a half-year enrollment and 2,000 Euro expenditures is given a
weight of 0.5 and annualized expenditures of 4,000 Euro (2,000/0.5).

16

For some recent papers see Layton, McGuire and Van Kleef (2016), Van Kleef et al., (2017), Van Veen et
al., (2017).

17

8

the first quarter of 2018, about 10.6 million Americans were enrolled in a Marketplace plan, 87% of
whom receive premium subsidies, representing over 70% of the individual health insurance market.
The extent of coverage in Marketplace plans ranges from approximately 60% on average for
“bronze” plans to 90% for “platinum” plans. The Marketplace risk adjustment model assigns risk
scores to enrollees based on their demographics and observed diagnoses during the concurrent plan
year (i.e. calendar year). Risk scores are calculated using a model developed by the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS), the HHS Hierarchical Condition Categories (HHS-HCC)
model. The HHS-HCC model predicts an enrollee’s medical spending in the current year by
mapping diagnoses coded on insurance claims into one of currently 127 HHS-selected HCCs, which
were drawn selected from the larger set of HCCs available in the diagnostic classification system).18
A “temporary” reinsurance component was part of the Marketplace payment system in the first
three years, and due to a continuing concern about high-cost cases, a modest reinsurance function
was restored through changes in the formula transferring funds among health plans (Jost, 2016;
Layton and McGuire, 2017). As of August, 2018, seven states in the U.S. have received waivers
from the federal government to reintroduce reinsurance in their Marketplaces.19
The U.S. data are an updated version of the MarketScan data used to calibrate plan payment
models in the Marketplaces. The 8.2 million sample from the larger MarketScan files is drawn using
the same exclusion/inclusion criteria used by HHS in estimating risk adjustment models, as has been
done in previous research on Marketplace payment models.20
3. Residual-Based Reinsurance and Repayment, and Optimized Risk Adjustment Weights
This section defines parameters of the plan payment systems and summarizes the payment
systems studied in the simulations.
Kautter et al. (2014) describe the choice of the original 100 HCCs. In 2016, there were 127 HCCs. In 2018
some modifications were added using drug use indicators and enrollment duration factors.
https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Programs-and-Initiatives/Premium-StabilizationPrograms/Downloads/2018-Benefit-Year-Final-HHS-Risk-Adjustment-Model-Coefficients.pdf.
18

https://www.commonwealthfund.org/blog/2018/affordable-care-act-under-trumpadministration?omnicid=EALERT1465357&mid=mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu.

19

See Layton et al. (2017), Layton and McGuire (2017). Following practice for estimating risk adjustment
models in the Marketplaces, our sample is restricted to those individuals who had both prescription drug and
mental health coverage and who had no negative or capitated claims. In addition, we further restricted our
sample population to those continuously enrolled for twelve months who were in a non-HMO plan in the
first and last month. The U.S. data are for full-year enrollees only, following current practice used for
estimation of risk adjustment models for the Marketplaces.

20

9

3.1 Plan Payment Models
A risk adjustment payment consists of the summed product of the scores on a set of risk
adjustor variables and the payment weights on these variables which we call the β weights. The risk
adjustor variables differ by country as set out in Table 1. We treat the choice of risk adjustors as
given. That is, for the plan payment models studied for Germany, for example, the risk adjustor
variables are the same as those actually used and described in Table 1. Model 1 in the first row in
Table 3 refers to this risk-adjustment-only payment model where the β weights are estimated in a
least-squares procedure following the estimation practices used in each country.
Model 2 adds conventional reinsurance. A plan receives a reinsurance payment equal to
spending less a preset threshold of spending, referred to as an attachment point.21 Figure 1 depicts
typical reinsurance defined on plan spending per person. Some individuals within an insurance pool
will have spending at zero. For those with positive values of spending, the distribution is highly
skewed to the right. In a typical large population, there will be individuals with spending in the
millions of dollars or Euros. We set the threshold in our first set of models such that 2% of total
plan payments consist of reinsurance and finance the reinsurance by a flat reduction of the risk
adjustment payment from all individuals (equal to 2% of mean spending).
Model 3 begins incorporating the ideas in this paper. Keeping the same risk adjustment
weights estimated in Model 1, reinsurance now applies to spending residuals after risk adjustment
rather than total spending. A typical distribution of residuals, i.e., spending less risk adjustment
payment, is depicted in Figure 2. Residuals could be positive or negative (and must average zero in
the population used for estimating the risk adjustment payment weights). A positive residual
indicates the plan is spending more than it is paid. A large right tail persists after risk adjustment
because risk adjustment payments do not fully capture extreme spending. Reinsurance based on
residuals reimburses a plan for residual spending above a positive residual threshold. Residual-based
reinsurance in our first set of analyses redirects the 2% in reinsurance payments.
Model 4 also keeps the β weights from Model 1 but adds a repayment feature to the plan
payment system, requiring a plan to repay residual spending below a negative threshold. For
example, the negative threshold might be -$100k, in which case a plan would have to return any
individual-level overpayment exceeding $100k. Figure 2 shows what a reinsurance/repayment

Reinsurance can pay less than 100% of costs above a threshold. For simplicity, we assume a reinsurance
share of 100%, though our methods would work for other shares.

21

10

system looks like, with upper and lower thresholds based on residuals defining the regions for
reinsurance and repayment.
Finally, Model 5 optimizes the β weights to take account of the presence of reinsurance and
repayments. Specifically, the β weights are reestimated on plan obligations net of reinsurance and
repayment. New β weights, however, imply new thresholds for reinsurance and repayment. With
these new β weights the distribution of residuals changes and we refigure the thresholds that would
set aside 2% of funds for reinsurance and for repayment. With new thresholds, we reestimate β
weights again and repeat the iterative procedure until β weights and reinsurance/repayment
thresholds no longer change materially.22
3.2 Combinations of Residual-based Reinsurance and Repayment
A second set of analyses studies various combinations of residual-based reinsurance and
repayment all with optimized β’s. Specifically, we consider the following alternatives, with the first
number indicating the percent of funds set aside for residual reinsurance and the second number the
percent designated for residual repayment: (1,0), (1,1), (2,0).
3.3 Metrics of Plan Payment Performance
We report several metrics for plan payment system performance beginning with fit at the
individual level. When plan payments are the predicted values from a risk adjustment regression, fit
at the individual level is simply the R2 from the risk adjustment model. Any net contribution of risk
sharing to fit is captured by a generalization of the R2 referred to as ‘Payment System Fit’ (PSF).23
PSF is an R2-type statistic (analogous to a pseudo-R2) measuring the degree to which plan payments
for individual i, R , track spending for that individual, Y . PSF recognizes that the payment a plan
receives for an individual, R , can include other components in addition to the predicted spending
from a risk adjustment model.
PSF

1

∑ Y
∑ Y

R
Y

1

We also measure individual fit by Cumming’s Prediction Measure (CPM), a linear version of (1).24
Payment system alternatives are also commonly evaluated on how funds are redistributed
among different population groups, defined, for example by a specific illness. Policy evaluations in
22

We found there is little gained from iterating after the second time.

23

For other applications of payment system fit see Geruso and McGuire (2016) and Layton et al. (2017).

Although R-squared is by far the most commonly reported statistic, CPM is also frequently used. For a
discussion of the many measures used in risk adjustment research, see Van Veen et al. (2015).

24

11

each country define groups of interest based on illness, previous levels of spending, past health care
use, and other information available in the country.25 In order to define a group of potential interest
in parallel across the three countries, we study over/undercompensation for those in the top decile
of spending in the previous year. Persistence of spending means that the high spenders from last
year are likely to be underpaid in the current year. Our group-level payment fit measure, the
predictive ratio (PR), is, as a ratio, comparable across the three health insurance markets. Letting the
index g designate those in the top decile last year
PR

∑ R
∑ Y

2

PR will take a value like 80% if plan payments for this group underpay on average by 20%. PR

closer to 100% indicates better plan payment performance for this group.
Finally, we track the redistributions accomplished by the payment system in relation to the
baseline risk-adjustment payment model with no reinsurance/repayment. Funds redistributed
between models 2-5 and model 1 are measured by the absolute value of changes in payment at the
individual level between the two systems. For example:
Funds redistributed for model 2

∑ | R

R |

3

where R is the payment for individual i in model 2 and R is the payment in model 1. Funds
redistributed measures the potential of a payment system to affect group-level allocations for as-yet
unspecified groups. To make measure (3) comparable across the three settings, we present the funds
redistributed as a percentage of total spending. We do not regard funds distributed as a measure of
plan performance; it simply tells us how much money is moved around with the various payment
models.
4. Results
In each country, data were randomly divided into equal-sized training and test samples. All
estimation, including selection of reinsurance and repayment thresholds, is conducted on the
training sample; all outcome measures are calculated on the test sample. For example, when we
estimate risk adjustment models, the β weights are estimated on the training sample, but fit statistics
are reported from the test sample. Similarly, when we choose an upper threshold in order for
reinsurance to pay for the top 2% of spenders, the choice is made based on the distribution of

25

For a review of some of these evaluations from Europe and the U.S., see Layton et al. (2017).
12

spending in the training sample. Results reported on the test sample will therefore not yield exactly
2% set aside for reinsurance.
4.1 Base Risk Adjustment Model and Residuals
We estimate risk adjustment models on total spending with the current specification used in
each country. Table 4 reports summary statistics from the test samples for the risk adjustment
models and information on the distribution of residuals (i.e. spending less risk adjustment
predictions). The values of the R-squared are similar to those in other reports, 24.6% for Germany
(Drösler et al., 2017), 31.6% for the Netherlands (Cattel et al., 2017), and 35.8% for the U.S.
Marketplaces (Layton, Montz and Shepard, 2018). Better fit for the Marketplace model compared to
that for Germany or The Netherlands is because Marketplaces use a concurrent risk adjustment
model rather than the prospective models used in the other two countries.
Positive residuals result when spending is higher than predicted; negative residuals result
when spending is lower than predicted. The mean absolute deviation ranges from over five
thousand dollars in the Marketplaces to less than two thousand Euros in The Netherlands. Even
after risk adjustment, the maximum residuals are in the millions of dollars or Euros, and the
minimum residuals in the hundreds of thousands of dollars or Euros. Properties of the left side of
the distribution of residuals depend heavily on the risk adjustment model. The minimum possible
value for residual spending is the maximum value for predicted spending from the risk adjustment
model (if that person spends nothing). In all three countries risk adjustment generates substantial
overpayments for a meaningful share of the population. In Germany and The Netherlands one
percent of the population is overpaid by about 10k Euros or more, and in the Marketplaces,
overpayment exceeds $25k for one percent of the population. The median residual in each country
is negative. In all three countries, residuals do not turn positive until about the 75th percentile of the
distribution. This means that the large majority of the population is profitable for plans; losses are
concentrated in the much smaller share of the population on the right side of the residual
distribution.
4.2 Residual-Based Reinsurance and Repayment
Table 5 reports results for Models 1-5 listed in Table 3. In Models 2-3, reinsurance
payments sum to 2% of total spending. In Models 4-5, reinsurance payments and repayments each
sum to 2% of total spending. Risk adjustment alone leaves the top decile of spenders from the
previous year undercompensated in each country, with the U.S. Marketplaces showing the lowest
PR; the Dutch model is most successful by this metric. The Dutch model contains risk adjustors
13

based on prior high spending (see Table 1) which partially address underpayment for the last-year
high-spending group.
The second set of rows for Model 2 shows the impact of conventional reinsurance. Setting
aside 2% of funds for reinsurance corresponds to reinsurance thresholds of €140k in Germany,
€122k in the Netherlands, and $350k in the U.S. Marketplaces. Notably, these thresholds touch a
very small fraction of the population, less than .1 % in all markets – another indicator of the
concentration of spending on the far-right tail of the spending distribution. Conventional
reinsurance at 2% has a powerful effect on individual fit of payments to spending. Compared to the
risk-adjustment-only model, PSF more than doubles for Germany, and moves to the range of
around 60% in all three countries. PR for the top-decile of spenders in the prior year increases
everywhere.26 Conventional reinsurance moves about 4 % of the funds in comparison to riskadjustment only in all three countries.
Model 3 targets the 2% set aside for reinsurance to residuals from the base risk adjustment
model rather than spending. Thresholds defined in terms of residuals are lower than with
conventional reinsurance since the risk adjustment amount is subtracted from spending to define
residuals. Still, less than .1 % of the population is affected by residual-based reinsurance at 2%.
Targeting the same reinsurance funds to residuals rather than spending buys an increase of about 3
percentage points in PSF in all countries. The 3 percentage point gain in individual fit compared to
Model 2 is ‘free’ in incentive terms since the funds set aside for risk sharing are the same. Moreover,
the 3 percentage point increase is substantial compared to potential improvements from adding riskadjustor variables to already rich models.27 Targeting residuals does not improve the PR for the topdecile of spenders in the prior year; in fact, it decreases slightly in all three markets. A potential
explanation for this finding is that – in contrast to conventional reinsurance (Model 2) – residualbased reinsurance avoids ‘double’ payments for people with both high predicted spending and high

Note that the PR for the top decile of spenders in t-1 is likely to be sensitive to how reinsurance is financed
and whether or not risk adjustment weights are optimized for the presence of reinsurance. More specifically,
the combination of a flat contribution and no optimization (as is true for model 2) is likely to result in double
payments for people with both high predicted spending and high actual spending. Since these people are
likely to be overrepresented in the group of high spenders in t-1, this group as a whole is likely to benefit
from these overpayments.
27 For example, Van Kleef et al. (2018b) find that inclusion of chronic conditions reported by general
practitioners would improve the R-squared of the Dutch risk adjustment model by <.01. The latest published
evaluation of the CMS-HCC risk adjustment system (Pope et al., 2011) reports an increase in R-squared of
.014 between V12 and V21. V21 was, however, viewed as too gameable and some variables were dropped in
the V22 put in place. The R-squared of V22 will thus be less than for V21.
26

14

actual spending (see also footnote 26). Assuming these people are overrepresented in the top decile
of spending in the prior year, this group as a whole might receive less payment under residual-based
reinsurance than under conventional reinsurance, thereby lowering the PR. This finding indicates
that switching from spending-based reinsurance to residual-based reinsurance may not improve
group-level fit for some groups of interest. Finally, funds redistributed increase only slightly in
relation to conventional reinsurance.
Residual-based repayments at 2% are added to the payment models in the results for Model
4 in the next set of rows. The repayment threshold is much lower in absolute value than the
reinsurance threshold because, as we have seen, the residual distribution is much less skewed on the
left. While less than .1% of the population remain touched by reinsurance, the repayment threshold
is crossed by less than 1% of the population in the three countries. Repayments augment payment
system fit further in the .02 - .04 range. PR for the top-decile of spenders in the prior year decreases
slightly. Some of those with high spending last year would generate high risk scores this year, and
may fall in the highly overcompensated group if spending for whatever reason falls a lot this year.
Taking funds from these people increases undercompensation from past high spenders. A
repayment feature has little effect on the share of funds redistributed.28
The last set of results optimizes β weights in each country, derived from the iterative
procedure described earlier. Thresholds from the previous set of rows (e.g., $209,826 for the
reinsurance threshold for the Marketplaces) are used to truncate the left and right-hand side of the
spending distribution for estimation of the β weights. Iteration is required since the thresholds from
the “old” model are not exactly right for the “new” model. Reestimation of β weights has some
interesting effects. The thresholds for reinsurance fall, which leads to slightly more people crossing
the reinsurance threshold. Both in absolute and in relative terms, the effects of reestimation on the
thresholds for repayment are bigger. Consequently, the share of population crossing the repayment
threshold falls substantially, to, for example in the Marketplaces, only .28%. Reestimation of β
weights must improve payment system fit, but the gains in fit at the individual level are small, in the
third decimal place in all countries. PR for the previous high spenders is improved in relation to
Model 4, but remains below the PR with Models 2 and 3. Optimization of β weights adds to the
redistribution of funds in comparison to the base risk adjustment model. Whereas Model 4 only

One possibility: (in modalities without optimization/changes of RA weights) 2% reinsurance will always
result in about 4% redistribution (2% due to the reinsurance payments themselves and 2% due to the
necessary reinsurance contributions). It doesn’t really matter who makes the reinsurance contributions.

28

15

affects payments for people in the reinsurance and repayment ranges, Model 5 affects payments for
other people too (due to changes in risk adjustment payment weights).
Results for PSF from Table 5 are summarized in Figure 3. The improvements in individual
fit are very large, and remarkably similar in the three markets. Adding 2% conventional (i.e.
spending-based) reinsurance to risk adjustment comes with a substantial gain in PSF. Changing from
conventional to residual-based reinsurance gives non-trivial improvement. Adding 2% residualbased repayments also improves fit, though not as much as 2% (residual-based) reinsurance. The
latter is because the residual distribution is more skewed on the right than on the left. Optimization
of risk adjustment for the presence of 2% reinsurance/2% repayments does not substantially affect
PSF. Note however that the importance of basing reinsurance on residuals and optimizing β
weights is likely to increase as the share of funds devoted to reinsurance increases. The intuitive
explanation is that with larger shares of reinsurance, overlap with risk adjustment payments is
greater. Paying on residuals and optimizing the β’s both contribute to avoiding overlap.
4.3 Reinsurance and Repayment with Alternative Thresholds
Table 6 presents the results for four new combinations of residual-based reinsurance and
repayment. All payment models in Table 6 are similar to Model 5 from Table 5 except the share of
funds devoted to reinsurance or repayment is the same or less. For each of the
repayment/reinsurance modalities in the table β weights are optimized. Generally, the payment
alternatives do little to increase the PR for last year’s high spenders relative to conventional
reinsurance. With residual-based reinsurance at 1%, with or without repayment, PSF is 50% or
higher, increasing the individual-level fit of the Dutch model by 20 percentage points and the
models in Germany and the US Marketplaces by 30 percentage points. When residual-based
reinsurance is 2% of funds, with and without repayments, PSF is in the 60% range or higher,
ultimately doubling the PSF in comparison to the current risk adjustment model in each market.
For all the options shown, the number of people touched by reinsurance or repayment is very small,
less than .05% (5 in 10,000) in all simulations.
Figure 4 summarizes the increments to PSF by residual-based reinsurance and repayment
with optimized β weights. Patterns are very similar in all three countries.
Results in Table 6 and Figure 4 bear on the tradeoff of loss of cost containment incentives
from risk sharing and fit of the payment system at the individual level. Incentives are diluted as

16

more funds are devoted to reinsurance or repayment.29 The loss of cost control incentives depends
on plan expectations about patterns of cost, but is approximated by the share of funds devoted to
reinsurance and repayment.30
5. Discussion
Where reinsurance and risk adjustment are applied simultaneously, individual-level fit is
maximized by basing reinsurance on the residuals that remain after risk-adjustment payments, and
calibrating risk-adjustment weights on the spending net of the risk-sharing features of the payment
system. Reinsurance can be flanked by repayments to further improve the fit in the tails of the
residual distribution. Full optimization of payment system parameters to improve fit requires
teamwork between risk-adjustment weights and reinsurance/repayments. Our paper shows that it is
straightforward to mesh choice of risk adjustment weights with choice of risk sharing parameters.
We do this for a series of models with the data actually used to build the payment systems in The
Netherlands and the U.S. Marketplaces, and with a large insurer’s data from Germany.
It will come as no surprise to researchers that conventional reinsurance can markedly
improve the individual-level fit of a payment system. We add to this by showing that with a fixed
share of funds going to reinsurance, teamwork – paying on residuals/optimizing risk-adjustment
weights – gives fit another boost. The empirical results in terms of introduction of residual-based
reinsurance, repayment, and optimized risk adjustment weights work in remarkable parallel in the
three health insurance markets, with their different risk-adjustment models, health care systems, and

Reinsurance based on residuals after risk adjustment is likely to improve incentives for cost control over
conventional reinsurance with the same budget for reinsurance. The argument is parallel to that made by Van
Kleef, Van de Ven and Van Vliet (2009) in the case of “shifted deductibles” where the authors moved the
deductible range to be more likely to hit where the marginal decisions were being made about consumption.
The deductible range was moved higher for those with higher predicted costs. In our case of “shifted
reinsurance,” moving the range where reinsurance kicks in higher for individuals likely to be higher costs
makes it less likely a plan could anticipate being in the reinsurance range for any individual. Thus, reinsurance
based on residuals maintains plans’ incentives to control costs even for those with very high predicted costs.
Our constraint on incentives is best interpreted as a simple operational way for a regulator to limit the degree
incentives are diluted with reinsurance/repayment, not as a precise measure of “power” of a plan payment
contract.

29

With “static” expectations, the loss of incentive is just equal to the share of plan spending devoted to
reinsurance and repayments. With perfect foresight, a plan knows that for persons destined to fall above the
reinsurance or below the repayment threshold, the marginal spending is not plan responsibility, and the
incentive effects are equal to the share of spending associated with the individuals over or below the
thresholds.

30

17

simple magnitudes of spending. We come out of our analysis with a high degree of confidence that
our findings generalize to other health care systems and payment models.
Teamwork adds to fit “for free” in the sense of creating no extra incentive cost associated
with risk sharing. For any given share of funds devoted to risk sharing, joint optimization of
payment and risk-adjustment parameters is worthwhile to improve fit. By analysis of a series of risksharing options, we quantify the tradeoff for a regulator, showing what can be had in terms of better
fit at what cost in terms of the incentive effect of risk sharing. We regard the tradeoff to be very
favorable. Massive gains in individual-level fit can be had touching only a very small portion of the
individuals in the insurance pool.
Consideration of incentive effects of a payment system are important but complex. Even
putting aside incentives related to risk selection, the cost control incentives of risk-adjusted
payments are not always straightforward. The incentive effects of reinsurance and other risk-sharing
features are evident, and can be measured in terms of the share of people or the share of funds
affected. Risk-adjusted payments, depending on the adjustors used and their weights, also dilute
cost-control incentives but the magnitude of the effects are less clear. Use of a concurrent risk
adjustment model as in the US Marketplaces or use of past spending as a risk adjustor as in The
Netherlands each also dilute incentives for cost control. More generally, any risk adjustor variable
based on health care activity increases incentives for that activity to be undertaken.31
An alternative way to frame a policy discussion about incentives would be to ask, for
example, what is the way to achieve a given fit with the least sacrifice in terms of incentives? A
series of interesting questions emerges from this perspective. Suppose we were to ask, for The
Netherlands, what would be needed in terms of residual-based reinsurance to achieve the same level
of fit (in terms of the measure used in the Netherlands) as now but dropping past-spending groups
from the risk adjustor variables? Or, for the Marketplaces, what level of residual-based reinsurance
would be needed to achieve a target level of fit if only diagnoses from inpatient episodes counted
toward morbidity indicators? Ideally, a regulator would have available comparative information
about the incentive effects of risk adjustment as well as of any risk sharing. This is an open and
important area for future research.

This incentive is distinct from the incentive to “upcode” (or “right code”) which refers to coding practices
not incentives to do more. Use of risk adjustor variables based on activities reported in claims generally
include both types of incentives.
31

18

We showed in our simulations that a little bit of residual-based reinsurance improves fit
markedly keeping the current risk adjustment in place. A corollary is that a little bit of residual-based
reinsurance could instead compensate for a simplification of the risk adjustment formula, going in
the opposite direction to decades of research in all three countries seeking new risk adjustor
variables to add to the formula. Simplification by dropping potentially problematic risk adjustors
can improve incentives. Future work can study the simplifications that could be achieved by
judicious use of targeted risk sharing.
The focus on residual spending calls attention to residuals on the other side of the spending
distribution: individuals for whom risk adjustment payments greatly exceed what they spend. Our
simulations explored this new territory in payment system design. Repayments, the mirror-image of
reinsurance -- are an intriguing policy option. Repayments improve fit at the individual level.
Repayments obviously also “give money back”. If funds repaid, for example, were set equal to the
funds devoted to reinsurance, the same level of funding could be devoted to risk adjustment before
and after introduction of risk sharing. Very large left-hand side residuals also raise the simple
question of whether it is necessary and appropriate to confer profits on the order of hundreds of
thousands of dollars or Euros to a plan for a single individual. Should we limit profits such that, for
example, a plan can make no more than $50k on any one person?
Before deciding what, if anything, should be done to modify payment systems in light of the
high overpayments, research is needed to learn more about the people who fall on the far left of the
distribution of residuals. To note just two relevant questions: What combination of flags and
services is associated with such gross overpayments? Are people on the left persistently on the left?
In this paper our performance metrics were chosen so as to be comparable across the three
countries. It is well-recognized, however, that health plan payment systems need to be evaluated on
other criteria than simply fit at the individual level. Ideally, these criteria follow the specific
objectives of the regulator in each country or sector. For example, when a regulator is concerned
about selection incentives regarding groups with chronic illnesses evaluation, metrics should
adequately capture these incentives. We believe consideration of other criteria, such as under
payment for persons with chronic conditions and the practical feasibility of our ideas in a specific
institutional setting, is best pursued on a country-by-country basis.

19

References
Brammli-Greenberg, S., Glazer, J., Waitzburg, R., 2018. Measuring and mitigating incentives for
service distortion in managed health care: the Israeli example. Working Paper, Myers-JDC
Brookdale Institute, Jerusalem.
Cattel, D., Eijkenaar, F., van Kleef, R.C., van Vliet, R.C.J.A., Withagen-Koster, A.A., 2017. Evaluatie
normbedragen van somatische risicovereveningsmodellen 2010-2013 (English translation:
“Evaluation of the payment weights of the risk equalization models for somatic care in 20102013”), Research report, Erasmus University Rotterdam.
Drösler, S., Garbe, E., Hasford, J., Schubert, I., Ulrich, V., van de Ven, W., Wambach, A. Wasem J.,
Wille, E., 2017. Sondergutachten zu den wirkungen des morbiditätsorientierten
risikostrukturausgleichs,” (English Translation: “Special evaluation of the effects of
morbidity-based risk adjustment”).
https://www.bundesversicherungsamt.de/fileadmin/redaktion/Risikostrukturausgleich/201
80125Sondergutachten_Wirkung_RSA_2017_korr.pdf.
Enthoven, A.C., 1980. Health plan. Addison-Wesley Publishing.
Geruso, M., McGuire, T.G., 2016. Tradeoffs in the design of health plan payment systems: fit,
power and balance. Journal of Health Economics. 47, 1-19. DOI:
10.1016/j.jhealeco.2016.01.007.
Jost, T., 2016. The proposed 2018 notice of benefit and payment parameters: part 1. Health Affairs
blog post, August 30. DOI: 10.1377/HBLOG20160830.056308.
Kautter, J., Pope, G.C., Ingber, M., Freeman, S., Patterson, L., Cohen, M., Keenan, P., 2014. The
HHS-HCC risk adjustment model for individual and small group markets under the
affordable care act. Medicare & Medicaid Research Review. 4 (3), E1-E11. DOI:
10.5600/mmrr.004.03.a03.
Layton, T.J., Ellis, R.P., McGuire, T.G., van Kleef, R.C., 2017. Measuring efficiency of health plan
payment systems in managed competition health insurance markets. Journal of Health
Economics. 56, 237-255. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2017.05.004.
Layton, T.J., McGuire, T.G., 2017. Marketplace plan payment options for dealing with high-cost
enrollees. American Journal of Health Economics. 3 (2), 165-191. DOI: 10.3386/w22519.
Layton, T.J., McGuire, T.G., Sinaiko, A.S., 2016. Risk corridors and reinsurance in health insurance
marketplaces: insurance for insurers. American Journal of Health Economics. 2 (1), 66-95.
DOI: 10.1162/ajhe_a_00034.
20

Layton, T.J., McGuire, T.G., Van Kleef, R.C., 2016. Deriving risk adjustment payment weights to
maximize efficiency of health insurance markets. NBER Working Paper 22642. DOI:
10.1016/j.jhealeco.2018.07.001.
Layton, T.J., Montz, E., Shepard, M., 2018. Health plan payment in U.S. marketplaces: regulated
competition with a weak mandate. In: McGuire T. G and van Kleef R. C. (Eds.), Risk
Adjustment, Risk Sharing and Premium Regulation in Health Insurance Markets: Theory and
Practice. Elsevier.
McGuire, Thomas G., van Kleef, Richard C., 2018. Risk sharing. In: McGuire T. G and van Kleef R.
C. (Eds.), Risk Adjustment, Risk Sharing and Premium Regulation in Health Insurance
Markets: Theory and Practice. Elsevier.
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, 2014. Status report on part D. In: Report to Congress:
Medicare Payment Policy (March 2014). Chapter 14.
Pope, G.C, Kautter, J., Inger, J.J., Freeman, S., Sekar, R., Newhart, C., 2011. Evaluation of the CMSHCC risk adjustment model, final report. RTI Project Number 0209853.006, RTI
International, March.
Schillo, S., Lux G., Wasem, J., Buchner, F., 2016. High-cost pool or high-cost groups? how to
handle the high(est) cost cases in a risk adjustment mechanism. Health Policy. (120): 141-47.
DOI: 10.1016/j.healthpol.2016.01.003.
Schmid, C., Beck, K., 2016. Reinsurance in the Swiss health insurance market: fit, power and
balance. Health Policy. 120 (7): 848-55. DOI: 10.1016/j.healthpol.2016.04.016.
Swartz, K., 2006. Reinsuring health. Russell Sage Foundation.
Van Barneveld, E.M., Lamers, L.M., van Vliet, R.C.J.A., van de Ven, W.P.M.M., 1998. Mandatory
pooling as a supplement to risk-adjusted capitation payments in a competitive health
insurance market. Social Science and Medicine. 47 (2): 223-232. DOI: 10.1016/S02779536(98)00056-2.
Van Barneveld, E.M., Lamers, L.M., van Vliet, R.C.J.A., van de Ven, W.P.M.M., 2001. Risk sharing
as a supplement to imperfect capitation: a tradeoff between selection and efficiency. Journal
of Health Economics. 20 (2): 147-168. DOI: 10.1016/S0167-6296(00)00077-1.
Van Kleef, R.C., McGuire, T.G., van Vliet, R.C.J.A., van de Ven, W.P.M.M., 2017. Improving risk
equalization with constrained regression. The European Journal of Health Economics. 18 (9):
1137-1156. DOI: 10.1007/s10198-016-0859-1.

21

Van Kleef, R.C., van Vliet, R.C.J.A., 2012. Improving risk equalization using multiple-year high cost
as a health indicator. Medical Care. 50 (2), 140-144. DOI: 10.1097/MLR.0b013e31822ebf8b.
Van Kleef, R.C., Eijkenaar, F. Van Vliet, R.C.J.A., van de Ven, W. P. M. M., 2018a. Health plan
payment in the Netherlands. In: McGuire T. G and van Kleef R. C. (Eds.), Risk Adjustment,
Risk Sharing and Premium Regulation in Health Insurance Markets: Theory and Practice.
Elsevier.
Van Kleef, R.C., Eijkenaar, F., van Vliet, R.C.J.A., 2018b. Using morbidity data from general
practitioners in risk equalization via constrained regression. In progress.
Van Kleef, R.C., van de Ven, W.P.M.M., van Vliet, R.C.J.A., 2009. Shifted deductibles for high risks:
more effective in reducing moral hazard than traditional deductibles. Journal of Health
Economics. 28, 198-209. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2008.09.007.
Van de Ven, W.P.M.M., van Vliet, R.C.J.A., Schut, F.T., van Barneveld, E.M., 2000. Access to
coverage for high-risks in a competitive individual health insurance market: via premium rate
restrictions or risk-adjusted premium subsidies?. Journal of Health Economics. 19: 311-339.
DOI: 10.1016/S0167-6296(99)00028-4.
Van Veen, S.H.C.M., van Kleef, R.C., van de Ven, W.P.M.M., van Vliet, R.C.J.A., 2017. Exploring
the predictive power of interaction terms in a sophisticated risk equalization model using
regression trees. Health Economics. DOI: 10.1002/hec.3523.
Van Veen, S.H.C.M., van Kleef, R.C., van de Ven, W.P.M.M., van Vliet, R.C.J.A., 2015. Is there one
measure of fit that fits all? a taxonomy and review of measures-of-fit for risk-equalization
models. Medical Care Research and Review. 72 (2), 220-243. DOI:
10.1177/1077558715572900.
Wasem, J., Buchner, F., Lux, G., Schillo, S., 2018. Health plan payment in Germany. In: McGuire, T.
G. and van Kleef R.C. (Eds.), Risk Adjustment, Risk Sharing and Premium Regulation in
Health Insurance Markets: Theory and Practice. Elsevier.
Zhu, J.M., Layton, T.J., Sinaiko, A.D., McGuire, T.G., 2013. The power of reinsurance in health
insurance exchanges to improve the fit of the payment system and reduce incentives for
adverse selection. Inquiry 50 (4): 255-75. DOI: 10.1177/0046958014538913.

22

Table 1
Health Plan Payment in Germany, the Netherlands and the U.S. Marketplaces
Germany (2018)

Netherlands (2018)

Marketplaces (2018)

Number of individuals
covered

72.2 m

17.1 m

10.6 m

Average plan spending per
person per year

3,034 €

2,504 €

$5,772
(silver plan benchmark
average premium 2018)

Geographic market

National

National

State with sub-state
rating areas

110

About 60
(varying by premium
and contracted care; each
plan can come with
deductible options and
group arrangements)

1-15, mean 4.2
varies by rating area

Single premium per
health plan

Single premium per plan;
rebates for voluntary
deductibles and group
arrangements

Limited age bands

Number of plans

Premiums

Risk adjustment data

Risk adjustment
demographics

Risk adjustment disease
indicators

Morbidity data from
Spending from 2015
2017; spending data from (made representative for
2018. Interim payments
2018, e.g. in terms of
are made prior to final
benefits package and
reconciliation
projected spending)
Age, sex, reduced
earning capacity,
reimbursement status

2016 MarketScan data
on large
employers/insurers

Age, sex, regional
factors, socio-economic
status, source
of income, household
composition, yes/no
institutionalized, level
of education

Age, sex, geography

201 hierarchical
124 morbidity
morbidity groups (HMG)
indicators based on:
based on:
 prescribed
drugs
 prescribed drugs
(PCGs)
 in- and outpatient  hospital
diagnoses
diagnoses
(DCGs)
 physiotherapy
diagnoses
 mental
care
diagnoses
 durable
medical
equipment
 multiple-year high or
low spending
 one-year spending on
home care

Based on 127 HCCs
(2016)

23

Table 1 continued
Germany (2018)

Netherlands (2018)

Marketplaces (2018)

Timing of risk adjustment
disease indicators

Prospective
(i.e. disease indicators
are based on information
from the prior year)

Prospective
(i.e. disease indicators
are based on information
from one or multiple
prior years)

Concurrent
(i.e., disease indicators
are based on data from
the same year as
spending predictions)

Risk adjustment estimation
procedure

Weighted least squares

Weighted least squares

Weighted least squares

Risk adjustment comments

Separate model for sick
leave payments

Separate models for
somatic care, mental
health care and out-ofpocket spending below
the mandatory deductible

Separate models for age
groups and tiers of
coverage

Reinsurance
2002 - 2008

Reinsurance until 2014;
risk corridors
until 2016

Reinsurance
2014-2016; functional
reinsurance restored in
2017 through transfer
formula.

26%

32% for somatic care
23% for mental
healthcare
33% for OOP spending

35%

Risk sharing

R-squared from the risk
adjustment regression

Note: Due to the volume of information presented here notes for each element are not provided. There are
some additional features of the payment systems in each country not contained in the table, for example,
Germany has special rules for those living abroad and for a small number of individuals paid by cost
reimbursement. For detailed descriptions of each of these payment models with much of the information
covered here, see Wasem et al. (2018), Van Kleef et al. (2018) and Layton, Montz and Shepard (2018).

24

Table 2
Data from Three Countries (Full Samples)

Source

Germany

The Netherlands
(somatic care only)

U.S. Marketplaces

Nationwide operating
sickness fund

Insurers and
government agencies

Large
employers/insurers

Number of individuals
Year

2.9 million
2015

17.0 million
2015

9.8 million
2016

1st percentile spending
10th percentile spending
90th percentile spending
99th percentile spending
Maximum Spending

€0
€ 98
€ 7,062
€ 35,591
€ 2,267,508

€ 50
€ 92
€ 4,573
€ 33,003
€ 7,819,446

$0
$0
$14,085
$80,974
$8,541,629

Entire population
49.1%

Entire population
26.7%

21-64
21.4%

Age range
Percent with disease indicator

Note: U.S. data only covers people with full-year enrollment. Data from Germany and the Netherlands also
covers people who were enrolled only part of the year. In the Dutch data spending is annualized here; in the
German data it is not. The € 50 spending at the 1st percentile in The Netherlands is a mandatory fee everyone
pays to register with a practitioner.

25

Table 3
Plan Payment Models Studied
Payment Model
Model 1:
Risk adjustment only

Model 2:
Risk adjustment plus
conventional (i.e. spendingbased) reinsurance

Model 3:
Risk adjustment plus residualbased reinsurance

Risk-Adjustment
β weights from least
squares regression on
total plan spending

Reinsurance

Repayment

None

None

β weights from least
squares regression on
total plan spending

Full reinsurance after
threshold of spending;
financed by flat
reduction in risk
adjustment payment

None

β weights from least
squares regression on
total plan spending

Full reinsurance after
threshold of spending
less risk adjustment
payment; financed by
flat reduction in risk
adjustment payment

None

Full reinsurance after
threshold of spending
less risk adjustment
payment; financed by
repayments (and –
when total reinsurance
is larger than total
repayments – a flat
reduction in risk
adjustment payment)

Full repayment after
threshold of risk
adjusted payment less
spending; contributes to
financing reinsurance

Full reinsurance after
threshold of spending
less risk adjustment
payment; financed by
repayments (and –
when total reinsurance
is larger than total
repayments – a
reduction in risk
adjustment payment via
the optimized β
weights)

Full repayment after
threshold of risk
adjusted payment less
spending; contributes to
financing reinsurance

Model 4:
Risk adjustment plus residualβ weights from least
based reinsurance and repayment squares regression on
total plan spending

Model 5:
Risk adjustment plus residualβ weights from least
based reinsurance and repayment squares regression on
and with optimized β weights
plan obligations net of
reinsurance and
repayment

26

Table 4
Residuals from the Base Risk Adjustment Model
The Netherlands
(somatic care only)

Germany
Fit of the risk adjustment model
R-squared
CPM

23.7%
24.0%

Residuals

31.6%
31.8%

U.S. Marketplaces

35.8%
28.3%

(Euros or Dollars)
Mean absolute deviation
Min
1st percentile
10th percentile
25th percentile
Median
75th percentile
90th percentile
99th percentile
Max

3,566

1,985

5,559

-334,029
-10,905
-3,283
-1,651
-827
-110
2,870
32,097
1,892,219

-382,283
-8,988
-2,240
-1,098
-444
-59
1,375
20,380
7,812,633

-529,274
-26,511
-5,037
-2,832
-1,530
55
5,472
49,035
3,578,792

Note: Statistics are reported from the test sample based on estimates from the training sample. Data from
Germany and the Netherlands are annualized here. The maximum residual for Germany is the largest value for
an individual enrolled for the full year. U.S. data are full-year enrollees.

27

Table 5
Risk Adjustment, Reinsurance, and Repayment
Germany
Model 1: Base Risk Adjustment
Payment System Fit
24.0%
PRg
76.7%
Funds redistributed
NA
Model 2: Conventional (i.e. spending-based) Reinsurance 2%
Attachment points
Upper Threshold
€139,810
Lower Threshold
NA
Population affected
Above Upper Threshold
.04%
Below Lower Threshold
NA
Payment System Fit
56.4%
PRg
80.3%
Funds redistributed
3.9%
Model 3: Residual-based Reinsurance 2%
Attachment points
Upper Threshold
€102,789
Lower Threshold
NA
Population affected
Above Upper Threshold
.07%
Below Lower Threshold
NA
Payment System Fit
59.9%
PRg
79.9%
Funds redistributed
4.0%
Model 4: Residual-based Reinsurance and Repayment (2%, 2%)
Attachment points

The Netherlands

Marketplaces

31.6%
94.5%
NA

35.8%
69.0%
NA

€122,044
NA

$350,301
NA

.04%
NA
55.6%
96.9%
4.0%

.06%
NA
60.5%
73.1%
4.3%

€90,975
NA

$209,959
NA

.07%
NA
58.8%
96.4%
4.1%

.07%
NA
62.6%
73.2%
4.4%

Upper Threshold
€102,724
€90,929
Lower Threshold
-€11,044
-€12,009
Population affected
Above Upper Threshold
.07%
.07%
Below Lower Threshold
.96%
.59%
Payment System Fit
62.6%
61.7%
PRg
76.8%
92.6%
Funds redistributed
4.0%
4.1%
Model 5: Residual-based Reinsurance and Repayment (2%, 2%) with Optimized β weights
Attachment points
Upper Threshold
€101,179
€88,908
Lower Threshold
-€13,830
-€15,198
Population affected
Above Upper Threshold
.07%
.07%
Below Lower Threshold
.61%
.41%
Payment System Fit
63.0%
62.0%
PRg
78.4%
95.1%
Funds redistributed
6.2%
6.2%

$209,826
-$48,832
.07%
.34%
66.6%
71.0%
4.1%

$206,502
-$54,801
0.08%
0.28%
6.8%
.71.5%
5.9%

28

Table 6
Residual-Based Reinsurance and Repayment with Optimized β’s
Germany

The Netherlands

Marketplaces

24.0%
76.7%
NA

31.6%
94.5%
NA

35.8%
69.0%
NA

€169,932
NA

€150,650
NA

$370,588
NA

.03%
NA
53.3%
77.3%
2.6%

.02%
NA
51.6%
94.7%
2.2%

.03%
NA
55.8%
70.3%
2.8%

€166,474
€-19,700

€146,457
€-22,159

$353,552
$-80,484

.03%
.25%
55.4%
77.6%
3.5%

.02%
.15%
53.8%
94.9%
3.3%

.03%
0.14%
58.4%
70.6%
3.3%

€105,068
NA

€92,827
NA

$223,529
NA

.07%
NA
60.2%
77.6%
4.7%

.07%
NA
59.0%
94.9%
4.1%

.07%
NA
63.0%
70.9%
4.8%

€102,253
€-18,156

€89,860
€-20,552

$212,733
$-71,782

.07%
.28%
62.1%
78.0%
5.5%

.07%
.18%
60.9%
95.0%
5.1%

.07%
.16%
65.3%
71.2%
5.1%

Base Risk Adjustment
Payment System Fit
PRg
Funds redistributed
Reinsurance 1%; Repayment 0%
Attachment points
Upper Threshold
Lower Threshold
Population affected
Above Upper Threshold
Below Lower Threshold
Payment System Fit
PRg
Funds redistributed
Reinsurance 1%; Repayment 1%
Attachment points
Upper Threshold
Lower Threshold
Population affected
Above Upper Threshold
Below Lower Threshold
Payment System Fit
PRg
Funds redistributed
Reinsurance 2%; Repayment 0%
Attachment points
Upper Threshold
Lower Threshold
Population affected
Above Upper Threshold
Below Lower Threshold
Payment System Fit
PRg
Funds redistributed
Reinsurance 2%; Repayment 1%
Attachment points
Upper Threshold
Lower Threshold
Population affected
Above Upper Threshold
Below Lower Threshold
Payment System Fit
PRg
Funds redistributed

29

Figure 1
Conventional Reinsurance Defined in Terms of Spending

Figure 2
Reinsurance and Repayment Based on Residuals from Risk Adjustment

30

Figure 3
Payment System Fit of Five Models in Three Different Settings

31

Figure 4
Payment System Fit of Six Combinations of Reinsurance/Repayment, all with Optimized Risk
Adjustment Weights

32

