                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE EFFECT OF THE INVESTMENT TAX
                         CREDIT ON THE VALUE OF THE FIRM




                                 Andrew B. Lyon




                             Working Paper No. 2537




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 1988




This paper is based on research in my Ph.D. dissertation submitted to Princeton
University. I would like to thank Harvey Rosen, Don Fullerton, and David Bradford
for suggestions and guidance I received in writing the dissertation. The research
reported here is part of the NBERs research program in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Support from The Lynde and Harry
                                            Bradley Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2537
                                                   March 1988




      The Effect of the Investment Tax Credit on the Value of the Firm


                                     ABSTRACT




     A change in the tax law that increaaes investment incentives foc new assets

may result in excess returns on new investment, causing firm value to increaae.

Alternatively, because the investment incentives apply only to new inveatmenta,

the value of existing assets that compete with these investments may decline.    A

model is developed in this paper which shows that in general investment

incentives have a theoretically ambiguous effect on firm value.    Modela proposed

by Abel (1982), Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983), and Feldmtein (1981) are shown to

be special cases of this more general model.     Empirical teata examine the changes

in firm value to repeated changes of the investment tax credit. Cross-sectional

teats find the changes in firm value are positively reiated to the expected

receipt of investment tax credita.   No evidence is fnund to aupport a

relationship between expected changes in the value of a firm's existing aaaets

and changes in firm value.




                                                Andrew B. Lyon
                                                Bureau of Business and
                                                  Economic Reaearch and
                                                Department of Economica
                                                University of Maryland
                                                College Park, Maryland 20742
                                                (3Dl) 454-2303
       The Tax Reform Act of 1986 repealed the investment tax credit (ITC),       iuirking

the third time the ITC has either been suspended or repealed since its

introduction in 1962.       The ITC was originally designed to encourage new

investment by reducing the after-tax cost of new investment at a smaller cost to

the government than from a statutory tax rate reduction.
                                                               A ITC     only reduces the

tax burden of new investment, while a statutory rate reduction also reduces tax

revenues from existing investment.       To prevent existing assets from being resold

to qualify for the ITC, the amount of used investment eligible for the ITC always

was strictly limited.

       The selective    lowering of the effective tax rate faced by new investment

through the ITC is traditionally thought to increase the after-tax return from

new investment, without altering the profitability of existing assets.         Under

this assumption, the value of the firm must increase following the introduction

of an ITC.       Abel (1982) presents a partial equilibriummodel that supports this

view which will be referred to as the        "traditional hypothesis."

       The traditional hypothesis has been challenged by Auerbach and Kotlikoff

(1983) and Feldstein      (1981).   The Auerbach-Kotlikoff-Feldstein(A-K-F) hypothesis

maintains that the value of a firm must decline following the introduction of an

ITC.    They argue that if competition eliminates any excess return to new

investment,      then the value of existing assets must decline by the amount of the

ITC in order to compete in the output market with the subsidized new investment.

Following this view, Downs and Hendershott (1987) derive the theoretical

increases in the value of firms from the 1986 Tax Reform Act.

       Summers    (1981, 1983), Gravelle (1984), and, more recently,   Auerbach (1986)

note the ambiguous effects of an ITC on firm value.       The long-run equilibrium

value of existing capital is expected to decline by the amount of the ITC.          Until

the long-run equilibrium is reached, however, new investment may earn an excess
                                        -2-


return.   Whether the value of the firm increases or decreases upon the

implementation of the ITC depends on the magnitude of these excess returns.

     Auerbach and Kotlikoff warn that the ITC and similar accelerated

depreciation provisions may cause "significant inframarginal redistribution from

current holders of wealth to those with small or zero claims on the existing

stock of capital."   The actual direction and magnitude of the wealth

redistribution caused by these investment incentives and other tax policies is an

important issue in the design of tax reform.   As suggested by Feldstein (1976)

policymakers may seek to minimize any windfall gains and losses that accompany

tax reform.   Knowledge of the magnitude of the wealth transfers is essential in

                                                these redistributions against the
comparing alternative proposals and in weighing

efficiency gains of each proposal.   In addition to equity considerations, wealth

redistribution can have important real effects on the economy through changes in

saving, consumption, and bequests.   These wealth effects can either reinforce or

offset the direct incentive effects of a tax policy on saving or consumption.

     The many past legislative changes to the ITC provide an excellent "natural

experiment" to examine the actual effect of the ITC on the value of the firm.

For publicly traded firms, changes in the value of a firm may be observed by

changes in the value of the firm's common stock.   Data on the value of a firm's

assets and the amount of investment in assets eligible for the TTC may be used to

construct estimates of the change in the value of the firm predicted by the

traditional hypothesis and the A-K-F hypothesis.   If the traditional hypothesis

is correct, firms that are expected to invest in a significant amount of

                                                                 to other firms
equipment eligible for the ITC should increase in value relative

when an ITC is implemented.   If the A-K-F hypothesis is correct, firms that
                                           -3-

intensively own assets that would be eligible for the ITC if purchased new should

decline in value relative to other firms when an ITC is
                                                        implemented.

       The structure of this paper is as follows.        Section I develops a model to

present the possible theoretical effects of changes in ITCs on the value of the

firm.      Section II presents the empirical procedures for testing the traditional

hypothesis and the A-K-F hypothesis.      Section   In   presents the empirical results.

The empirical estimates provide substantial support for the traditional

hypothesis and tend to reject the A-K-F hypothesis.         The final section provides

conclusions to the analysis.

I.     The Theoretical Effects of Investment Incentives en the Value
       of the Firm

       The value of a firm consisrs of both the value of the firm's
                                                                    existing assets
and the excess return, if any, the firm can earn on its future investment.

Investment incentives may affect these two components of firm value in oppoaite

directions.     An ITC may increase the return from new investment, while it reduces
the value of a firm's existing assets.     In general, the effect of investment
incentives on the value of the firm is ambiguous.

       One condition under which inframsrginal new investment
                                                              msy earn an excess
return is if there are costs of adusting to a new level of                    These
                                                           tspitalj
adjustment costs may include costs of installing the new investment, interference

with current production, and managerial effort.      If adjustment costs are a convex

function of investment, inframerginal investment is able to earn an excess

return.

       The following model of the vslum of a firm can help illustrate the effects

of Sn ITC on firm value.     Consider a firm i with s production function F(Kt),


       1   See Eisner and Strotz (1963), Lucas (1967), Could (1968),     Treadway (1969)
and   btusss (1917).
                                          -4-


where Kft is the firm's stock of capital at time    t,   F'>O, and F<O.    Let the

total cost to the firm, before taxes, of investing 'it be     It +   c(Tit), where c

is the adjustment cost function with c'>O and c">O.      Assume the following

parameters: the initial price of the firm's output is p0, the constant after-tax

discount rate is r,2 the firm's tax rate is u,3 the initial rate of the ITC is

    the present value of depreciation allowances per dollar of investment is Z,

and the present value of remaining depreciation allowances on all existing

capital at time s is          It is assumed that adjustment costs reduce current

profits so that the after-tax adjustment cost is (l-u)c(It).         The value of the

firm at time a may then be written as

                                                                  + uB.       (I)


     Let   us   assume that initially the economy is in equilibrium with   k0O   and at

time a the rate of the ITC is increased to k>O.      If the output price remains

constant (as in Abel (1982)), then the ITC can only increase firm value.         The

firm could maintain the same time path of investment as it would in the absence

of an ITC, yet at a lower cost.      If the firm increased investment, its profits

would be even greater.

     If the output price is not constant, the conclusion that the introduction of




     2 The                                         be infinitely elastic so that
            supply of funds to firms is assumed to
the after-tax discount rate is unaffected by the level of investment. As
discussed in footnote 4 this assumption may be relaxed in showing that firm value
may not always increase when an ITC is introduced.

        The model abstracts from personal taxes. In the presence of personal
taxes firm value might be affected differently depending on whether the change in
cash-flow is expected to affect dividends or retained earnings.
                                            -5-

an ITG unambiguously increases firm value no longer holds.4        First, consider the

case with no adjustment costs where an ITC at rate k1 induces new firms to enter

and reduces output price to p1.       With no adjustment costs, an entrant j would

find it profitable to invest until

         l-k-uZ                                                        (2)
                  _j'{(lu)p1F(Kjfle(r''5)(ts)dt,
where & is the exponential rate of depreciation,        Equation (2) states that firm j

invests until the marginal profit from an additional unit of capital for firm          j


equals the net cost of investment.

     With the inclusion of adjustment costs the result is similar.           If each firm

views itself as too small to affect output price but takes the new
                                                                   output price
into consideration in formulating its investment decisions, firms will undertake

any investment opportunities for which the present value of the after-tax returns

from an additional unit of capital exceed the after-tax cost of investment.           The

solution to Equation (1) for the optimal level of investment is then

   l-k-uZ +   (l-u)c'     —
                              p((lu)pF(Kit))e(14fl(t5)dt.                       (3)


The firm invests until the profits from a marginal investment equal the net cost

of investment plus the marginal cost of adjustment.

     Because each unit of capital earns the return given by Equation (3), the

total returns from the investment of the quantity 'is are

         I.               ÷   I. (l-u)c'.
          15 [1-k1 -uZJ       iS                                        (4)


The net profit from the investment          is positive since the convexity of the

adjustment cost function implies
                                      (lu)[Ic'
                                                  -
                                                      c(I)J > 0.   This is the excess

return earned from new investment in period a.


        Alternatively, the assumption of a fixed output price may he maintained
and firm value may still decline if (1) the after-tax rate of return is not
constant (r1>r3) or (2) in the more general case with labor in the production
function, the supply of labor is fixed in the economy but mobile among firms.
    The total excess return to future investment is given by

          (1-u)
                   f((I.)c'
                               -

                                   c(I.t)}e(t5)dt.                                   (5)


If there were no decline in the return to existing capital, this is the amount by

which the value of the firm would increase.

    While inframarginal new investment earns an excess return, the increase in

the ITC causes an increase in investment and output; as a result, output price

declines causing the profit from a unit of existing capital to decline.              Assuming

the economy was in equilibrium with no ITC initially, the decline in value of a

unit of existing capital is (from Equation (3))

            fl-uZ]   -
                         [l-k-uZ+(l-u)c'}   —   k   -   (l-u)c'.               (6)


     The total change in the value of the firm is ambiguous, depending on the

magnitude of the excess return to new investment, shown in Equation (5), relative

to the decline in the value of the existing capital stock.

        One special case where the value of the firm must increase following the

implementation of an ITC is under the condition of an infinite marginal cost of

adjustment for expansion of the capital stock, but no adjustment coat for

investment less than or equal to depreciation.               Assuming that in the absence of

an ITO    (k5—O)   each firm would have chosen investment equal to its depreciated

capital in each period, then from Equation (1) the implementation of an ITO at

rate k1 must increase the value of the firm by

                                      —
                   jkiIitei(t_5)dt        8Kk/r.                                     (7)


where E is the depreciation rate of capital.               Because output does not change in

this particular case, there is no decline in the value of existing capital and

the result found by Abel that the value of the firm must increase also is found

here.
                                          -7-


    As suggested earlier, a special case supporting the A-K-F hypothesis that

the value of the firm must decrease following the implementation of an ITC is

where there are no costs of adjustment.     Solving Equation (1) for the optimal

level of investment for an ITC at rate k1 under the assumption of no adjustment

costs yields

           l-k-uZ —
                      j((l.u)pF(K.tfle((t5)dt.                           (8)


The marginal return to each unit of existing capital declines by k1, and because

there is no excess return to new investment, the value of the firm declines by

     .5

     This discussion has shown the theoretical ambiguity of the effects of

changes in investment incentives for new assets on firm valuation.        If adjustment

costs are small and the economy quickly teaches its new equilibrium level of

capital stock, the A-K-F hypothesis of a decline in the value of the firm may be

most appropriate.     If adjustment costs are large, then excess profits on new

investment may be substantial and the traditional hypothesis may most accurately

describe changes in firm value.     If adjustment costs differ across firms and

industries, no single theory may adequately describe the economy-wide effects of

investment incentives on firm valuation.        The following sections of this paper

develop an empirical test of the two hypotheses to determine their actual ability

to account for changes in firm valuation following changes in the ITC.




        The value of a unit of capital would decline by less thank1 if the
supply curve for new capital goods were not perfectly elastic. Provided that all
new capital goods are sold at the same price in any period and that the supply
curve is not perfectly inelastic, the A-K-F hypothesis still predicts that the
value of the firm will decline.
                                         -g-

II.   Empirical Procedures

      The analysis in this section provides an empirical framework for modeling

and estiaating the change in value of the firm predicted by the traditional and

A-K-F hypotheses following changes to the ITt.    First, measures representing the

two hypotheses are formulated and, second, the relationship between these

measures and the estimated change in value of firms is analyzed.

A.    Representing the Traditional and A-K-F Hypotheses

      The ITt applied predominantly to purchases of new equipment and public

utility property.    During the period examined in this paper, the rate of the ITt

ranged from a maximum of seven percent for long-lived equipment to          2   1/3 percent

for abort-lived equipment.6    Public utility property was eligible for only 3/7 of

the applicable percentage until 1971.

      Under the traditional hypothesis, the aaving provided by the ITt for the

purchase of an asset results in higher profits for the firm.         Let        be the
                                                                           k
applicable rate of the iTt for aaaet 7, where j—l         J.   Let         be the gross

expenditure (gross of depreciation and gross of the ITO) by firm i on asset              j   in

a given year.    If the traditional hypothesis is correct, the benefit to the firm

in that year is equal to the total amount of ITCa received by the firm7

                      k
                 Jj-i   j'ij                                                       (9)

The increase in the value of the firm at the time of the announcement of the tax

change is the present value of these future benefits.     Under the assumption that


      6   The maximum rate of the ITt was increased to lD percent in 1975.

        This assumes the firm has sufficient tax liability against which the ITt
may be applied. Altshuler and Auerbach (1987) estimate that between 1976-1980
approximately 25 percent of all firms may have been constrained in their use of
ITCs due to present and past losses and limits on the percentage of tax liability
that may be offset with ITCs.
                                         -9-

the return to new investment is increased by the entire amount of the ITC, the

percentage change in firm   value   is


                                                                                      (10)


where V is the current value of the firm, g is the expected real growth rate of

the firm, and r is the real after-tax discount rate.    This is a more general

expression of the change in the value of the firm given in Equation (7), which

was derived under the assumption of an infinite cost of adjustment for investment

in excess of depreciation.

     If the adjustment cost is not infinite, the entry of further investment

would be expected to limit the extent to which the benefit of the ITC persists

into the future.   In this study, it is assumed that all firma have the same

discount rate and expected growth rate.    The percentage change in firm value

predicted by   the traditional hypothesis is assumed to be a function of

                kI                                                             (11)

     Under the A-K-F hypothesis, the decline in value of an existing asset is

directly related to the rate of the ITC on new assets against which it must

compete.   If there are no adjustment costs, the percentage decline in the value

of the firm is given by


                1kjK1i.                                                        (12)

If there are adjustment coats, existing assets will not decline in value by the

full amount of the ITC.     It is assumed that the percentage decline in firm value

predicted by the A-K-F hypothesis is a function of Equation (12).

     To estimate the values of Equations    (11) and (12)   for a firm, data
                                         Jo-

representing each of the variables are required.8    A detailed data set on the

capital atock of 25 types of assets eligible fot the ITO, other depreciable

assets, and land present in each of 44 industry groups has been constructed by

Jorgenson.9   It ia aasumed in this study chat the proportion of capital stock

held among all depreciable assets is the same for all firms in a given industry.

It is also assumed that the proportion of investment in each asset is equal to

the proportion of capital atock in each asset)-°    Assets eligible for the ITO and

the ITO rate for each aaaet in the period before 1971 are shown in Table 1.11

     COMPUSTAT data are used to provide the total amount of inveatment and

capital of each firm.    Two alternative measures are used to represent the

expected investment of the firm: (1) current capital expenditurea and (2) the

book value of depreciation.    If the investment plana of the firm are unknown in

advance to investors, depreciation may better represent expected inveatment than

actual expenditures.    The book value of the firm's net plant and equipment   is



        Alternatively, the quantity of ITCa actually received by the firm may be
used in the numerator of Equation (11). During the period examined many firma
did not report the ITC and some fitms reported only an amortized portion of the
ITO.  There may be a sample selection bias in using only firms that reported the
full ITC in their income atatementa. Ayrea (1987) examines 175 firma which
reported full receipt of the ITC and finds the change in firm value to be
positively related to reported ITCa.

        Using capital flow tables on the amount of investment in each asset and
applying economic rates of depreciation to past investment, Jorgenson has
estimated the net stock of each of these assets present in the 44 industry groupa
for the year 1977. The construction of this data set is explained in more derail
in Fraumeni and Jorgenson (1980) and Jorgenson and Sullivan (1981).  The actual
data are unpublished.
     10 The U.S.
                  Department of Commerce (1980) has published data on groaa
investment in each asset for 76 industry groups in 1972. Thia data ser waa used
in preliminary teats and yielded very similar statistical results to those found
for the Jorgenson data set.

     11 The
             applicable rate of the ITC is baaed on the 1962 Depreciation
Guideline tax life for each asset. These lives are derived for each of the 25
types of assets by Jorgenson and Sullivan (1981).
                                         -11-

used to represent the capital stock of the firm.      Finally, the total value of the

firm is taken to be the book value of total assets, which includes net plant and

equipment, inventories, cash equivalents, and certain intangible assets.

     These variables are combined with (1) the industry-specific proportions of

assets eligible for the ITC from the Jorgenson data set and (2) the applicable

rate of the ITC for each asset to construct two alternative measures of Equation

(11) and one measure of Equation (12).    The two measures representing the

traditional hypothesis in Equation (11) are labelled CAPTA and DEPTA, where the

measures are constructed using capital expenditures and depreciation,

respectively.   The measure representing the A-K-F hypothesis, based on the net

plant and equipment of the firm, is labelled NPTA.12

B.   Estimating Chanees in Firm Value from the Investment Tax Credit

     The ITC was first introduced in the Revenue Act of 1962 following lengthy

legislative debate.   Between 1966 and 1971 the ITC was suspended twice and

reinstated twice by presidential request.       In 1986 the ITC was repealed as part

of the 1986 Tax Reform Act, following the recommendation of a November 1984

Treasury Department study.

     Unlike the initial enactment and recent repeal of the ITC, the series of

presidential requests between 1966 and 1971 initiated fast congressional action


     12 To examine the
                        accuracy of the variables DEPTA and CAPTA in identifying
the quantity of ITCs received by a firm in a given year, a comparison was made
between these calculated values and Internal Revenue Service data. The variables
DEPTA, CAPTA, and NPTA were constructed for fiscal year 1968 for 710, 685, and
711 firms, respectively. IRS data on ITC5 received by firms by industry group and
asset size within each industry group are taken from Statistics of Income 1968.
Corporate Tax Returns (1972), table 4, pp. 26-58. The 711 firms may be placed
into 29 IRS industry classifications and correspond to 109 IRS industry-asset
group classifications. The IRS information was used to calculate the ratio of
the ITC received by a group to its total assets for each of the 109 groups. The
correlation between this IRS variable and the measures DEPTA, CAPTA, and NPTA are
.44, .36, and .45, respectively. These measures do appear to distinguish
differences in the level of ITCs received by the different groups of firms.
                                         -12-


leading to the reinstatement or suspension of the ITO.          Tn September 1966,

Ptesident Johnson requested the immediate temporary suspension of ITO until

January 1968.     The next change came in March 1967 when President Johnson asked

for the immediate reinstatement of the credit.       In April   1969,   President Nixon

requested the permanent repeal of the TTO.      The fourth change came in August 1971

when President Nixon asked for the reenactment of the      ITO.    This series of events

provides sn excellent opportunity to exsmine the effect of changes to the ITO on

the value of the firm.'3

     To test whether firms were affected by the presidential requests leading to

the suspension or reinstatement of the ITO, firm stock prices are examined.               A

version of the Ospitsi Asset Pricing Model is estimated, where it is assumed thst

security returns for firm i conform to the model

   R. -R        -R          D +6.   D +6.   D +6.   D +c. ,                        (13)
    it sot—$.(R
            i mt sot )+6.
                        i,66 65 1,57 67 1,65 56 3,71 71 it

where R—log(l+r), and        is the return to security i in month t, rmt is the
                        nt
value-weighted return to the market portfolio, snd

                   Tt is assumed thst the residual
                                                       r        is the return on   a 90-day

Tressury bill.                                            is normally distributed with

mean zero.    The D's are dummy variables, with esch subscript denoting the year of

the presidential request.     The vslue of each dummy variable is one in the month

of a presidential request to reinstate the ITO, negative one in a month to

suspend the ITO, and zero otherwise.     For example, D      is equal to negative one

in September 1966 and zero for all other months.      The estimated         coefficients

measure the covariance of the return of security i with the market return over

all months.     The Sj coefficients measure the abnormsl return to security i in the

month of each presidential request.     A t-test on an estimated 6j      coefficient

     13   These dates were selected prior to any empiricsl tests.          No other dates
were tested.
                                                    -13-

provides a measure of the significance of the abnormal return for the month of

the presidential request to change the ITC.14

        If we assume that each of the four tax changes are of equal importance,

equally unanticipated, and the abnormal return to a security for the

reinstatement of the credit is opposite to                   the   abnormal return for the suspension

of the credit, Equation          (13) can   be simplified.15 A measure of the significance

of all the changes to the ITC can be estimated from the model

              R. -R
               it    sst— .(R
                           i mt-Rgot)    + 5.
                                              i,all Dall+          e.it                     (14)

asat-testonS.i,all ,whereDall—D55                    +D67 +D59 +D71
       Two different      estimation   procedures      are    used    to evaluate the estimates

provided by variants of Equations (13) and (14) and to compare the estimates of

the    abnormal firm    returns    with the changes predicted by the traditional

hypothesis and the A-K-F hypothesis.                The first set of procedures assumes

independence        across residual returns in Equation (13) and the second set of

procedures allows for these residuals to be contemporaneously cross-correlated.

These procedures are explained in turn.

5.1.    OLS and WLS Regression Procedures

       Ito   these procedures, Equation (13) and (14) are first estimated separately

for each of n firms over a common time period.                     In the second step, the n

       14  An important assumption in Equations (13) and (14) is that the tax
changes are unanticipated. If these changes were anticipated, little or no
reaction might be expected in these months. Auerbach and Hines (1986) discuss
how firm investment behavior may differ when tax changes are anticipated.
       15The response to each tax change may differ because some of the tax
changes were explicitly temporary. The ambiguous theoretical effect of ITCs on
firm value even allows for the possibility that a temporary ITC could increase
firm value, while a permanent ITC decreases firm value. For example, an
immediate one-day ITC may be unable to affect investment, but give firms that
invest on that day a windfall. Further, unless the adjustment cost function is
symmetric, the repeal of an ITC may be expected to affect firm value differently
from the reinstatement of an ITC.
                                           -14-

estimated   S   coefficients for a single tax change are used in a cross-eectional

regression on one of the three variables DEPTA, CAPTA, or NPTA.

     The traditional hypothesis preditts that the percentage change in the value

of the firm will be positively related to the firm's receipt of ITCs relative to

the total value of the firm.      Using depreciation ma a proxy for expected firm

investment, a test of the traditional hypotheaia ia conducted by the

cross-sectional regression

            S — a + b(DEFTA) + j,                          (15)

                                                                       a single tax
where S'—[S         50J is the vector of estimated Sj coeffitienta for

change from Equation (13) (for example, the vector of i.          coefficients across

all fins) or from Equation (14) (Si ally and DEPTA' EDEPTAi            DEPTAn is a

vector of the DEPTA for each firm, with DEFTA defined ma in Equation (11).

Estimates are presented separately for each of the four tax changes and for an

estimate based on S — £       - A similar croaa-aectional regression is also
                   i    i,all
estimated with CAPTA replacing DEPTA. Using either DEPTA or CAPTA, the

traditional hypothesis predicts the sign of b is positive for each of the four

tax changes.

     The A-K-F hypothesis predicts that the change in the value of the firm will

be the same as the expected change in the value of the firm's existing assets.          A

teat of the A-K-F hypothesis is conducted by the cross-sectional regression

            £ — a + b(NPTA)   +   p,                       (16)
where NPTA'[NPTAi,...,NPTAn)       and NPTA is defined in Equation (12). The A-K-F

hypothesis predicts the sign of b is negative for each of the four tax changes.

     The variables DEPTA, CAPTA, and NPTA are likely to be highly correlated

since firma that are equipment-intensive, as measured by NPTA, also are likely to

have large measures of depreciation and undertake a large amount of replacement
                                                      -15-

investment.         If both the traditional and A-K-F hypotheses are partially correct,

the estimated coefficient b in Equations (15) and (16) will reflect, in part, the

effect of the opposing hypothesis.                 Provided CAPTA and NPTA are not highly

collinear, the two           hypotheses may      be tested simultaneously through the

cross-sectional regression

              & —     a+ b       (CAPTA) +   b   (NPTA) + /4,                  (17)

A finding of bL>O and b2<O would suggest elements of both hypotheses are true.

       The parameter estimates in             Equations      (l5)-(l7) are unbiased, but

inefficient, if the residuals                    across firms do not have a common variance.             It

is   possible that firms with larger variances of the residual returns                     i   in

Equations       (13) and (14) also       will have larger variances of the residuals ij             in

Equations(l5)-(l7).               Because the variance of an estimated Sj coefficient is

proportional to        4     —
                                 E(4), the    variance of the residuals       may also be

proportional to         4.       The correction for this heteroacedasticity is to estimate

Equations (15)-(17) using weighted least squares (WLS), where the weights are

equal to the inverse of the estimated standard deviation from Equation (13)                         or

(14).       Estimates   of Equations (l5)-(17) are conducted using both               OLS and WLS.

B.2.        Seemingly Unrelated Resression Model Procedure

       A    possible disadvantage of the previous procedures is that if the residuals

Eit    in    Equation (13) or (14) are contemporaneously correlated across firms,                   the
estimated       &j are not independent across firms.               King (1966) found that security

returns of firms within an industry show evidence of positive contemporaneous

cross-correlation.               Because firms within an industry also are likely to have

similar measures of              DEPTA, CAPTA, and NPTA, it is more likely that         these   measures

will be found to be significantly associated with the estimated                       5 coefficients
under the assumption of independence.
                                              -16-

       To account explicitly for possible cross-correlation, it is necessary cc

estimate Equation <13) or (14) simultaneously across firms using Zeilner's (1962)

seemingly unrelated regression model (SUP.M),          The SURM, however, requires that

the number of time periods used to estimate the system be greater than the number

of equations.    Given the large number of firms used in this study, it is not

possible to estimate the system at the firm level.           As a solution to this

problem, the firms are grouped into a number of portfolios.

       The portfolios are formed by sorting the firms into groups based on their

relative values of DEPTA, CAPTA, and NPTA.           For exsssple, to test the traditional

hypothesis using the variable DEPTA, each firm is placed into one of ten

portfolios based on the firm's decile rank of the variable DEPTA.'6              Equation

(13)   is modified to


            it-R9st—$.(Rmt-Rsot
           R.
                      2.
                                   )+   66 (D66   xX)+
                                                   i      67 (D67 xx.)
                                                                     2.




                           +   #(Dx X.) + $(Dx Xi)           +
                                                                  €itt              (18)


and Equation (14) is similarly modified to


                  i mtsot + allsll x X.) + €i
           Rt_R95t_                                                                 (19)


where the variable X is equal to mean value of DEPTA, CAPTA,              or NPTA for the

portfolio, depending on the hypothesis tested, and the coefficient               for a given

year is restricted to be equal across equations.

       For example, using Equation (18),                          and     are each reatticted
                                                     67 69
to be equsl across firms, although
                                         #6   need not equal
                                                                  #67      Ot   .    Equation
(19) is similar to estimating Equation (18) with the further restriction that

#66#67#66#71 Without            the restrictions on the #    coefficient    for a given yeat,

say    ,
       the value of              (D   x X.) in Equation    (18)    for any portfolio is equal


     16 The choice of the number of
                                    portfolios is arbitrary, provided it is less
than the number of time periods.
                                                 -17-

to    S.         in Equation   (13).   The traditional hypothesis predicts that the value of

5           in   Equation (13) increases with the value of DEPTA.    If 6.      increases
 i,66                                                                     L,5
linearly         with DEPTA, this is equivalent to a constant       across portfolios in

Equation (18), when X is replaced by DEPTA.             The traditional hypothesis predicts

all        coefficients in Equation (18) and (19) are positive when X is replaced by

DEPTA or CAPTA.

           Similarly, the A-K-F hypothesis predicts that the value of the S

coefficients in Equation (13) is negatively related to NPTA.            The A-K-F

hypothesis is tested against the prediction that all '           coefficients   are less than

zero when K is replaced by NPTA.

III.       Ernoirical   Analysis

           This section presents the empirical findings of the effects of the changes

made to the ITC between 1966 and 1971 on firm valuation.            The data are described

in the first part of this section and the espirical results follow.

A.     Data

           The firms used in this study are drawn from 914 U.S. firms listed on the New

York Stock Exchange prior to October 1965 that have complete returns for the

70-month period from April 1966 through January 1972.            The 70-month period begins

five months before the first presidential request to suspend the ITC and

concludes five months after the final request to reinstate the ITC,             The stock

returns and market indices are obtained from the monthly stock returns tape of

the Center for Research in Security Prices.
      Firm-specific information for 711 of these firms is available from the 1970

COMPUSTAT tape of industrial firms.'7    All COMPUSTAT data are selected from the

1968 fiscal year.18

El.   OhS and WLS Regression Estimates

      The first empirical results presented assume independence of residual

returns across firms.    Estimates of &     , 5.          5.1,69 ,   S.       and 5.        ore
                                       i,56    1,67   ,
                                                                      1,71'          tall
obtained   for each of the 711 firms by estimating Equations (13) and (14)

separately for each firm.    The set of estimated     5 parameters        of all firms for

any one year is then used as the dependent variable in cross-sectional

regressions on DEPTA, CAPTA, and EPTA.

      The traditional hypothesis is first tested by OhS estimates of Equation (15)

with the alternative dependent variables     tall , S
                                            S.            .,S.,S.,ands..
                                                             1,57
                                                          1,66        1,71    1,69

The coefficient of DEPTA is predicted by the traditional hypothesis to be

positive for each of the tax changes.    The estimates are presented in the first

row of Table 2.

      Using the dependent variable 5i all' the coefficient of DEPTA is found to be

positive and highly significant at less than the 0.0001 probability level.                   Using

the estimated Si for each of the four tax changes separately, the coefficient of


     17 Of the firms for which data are not available on the COMPUSTAT tape, 110
of these firms are electric and gss utilities; 49 firms are mutual funds, holding
companies, or other financial institutions; 19 firma are from the transportation
services sector; and the remaining 25 firms are distributed among all other
industries.

         The fiscal year 1968 was chosen as the approximate midpoint of the four
tax changes. Some tests were conducted with data from different years and with
the average of 1966-1969 information. Results were similar, although fewer firma
had data for all years. A match of the 914 firms using a more recent COMPUSTAT
tape resulted in significantly fewer firms. Use of a single year's data may
reduce the likelihood of observing a relationship between firm characteristics
and changes in firm value if these firm characteristics varied over the 1966-1971
period.
                                                              -19-

DEPTA is positive and significant for three of the four tax changes. The one

exception is the 1969 repeal of the ITC.                           The coefficient of DEPTA is regative

but insignificant, for this tax change.                           WLS estimates of Equation (15) are

presented in the first row of Table 3.                         The coefficient of DEPTA changes

slightly, but remains very significant for the dependent variables                          .   an.'   6i

5.      ,    and   61,71
 1,67
        Tests of     the traditional hypothesis using the alternative variable CAPTA in

                                                                                   With the dependent
Equation (15) are presented in the second row of Table
                                                       2.


variable 8.                 the coefficient      of CAPTA is positive and highly significant                 An
                   all'
examination of the four tax changes separately, however, shows that the

coefficient of CA,PTA is significant only for the two reinstatements of the ITT in

1967 and 1969.             The WLS estimates, shown in the second row of Table 3, are

similar.        The coefficient of CAPTA is positive and significant using the

dependent variables &                       5.          and
                                i,all   ,
                                             1,67
                                                    ,
                                                              8      -




        Recall that a possible upper-bound estimate of the percentage change in the

value of the firm predicted by the traditional hypothesis is given by Equation

(10)    (reproduced here)


                       j-lj1iji'                                                                            (10)


The variables DEPTA and CAPTA are each proxies for the first term in brackets.

The coefficient of DEPTA or CAPTA in Equation (14) could be as large as l/(r-g)

if it were believed that the ITT is permanent, there were no decline in the value

of existing capital, and new investment permanently earns an excess return.

            If we assume a real after-tax discount rate of 4 percent and a real growth

rate of 3 percent, the coefficient of DEPTA or CAPTA could be as large as 100.

With the same above conditions, except under the assumption that excess returns

attributable to the ITC persist for only the first 5 years from implementation of
                                            -20-

the credit (and maintaining the assumption of no decline in the value of existing

capital), the coefficient of DEPTA or CAPTA would decline to 2.2.19

     The actual estimates of the coefficients of DEPTA and CAPTA (between 3.0 and

7.1 from the WLS estimate) suggest a fairly lengthy period during which new

investment earns an excess return.    The magnitude of the estimated coefficients

are sensitive to the construction of DEPTA and CAPTA.       If these variables

understate the ITCa received by the firm then the estimated coefficients will

overstate the period of adjustment.

     Next, the A-K-F hypothesis is tested by conducting cross-sectional

regressions on Equation (16), with NPTA as the independent variable.        If assets

decline in value hy the full amount predicted by the A-K-F hypothesis, the value

of the coefficient of NPTA would be   -1.     The OLS estimates are presented in the

third row of Table 2.   The actual estimates of the coefficient are all positive,

and they are significantly positive using               and         The OLS
                                          8i,all' 6i67'
estimates are ahown in the third row of Table 3. The estimates are similar,

except the coefficient of NPTA for the 1969 repeal of the ITC is negative.          The

negative coefficient is not significant, however, at standard significance

levels.   These estimates do not support the A-K-F hypothesis.

     A correlation matrix of the independent variables DEPTA, CAPTA, and NPTA is

presented in Table 4.   The variables are highly correlated.      As discussed in

Section II, if the traditional hypothesis and the A-K-F hypothesis are both

partially true, the estimated coefficient of DEPTA, CAPTA, and NPTA may reflect

only the net effect of the two hypotheses on firm value.      A   regression that

includes both CAPTA and NPTA as explanatory variables may find the predicted


     19 This is calculated as the
                                   present value of after-tax rental savings
assuming an annual depreciation rate of .15.
                                          -21-

positive coefficient for CAPTA and a negative coefficient for NPTA.          Equation

(17) tests this hypothesis.

     OLS estimates of Equation (17) are shown in Table 5.     These estimates do not

find evidence of a decline in the value of the firm to be related to NPTA.          The

coefficient of NPTA is negative for only one of the tax changes, and it is not

significant for this tax change.     WLS estimates shown in Table 6, are similar.

The failure to find support for the simultaneous operation of both hypotheses

must be tempered by the fact that the high degree of collinearity between CAPTA

and NPTA makes it difficult to measure the separate effects of each of the

variables,

.2. Seemingly Unrelated Regression Model Estimates

     The support for the traditional hypothesis using the OLS and WLS estimates

is based on the assumption that the residual returns across firms are

uncorrelated.     If these residuals are contemporaneously cross-correlated, the

statistical significance of the relationship between the estimated       5
coefficients    and DEPTA and CAPTA may be overstated.   The SURM   procedure   provides

a more general test of the traditional and A-K-F hypotheses by controlling for

the pattern of contemporaneous cross-correlation between groups of firms.

     Ten portfolios are formed based on the decile ranking of a firm for each of

the variables DEPTA, CAPTA, and NPTA.     Equation (18) or (19) is estimated




             ,,
simultaneously for a group of ten portfolios, where the variable X is replaced by

the mean value of DEPTA, CAPTA, or NPTA for each portfolio.         The restriction that

,                      or al1   are equal across portfolios cannot be rejected for

the three sets of portfolios.

     Tests of the traditional hypothesis are examined first.         Estimates of

Equations (18) and (19) using the ten portfolios based on DEPTA are presented in
                                               -22-

Table 7.    The estimated parameter mall is positive and significant.              The value of

the coefficient is very close to the estimated coefficient of DEFTA in Equstion

(15) using WLS, shown      in Table   3.   The significance of the coefficient is reduced

slightly from the WLS estimate.         The estimated        coefficients for each of the

four tax changes are positive.         The values of these coefficients are also similar

to the WLS estimates in Table 3.           Of these four coefficients, however, only the

coefficient for the 1971 reinstatement of the ITC is now significant.

       Estimates based on the ten portfolios formed using CAPTA are shown in the

second column of Table 7.       The coefficient       ll     is positive and significant.    The

value of the coefficient is also very close to the WLS estimate of Equation (15)

shown in Table 3.       The coefficients for the 1967 and 1971 reinstatement of the

TTC are positive and significant, although slightly less significant than the WLS

estimates of Equation (15).       The estimated coefficients for the other two tax

chsnges also are positive, but not significant.

        Tests of the A-K-F hypothesis using the portfolios formed on NPTA appear in

the third column of Table 7.          The A-K-F hypothesis predicts s negstive vslue for

the #   coefficients.     The sctusl estimate of
                                                      *all
                                                              is positive and significant.

The vslue of this psrsmeter is also similar to the WLS estimate of the

coefficient of NPTA in Equstion (16).           Only 69      is   estimsted to be negative, and

it is not significant.       Of the three positive coefficients, the estimate of

is found to be significantly positive.

B.3.     Discussion

        The empiricsl results of this section generally support the traditional

hypothesis.     The OLS and WLS estimates show the change in firm value from the

four tsx changes in aggregate                   is positively related to the expected
                                      8i sll
receipt of ITCs by the firm (DEPTA or CAPTA).              Tests of the traditional
                                       -23-


hypothesis applying the SURM also find a highly significant positive relation

between the change in firm value from the four tax changes in aggregate and

measures incorporating the expected receipt of ITCs   (all)    The estimates of

each of the tax changes separately are not as significant, although the estimated

values of the coefficients imply a fairly lengthy period during which new

investment earns an excess return.   Firms in the quartile with the largest

measure of DEPTA increase in value by an average of 1.8 percentage points more

than firms in the lowest quartile in the month of a presidential announcement to

reinstate the ITC.20

     The estimates do not support the A-K-F hypothesis that the ITC causes a

decline in the value of existing assets that results in a decline in firm value.

The change in firm value actually appears to be positively related to the ITC-

weighted measure of the firm's assets (NPTA) upon introduction of an ITC,

although this relationship is less significant than measures which incorporate

the expected receipt of ITCs.   These results suggest that the benefits a firm is

expected to receive from future investment qualifying for the ITC outweigh any

expected decline in the value of the firm's existing assets from increased future

competition.

     The magnitude of the estimates are consistent with a model providing rental

cost savings (losses) to the firm equal to the full amount of the ITC over at

least the first five years of investment from reinstatement (repeal) of the ITC.

Excess returns on new investment may persist due to adjustment Costs.    Existing

firms may be better able to benefit from an   hG   due to their plans to replace

depreciated capital.   These firms may also earn economic rents on any intangible



     20 The hypothesis of equality can be rejected at less than the 5 percent
probability level.
                                          24-


capital the firms possess that allow them to increase investment at a faster rate

than new entrants.   Further, the structure of the ITC gives the largest

investment incentive to those firms with current profits.    Excess tax credits are

not refundable and, if no recent past tax liability exists, they must be carried

forward for use in a future year, reducing the present value of the benefit.

This provision would make it difficult for a start-up firm to receive the same

effective ITC per dollar of investment that currently profitable firms receive.

Profitable firms in industries with a low use of equipment may be encouraged to

expand into equipment-intensive industries, but entry into new lines of business

might be expected to occur only slowly.

IV.   Summary

      This paper investigates the effect of changes in investment incentives on

the value of the firm.   The wealth effects caused by changes in ITCa and

accelerated depreciation are ambiguous, except under special conditions.     If the

economy is composed of perfectly competitive firms and there are no adjustment

coats, the A-K-F hypothesis is shown to be theoretically correct.    Alternatively,

with infinite costs of adjustment to positive net investment, the traditional

hypothesis is shown to be correct.   In between these extremes, we know neither

the magnitude nor the direction of these net effects.

      The empirical findings of this paper suggest that the ITC causes a

redistribution of wealth that benefits investors of new equipment.     Firas that

own existing equipment generally benefit, perhapa because they are in a better

position to undertake new investment in equipment.     Policies designed to offset

directly this benefit to existing owners of capital, auth as by implementing a

direct wealth tax on existing capital in conjunction with an ITC, may themselves

be viewed to violate equity considerations.     Distributional analysis which
                                      -25-


neglects the wealth transfers caused by the implementation of an ITG, however,

may overstate the progressivity of the tax system with respect to existing
wealth.
       The Tax Reform Act of 1986 repealed the investment tax credit (ITO)   ,   rarking
the third time the ITO has either been suspended or repealed since its

introduction in 1962.    The ITO was originally designed to encourage new

investment by reducing the after-tax cost of new investment at a smaller cost to

the government than from a statutory tax rate reduction.    An ITO only reduces the

tax burden of new investment, while a statutory rate reduction also reduces tax

revenues from existing investment.    To prevent existing assets from being resold

to qualify for the ITO, the amount of used investment eligible for the ITO always

was strictly limited.

       The selective lowering of the effective tax rate faced by new investment

through the ITO is traditionally thought to increase the after-tax return from

new investment, without altering the profitability of existing assets.       Under

this assumption, the value of the firm must increase following the introduction

of an ITO.    Abel (1982) presents a partial equilibrium model that supports this

view, which will be referred to as the "traditional hypothesis."

       The traditional hypothesis has been challenged by Auerbsch and Kotlikoff

(1983) and Feldstein (1981).    The Auerbach-Kotlikoff-Feldstein (A-K-F) hypothesis

maintains that the value of a firm must decline following the introduction of an

ITO.    They argue that if competition eliminates any excess return to new

investment, then the value of existing sssets must decline by the amount of the

ITO in order to compete in the output market with the subsidized new investment.

Following this view, Downs and Hendershott (1987) derive the theoretical

increases in the value of firms from the 1986 Tax Reform Act.

       Summers (1981, 1983), Cravelle (1984), and, more recently, Auerbsch (1986)

note the ambiguous effects of an ITC on firm value.    The long-run equilibrium

value of existing capital is expected to decline by the amount of the ITO.         Until

the long-run equilibrium is reached, however, new investment may earn an excess
                                  REFERENCES

Abel, Andrew B. "Dynamic Effects of Permanent and Temporary Tax Policies in a q
     Model of Investment." Journal of Monetary Economics 9 (l982):353-373.

Altshuler, Rosanne and Alan J. Auerbach. "The Significance of Tax Lay
     Asymmetrics: An Empirical Investigation," National Bureau of Economic
     Research Working Paper No. 2279, June 1987.

Auerbach, Alan J. "Tax Reform and Adjustment Costs: The Impact on Investment and
     Market Value," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No, 2103,
     December 1986.

Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines. "Anticipated Tax Changes and the Timing of
     Investment," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1886,
     April 1986.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "Investment versus Savings
     Incentives: The Size of the Bang for the Buck and the Potential for
     Self-financing Business Tax Cuts," in Laurence Meyer, ed. , The Economic
     Consequences of Government Deficits. Boston: Kiuwer-Nijoff Publishing,
     1983, pp. 1.21-149.

Ayres, Frances L.  "An Empirical Assessment of the Effects of the Investment Tax
     Credit Legislation on Returns to Equity Securities." Journal of Accourtint
     and Public Policy, & (Summer, 1987): 115-37.

Downs, Thomas and Patric R. Hendershott. "Tax Policy and Stock Prices," National
     Tax Journal 40 (June 1987): 171-182.

Eisner, Robert and R.H. Strotz. "Determinants of Business Investment," in
     Commission on Money and Credit, Impacts of Monetary Policy. Engiewood
     Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1963, pp. 59-337.

Feldatein, Martin. "On the Theory of Tax Reform,"   Journal of Public Economics 6
     (July 1976):]7-104.

Feldstein, Martin. "The Tax Cut: Why the Market Dropped."    The Wall Street
     Journal, November 11, 1981, p. 26.

Fraumeni, Barbara M. and Jorgenson, Dale W. "The Role of Capital in U.S.
     Economic Growth, 1948-1976," in George M. von Furstenberg, ed. , CapitaL
     Efficiency and Growth. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 1980, pp. 9-250.

Gould, John P. "Adjustment Costs in the Theory of Investment of the Firm."
     Review of Economic Studies 35 (January 1968): 47-55.

Oravelle, Jane G. "Effects of Changes in the Taxation of Income from Capital on
     Stockholders Wealth and q," mimeo (1984).
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Martin A. Sullivan. "Inflation and Capital Recovery in
     the United States,' in Charles R. Hulten, ed, Depreciation. Inflation and
     the Taxation of Income from Capital. Washington, D.C. : Urban Institute,
     1981.


King, Benjamin F. 'Market and Industry Factors in Stock Price Behavior."
     Journal of Business 39 (supp., January 1966): 139-160.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Supply."   Journal of
     Political Economy 75 (August 1967): 321-334.

Lyon, Andrew B. "How Do Stock Prices Change when Corporate Tax Laws Change? An
     Empirical Analysis of the Effect of Tax Laws on the Value of the Firm."
     Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1986.

Mussa, Michael. "External and Internal Adjustment Costs and the Theory of
     Aggregate and Firm Investment." Econorsica 44 (May 1977): 163-178.

Summers, Lawrence H. "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-theory Approach."
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 1, l981):67-l27.

Summers, Lawrence H. "The Asset Price Approach to the Analysis of Capital Income
     Taxation," in National Tax Association-Tax Institute of America, Proceedings
     of the Seventy-Sixth Annual Conference, 1983, pp. 112-120.

Treadway, Arthur B. "On Rational Entrepreneurial Behavior and the Demand for
     Investment." Review of Economic Studies 36 (April 1969): 227-239.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. "New Structures and
     Equipment by Using Industries, 1972: Detailed Estimates and Methodology,"
     Staff Paper 35. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
     September 1980.

Zeliner, Arnold. "An Efficient Method of Estimating Seemingly Unrelated
     Regressions and Tests for Aggregation Bias." Journal of the American
     Statistical Association 57 (June l962):348•368.
                           Table   1



           Investment Tax Credit Rates by Asset


          Asset                              ITC


Furniture and fixtures                       .07
Fabricated metal products                    .07
Engines and turbines                         .07
Tractors                                     .0233
Agricultural machinery                       .07
Construction machinery                       .07
Mining and oil field machinery               .07
Metalworking machinery                       .07
Special industry machinery                   .07
General industry equipment                   .07
Office and computing machinery               .07
Service industry machinery                   .07
Electrical machinery                         .07
Trucks, buses and trailers                   .0467
Autos                                        .0233
Aircraft                                     .0467
Ships and boats                              .07
Railroad equipment                           .07
Instruments                                  .07
Other equipment                              .07
Railroads                                    .07
Telephone and telegraph                      .03
Electric light and power                     .03
Gas                                          .03
Other public utilities                       .03




Source:   Author's calculations.   See text for assumptions.
                                     Table 2

           Relationship Between Abnormal Security Return 8 and the
            Expected Change in Firm Value: Ordinary Least Squares


Equation                8.         8.          8.        8.       8.
                         i.all       1.66       1.67      1.69     1.71

  (15)       DEPTA       9.585       7.418       8.842   -0.516   22.923
                        (5.16)      (2.26)      (2.37)   (0.15)   (6.23)
              R2          .036        .007        .008     .000     .052

  (15)       CAPTA        3.087     -0.142       4.328   -0.291    8.600
                         (4.12)     (0.11)      (2.88)   (0.21)   (5.93)
              It2          .024       .000        .012     .000        .049


  (16)       NPTA         0.907      0.427       0.918    0.056    2.260
                         (4.40)     (1.17)      (2.23)   (0.15)   (5.53)
              It2          .027       .002        .007     .000     .041


                     t-statistics in parentheses
                                    Table 3

           Relationship Between Abnormal Security Return 6 and the
            Expected Change in Firm Value: Weighted Least Squares


                         6.         5.         6.          6.       5.
Equation                  i.all      1.55          i.67     1.59      ,71


             DEPTA       7.084      8.497      6.716      -2.501   16.745
  (15)
                         (4.14)    (2.79)     (2.01)      (0.80)   (5.01)


  (15)       CAPTA        2.962     0.877      4.909      -1.177    7580
                         (3.52)    (0.59)     (3.02)      (0.78)   (4.69)

             NPTA         0.618     0.589      1.000      -0.487    1.468
  (16)
                         (3.08)    (1.65)     (2.58)      (1.34)   (3,74)



                     t-statistics in parentheses
                              Table 4

            Correlation Matrix of Explanatory Variables


                  DEPTA          CAPTA          NPTA

DEPTA             1.00

CAPTA             0.56           1.00

NPTA              0.72           0.68           1.00

Mean              0.00132        0.00218        0.01099

Std. Dev.         0.00081        0.00206        0.00734

Observations      710            685            711
                                Table 5

        Relationship Between Abnormal Security Return 6 and the
             Expected Change in Firm Value: Ordinary Least
                   Squares Estimates of Equation (17)



                    CAPTA         NPTA


                    1.847         0.517           .029
                    (1.80)       (1.78)

                    -2.481        0.976           .005
                    (1.38)       (1.91)

                    3.753         0.240           .012
                    (1.83)       (0.41)

5.                  0.150        -0.184           .000
 1,69
                    (0.08)       (0.34)

                    6.079         1.052           .054
                    (3.07)       (1.87)

                t-statistics in parentheses
                                  Table 6

         Relationship Between Abnormal Security Return 8 and the
              Expected Change in Firm Value: Weighted Least
                    Squares Estimates of Equation (17)



                          CAPTA

6.                        2.483         0.172
 i,all
                         (2.16)         (0.61)

8.                       -1.787         0.962
 1,66
                         (0,88)         (1.91)

8.                      4.196           0.257
 1,67
                       (1.89)           (0.47)

8.                      0.129          -0.833
 1,69
                       (0.55)          (1.63)

6.                      6.532           0.378
 1,71
                       (2.95)          (0.69)

                t-statistics in parentheses
                                    Table 7

                 Seemingly Unrelated Regression Method Tests:
      Parameter Estimates of the Relationship Between Abnormal Security
                Returns and the Expected Change in Firm Value


                            DEPTA             CAPTA       NPTA

(1)                         6.909              3.038      0.560
         all
                           (2.79)             (3.35)     (2.01)

                            6.094              1.711      0.731
(2)
                           (1.23)             (0.94)     (1.32)

(3)                         5.044              4.697       0.204
         67
                           (1.01)             (2.57)      (0.37)

                            3.490              1.960       - .182
(4)      69
                           (0.70)             (1.08)      (0.33)

(5)                        13.318              4.050       1.393
                           (2.67)             (2.21)      (2.51)


                         t-statistics in parentheses
