NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CERTAIN EFFECTS OF UNCERTAIN TAXES
James R. Hines Jr.
Michael Keen
Working Paper 25388
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25388

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

We thank Andreas Pieschl, Joel Slemrod, Stefanie Stantcheva, and seminar participants at the
University of Michigan, ETH Zurich, and the National Tax Association annual conference for
helpful comments on earlier drafts and Saida Khamidova for excellent research assistance. Views
and opinions are ours alone, and should not be attributed to the management or Executive Board
of the International Monetary Fund. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by James R. Hines Jr. and Michael Keen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Certain Effects of Uncertain Taxes
James R. Hines Jr. and Michael Keen
NBER Working Paper No. 25388
December 2018
JEL No. H21,H22
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the implications of tax rate uncertainty, identifying circumstances in which
revenue-neutral tax rate variability increases profitability, economic activity, and the efficiency of
resource allocation. Furthermore, with heterogeneous taxpayers, tax rate variability is shown to
perform an efficiency-enhancing screening function, imposing heavier expected tax burdens on
less responsive taxpayers. And while efficient tax uncertainty enables governments to reduce
average costs of taxation, it necessarily increases the marginal cost of taxation over some ranges
of expected revenue, so may reduce efficient levels of government spending.

James R. Hines Jr.
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
343 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
jrhines@umich.edu
Michael Keen
Fiscal Affairs Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431
mkeen@imf.org

1.

Introduction
Thoughtful observers have long criticized uncertainty in tax matters. One of Adam

Smith’s (1802, p. 256) canons of taxation is that “the tax which each individual is bound to pay
ought to be certain,” while for Alexander Hamilton (1782), “The genius of liberty…exacts that
every man, by a definite and general rule, shall know what proportion of his property the State
demands.” Their concern was largely the risk of arbitrariness in the exercise of taxing powers;
but the notion that tax uncertainty in itself has inherently damaging consequences has recently
come to the fore of practical policy discussions. Perceptions of an increasingly uncertain tax
environment1 prompted the G20 (2016), for example, to stress “the benefits of tax certainty to
promote investment and trade,” and to put the IMF and OECD (2017) to work on how to
enhance it.2 This has become a concern for the European Union too.3 Against the background of
this long-lasting and now high profile concern—and wider interest in the impact of policy
uncertainty4—the purpose of this paper is to explore whether and when tax uncertainty reduces
economic activity and economic welfare.
Any efficiency case for tax certainty must rest on the properties of behavioral responses
to taxation. Tax-induced price uncertainty poses challenges to consumers and firms but need not
be harmful to their interests, since while fluctuating conditions can be costly they also create
opportunities. Indeed, one of the fundamental propositions of price theory is that a competitive
firm’s profits are convex in input and output prices (Mas-Colell, Whinston and Green, 1995, pp.
138, 141), implying that its expected profits increase with mean-preserving variability in these
prices—and hence too with corresponding randomization of input or output tax rates. The
reason is straightforward: input price variation permits firms to economize on expensive input
purchases while prices are high, substituting with other inputs and reducing output; and they can
expand the use of inexpensive inputs when prices are low. By adjusting its purchases and sales,
1

Largely, though not only, in relation to implementation of the outcomes of the G20-OECD project on Base
Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS), intended to curb tax avoidance by multinationals.

2

This work is updated in IMF and OECD (2018).

3

See Zangari, Caiumi and Hemmelgarn (2017).

4

The index of economic policy uncertainty developed in the influential work of by Baker, Boom and Davis (2016),
for example, includes an element intended to capture tax uncertainty.

1

a firm can effectively use price variability to reduce the average unit cost of its inputs, thereby
improving after-tax profits.
Remarkable though these results are, however, they are seriously incomplete as guides to
policy, since the firm responses just described mean that randomizing a tax rate generally
reduces expected tax revenue, requiring the government to compensate with a higher average
rate. This consideration suggests that the effect of tax uncertainty is appropriately gauged by
holding constant expected tax revenue rather than expected tax rates. The point is of
considerable practical importance. In the context of current policy concerns, it is important—but
rarely attempted—to disentangle business worries over tax uncertainty from those related to
expected tax liabilities, since with constant expected tax revenue businesses facing fluctuating
tax rates will also face higher average tax rates. While such empirical evidence as is currently
available suggests that tax uncertainty may discourage investment, it generally does little to
distinguish the effects of uncertainty as such from the effects of expected levels of taxation.5
A further limitation of the standard price theory result is that it speaks only to the effect
of tax uncertainty on after-tax profits, whereas the effect of tax uncertainty on input use—as with
the G20’s concern for investment—and economic output are also important for policy
assessment. There are of course some results on this, notably those presented by Hartman (1972)
and Abel (1983), who show that a mean preserving spread in an output tax rate leads a
competitive firm to increase its capital stock, so long as the marginal value product of capital is
convex in that output price. Again, however, this does not condition on expected tax revenue—
as is also true of more recent results on the effect of tax uncertainty with irreversible investment.
Without considering the tax revenue implications of randomization, moreover, it is difficult to
perform welfare analysis or draw implications for economic policy.
This paper takes up these and related issues, examining the effect of tax uncertainty on
profitability, economic activity, and the efficiency cost of raising government revenue. The
analysis takes tax uncertainty to consist of randomizing the tax rate on a productive input, subject
to keeping expected tax revenue unchanged. Firms are assumed to make decisions after the tax
5

As reviewed in IMF and OECD (2017) and Zangari, Caiumi and Hemmelgarn (2017). Edmiston (2004), for
example, uses the deviation of tax rates from trend as indicator of tax uncertainty, without reference to the expected
level of revenue. Baker, Bloom and Davis (2016) use as their indicator of tax uncertainty the dollar value of tax
provisions set to expire, which holds expected revenue constant only under limited circumstances.

2

rate is revealed, so they do not incur losses due to sunk costs. This is in contrast to much of the
recent literature on tax uncertainty, which posits that taxpayers make irreversible decisions prior
to knowing the future tax regime. Both of these specifications capture important features of
reality that can significantly influence decisions,6 with accompanying implications for
deadweight loss.7 But many aspects of government policies are understood in advance, and the
analysis here focuses on their effects.
There appears to be a widely held presumption, shared by the G20, that tax uncertainty
inefficiently reduces economic activity and depresses profits; some see this as simply ‘common
sense.’8 Higher tax rates discourage taxed activity, and the resulting economic losses are
commonly presumed not only to rise with the amount of tax revenue collected, but to do so at an
increasing rate, making it ever more expensive—in an efficiency sense—to collect additional tax
revenue. The familiar Harberger triangle approximation, that deadweight loss is proportional to
the square of the tax rate (Harberger, 1964, 1971; Auerbach, 1985; Hines, 1998), lends support to
this intuition—when the approximation is valid. It implies that tax rate variability increases the
deadweight loss associated with raising a given level of expected tax revenue; the cost of this
deadweight loss is borne by consumers in the form of higher prices and business in the form of
lower profits, and these discourage economic activity.
This intuition, however, can be seriously misleading, and the common sense view
misplaced. They rely on the notion that tax rate variability reduces the efficiency of the tax
system, but there are two reasons why this may not be the case. The first is that the discouraging
effects of higher increments to tax rates can become more moderated at high rates, causing the
marginal deadweight loss of collecting additional tax revenue to decline with tax revenue. This
possibility reflects an important inaccuracy in the intuitive approximation to the size of the
deadweight loss triangle, and is the basis of earlier normative arguments (e.g., Stiglitz, 1982b)

6

On the effects of tax and other forms of uncertainty on firm investments, see for example Hartman (1972), Pindyck
(1982), Abel (1983), Auerbach and Hines (1988), Alvarez, Kanniainen, and Sodersten (1998), Hassett and Metcalf
(1999), Niemann (2004, 2011), Bloom, Bond and van Reenen (2007) and Bloom (2014).

7

Weiss (1976), Stiglitz (1982a,b), Alm (1988), Skinner (1988), and Pestieau, Possen, and Slutsky (1998) consider
the efficiency properties of tax systems with rates that are revealed only after actors make consequential economic
choices.

8

As for instance do Zangari, Caiumi and Hemmelgarn (2017).

3

made in favor of random taxation. The analysis below identifies the circumstances—looking first
at the impact on a single firm—in which, conditional on expected tax revenue, tax rate variability
reduces expected profits, output and input use, as well as those in which, counter to ‘common
sense,’ tax uncertainty actually increases all or some of these.
A second, previously unnoticed but commonly more powerful, reason why tax
uncertainty can improve the efficiency of the tax system emerges from the analysis below. This
is that tax uncertainty serves as a screening device, effectively imposing higher tax rates on firms
and activities that are relatively unresponsive to taxation, and lower tax rates on firms and
activities that are more responsive—which, by standard intuition, improves efficiency. If there is
any type of taxpayer heterogeneity, then the fraction of taxed activity undertaken by taxpayers
that are most responsive to taxation will decline as tax rates rise. Consequently, as tax rates rise
the high tax rates increasingly bear on activities that are relatively unresponsive to taxation. The
opposite happens when tax rates decline: the resulting low tax rates apply to a population that is
relatively dominated by taxpayers and activities that are highly responsive to taxation. Tax
uncertainty therefore implements a subtle version of the Ramsey rule, imposing higher tax rates
on the activities of less-responsive taxpayers, and lower tax rates on the activities of moreresponsive taxpayers – which has the effect of reducing the total cost of taxation. If the
government cannot distinguish firms and activities any other way, it can do so indirectly with tax
rate variability.
All of this carries implications for efficient tax policy that are also subtle and to some
degree surprising. In the absence of tax uncertainty, and with a single tax instrument, tax policy
is dictated by the government’s revenue needs. Tax uncertainty expands the range of
possibilities, permitting the government to reduce the total economic cost of taxation by
randomizing between disparate tax rates, each associated with relatively low deadweight loss per
dollar of tax revenue collection. While over some ranges of expected tax revenue such policies
will reduce the marginal cost of public funds, it is also the case that over equivalently-sized
ranges they will increase the marginal cost of public funds. Consequently, there are many
circumstances in which the adoption of efficiency-enhancing tax uncertainty will reduce the
efficient level of government spending even though it reduces the average cost of taxation.

4

Section 2 sets out the basic framework of the analysis. Section 3 analyzes the effects of
tax uncertainty on firm profits and economic activity in settings with identical taxpayers.
Section 4 introduces taxpayer heterogeneity, showing it to have a marked effect on the efficiency
properties of tax uncertainty by playing the screening function described above. Section 5
considers the efficient design of uncertain taxes and its implications for the marginal cost of
public funds. Section 6 concludes by noting additional implications and generalizations.

2.

Preliminaries
A perhaps surprising degree of theoretical richness is available from considering a simple

setting in which a fixed number of identical price-taking competitive firms each purchases a
taxed input in amount x, paying suppliers a unit price, and also paying a specific tax of  per unit
purchased;9 it is assumed that   0 , but will be seen later that the results extend readily to cases
in which  is strictly negative. Each firm has a production function10 q  x  that is increasing,
continuous and continuously differentiable as needed in x, and exhibits decreasing returns, so
that q  x   0 and q  x   0 . There may be other untaxed inputs, in which case q  x 
represents output net of the cost of these optimally chosen additional inputs.11 Firms sell their
output at unit price (and untaxed) on the world market. The profits of the representative
firm   , arising from the presence of some fixed factor(s), are therefore given by

9

Specific and ad valorem taxes have equivalent effects in competitive markets in the absence of uncertainty in the
tax-exclusive price of the taxed input, as noted by Suits and Musgrave (1953). The effects of (non-stochastic)
specific and ad valorem taxes will, however, differ in competitive markets with price uncertainty (Goerke, 2011;
Kotsogiannis and Serfes, 2014; Goerke, Herzberg, and Upmann, 2014) and in imperfectly competitive markets
(Delipalla and Keen, 1992; Weyl and Fabinger, 2013). When, for either of these reasons, equivalence fails, the
distinction between specific and ad valorem taxes will be material for the impact of tax uncertainty; this paper’s
analysis, however, abstracts from these issues.
10

It is an important feature of the model that production functions are exogenously given. If firms could choose
among possible production functions then their choices, and therefore output, would be affected by the anticipated
distribution of tax rates. Furthermore, the production functions considered here exhibit no adjustment costs or other
forms of intertemporal dependence, so input choices and output are determined only by contemporaneous prices and
taxes.
11

Appendix A extends the analysis to allow for other variable inputs taxed at fixed rates.

5

  q  x   1    x .

(1)

The first order condition12 for profit maximization is q  x   1    , which generates a derived
demand for x as a function of  , x   , that is continuous and continuously differentiable, with
x    0 .

Tax revenue is R   x   . The analysis confines attention to ranges of tax rates over
which tax revenue monotonically increases with the tax rate, which requires that
x     x    0 .

(2)

Of course, (2) is not always satisfied, particularly at high tax rates. It is nonetheless constructive
to restrict attention to ranges of tax rates over which (2) is satisfied, since there are predictably
strange consequences of randomizing tax rates into ranges in which higher tax rates are
associated with reduced tax collections. Thus, it is assumed throughout that (2) holds, or,
equivalently, that
1      0 ,

(3)
where

    

(4)

x  
0
x  

denotes the elasticity of input demand with respect to the tax rate. This elasticity (strictly
negative at any positive tax rate), and its properties, plays a central role in the analysis that
follows.
From the implied one-to-one relationship between the tax rate and tax revenue, it is
possible to express the tax rate as an implicit function of tax revenue,   R  , with

12

The assumption that q   x   0 ensures that the firm’s second order condition is satisfied.

6

  R 

(5)

1
 0.
x     x  

Input demand is then also an implicit function of tax revenue, x   R   , and so too are both
output q  x   R    and profits   R  . The device of characterizing firm behavior and profits as
a function of tax revenue, used repeatedly in the next section, makes it possible to infer the effect
of revenue-neutral tax rate randomization from their convexity or concavity in revenue. For
example, a local randomization of tax rates that leaves expected revenue unchanged13 increases
the expected value of profits if and only if   R  is convex in R.

3.

The impact of tax uncertainty with identical firms

To identify clearly the considerations that influence the effect of tax uncertainty on
expected profits, input use and output, it is helpful to start by considering uncertainty that applies
to a single firm or to a set of identical firms.

3.1

Expected profits
Consider first the impact of a revenue neutral tax rate randomization on the firm’s

expected profits. Shephard’s lemma implies, from (1), that    R    x     R  and so, using
(5), that:
(6)

  R 

1

1    

.

Recalling (3), it follows that at any positive tax rate    R   1 : profits decline by more than
any increment to tax revenue, reflecting that the marginal deadweight loss associated with raising
an additional dollar is positive—a point returned to in Section 5. It also follows from inspection
of (6) that if      0 , so that the elasticity of input demand has a larger negative magnitude as

13

For brevity this is denoted a revenue neutral reform.

7

the tax rate increases, then increments of tax revenue will be associated with ever larger
reductions in firm profits, making the profit function concave in revenue. More formally,
differentiating (6) produces:

   R  

(7)

   
1     

2

  R .

Hence given (5), profits are strictly concave in tax revenue if      0 and strictly convex in tax
revenue if      0 . Therefore:14
PROPOSITION 1: A revenue neutral local tax rate randomization reduces expected profits if
and only if      0 , and increases expected profits if and only if      0 .
The impact of tax rate randomization thus turns on whether the elasticity of derived input
demand increases or decreases with the tax rate.
Figure 1 provides some intuition for this. It displays the relationship between tax rates
and firm profits, with the solid locus in the figure plotting firm profit as a decreasing convex
function of the tax rate. This captures the notion that a mean-preserving price spread gives firms
more options than they would have under price stability; formally, convexity is guaranteed by
the combination of Shephard’s Lemma, which implies that the slope of the profit function is
 x   , and the input demand implication that x    0 . The figure describes a setting with tax

rate uncertainty: the tax rate takes the high value  H with probability 0.5, and the low value

 L with probability 0.5.
Consider then a revenue-neutral reform that increases the scope of tax rate uncertainty by
increasing  H by an amount that would raise an additional $1 in tax revenue while lowering

 L by an amount that would lose $1 in tax revenue. Denoting input demand at  H
by xH  x  H  , and analogously the input demand elasticity at  H by  H    H  , it follows

14

Equation (7) readily generalizes to cases in which there are multiple taxed inputs, as elaborated in Appendix A.

8



1
from (5) that the new high value of the tax rate is  H     RH    H  
 . Since the
1


x


H
H


slope of the profit function at  H is given by  xH , the change (a reduction) in profit if this small
tax increase were to arise is the product of these two terms,

 xH
1
. By a similar

xH 1   H  1   H 

calculation, the increase in profit if the tax were reduced is

1
. Consequently, with equal
1   L 

probabilities of high and low tax rates, the net increase in expected profits from widening the
 1
1 

spread of tax rates in this expected revenue-neutral way is given by 0.5 
.




1
1




L
H



Expected profits therefore fall if and only if  H   L , which is the case if and only if the tax
elasticity of input demand declines (is more negative) at higher tax rates—which is precisely the
condition that      0 , just as in Proposition 1.15
Much thus turns on the sign of the derivative    . This, as a general matter, is
ambiguous. To see the forces at work, denote by     1   

 
demand for the taxed input, so that     
 1

    

1

1   

2

   



1   

x  
 0 the price elasticity of
x  


   and hence


    . Since the first term on the right points toward     0 , it is

sufficient, but not necessary, for     0 that the price elasticity of the input demand be
decreasing or constant in the input price—which will be the case, for instance, if input demand is
linear or (a case explored further below) Cobb-Douglas. Conversely, it can be the case that

    0 – so that revenue-neutral randomization of tax rates raises expected profits – only if the
price elasticity    not only increases with the input price but does so sufficiently rapidly to

15

While this exercise starts from a situation with tax uncertainty, its implications also apply to introducing a small
amount of tax uncertainty into a setting with tax certainty.

9

offset the mechanical effect of a higher tax rate. That this is a real possibility is illustrated by
considering firms with production functions
1

q  x  q  x   b

(8)

1
c



x

x

  z  c
ln  a   dz ,
  

with a, b and c all strictly positive constants. The production function (8) generates input
demands
x  ae

(9)
which imply that    

bc

1   

1 c

c

,

, and for b sufficiently small, 0      1 . It follows that

    

(10)

b 1 

bc 1   c 

1   

2c

.

Equation (10) then implies that that      0 whenever   1 c . 16
While theory thus leaves the sign of     open, and clearly there are instances in which

     0 , there is perhaps a cautious presumption that in many cases      0 , at least in the
sense that this can be shown to be case for the specific functional forms often found convenient
to work with and used to guide intuition. The implication is a similarly guarded presumption
that, with identical firms, revenue neutral tax rate randomization will commonly lower expected
profits. This, of course, stands in sharp contrast to the established result that randomization of
tax rates holding the expected tax rate constant increases expected profits: controlling for the
expected impact on revenue makes a great deal of difference to the likely consequences of tax
uncertainty for firm profitability.

3.2

16

Expected input use

More generally it is readily shown that the necessary and sufficient condition for      0 is that the price

elasticity of the price elasticity of input demand be greater than 1  .

10

The impact of revenue neutral tax rate randomization on input use turns on the convexity
or concavity of demand for input x expressed as a function of R. With x  R   x     R  ,
imposing (5) gives:
x  R  

(11)

  
.
 1     

Equation (11) then implies:
PROPOSITION 2: Expected input use is reduced by revenue neutral local tax rate

randomization if and only if     

   1     
 0 . Conversely, expected input use is


increased by revenue neutral local tax rate randomization if and only if     

   1     
.


Proof: Differentiating both sides of (11) with respect to R produces:

(12)

x  R  



1

 1     

2

   R      


   1      
.



Since the first two terms on the right side of (12) are positive, the sign of x  R  depends on the
sign of the term in braces, from which the proposition follows. □
Proposition 2 implies that      0 is a sufficient condition for expected input use to
increase with tax uncertainty. So, from Proposition 1, if tax uncertainty increases expected
profits then it will also increase expected input use. The central implication of Proposition 2,
however, is that the converse is not true: if      0 , so that tax uncertainty reduces expected
profits, it may nonetheless increase expected input use if     is sufficiently small in
magnitude. When     is negative but vanishingly small, for instance, a revenue neutral tax rate
randomization reduces expected profits but increases expected input use.

3.3

Expected output

11

The effect of tax uncertainty on expected output can be analyzed in the same way.
Expressing output as a function of tax revenue, q  R  , the output effect of greater tax revenue is
q  R   q  x  x     R  . Imposing the firm’s first order condition that q  x   1    ,

together with (5), gives:
q  R  

(13)

1       .
 1     

Differentiating equation (13) then gives:
PROPOSITION 3: Expected output declines with revenue neutral local tax rate randomization if

and only if     

   1     
. Conversely, expected output increases with revenue neutral
 1   

local tax rate randomization if and only if     

   1     
.
 1   

Proof: Differentiating both sides of (13) with respect to R produces:

(14)

q  R  

1      R        1      .
   

2
 1   
 1     



Since the first two terms on the right side of (14) are positive, the sign of x  R  depends on the
sign of the term in braces, from which the proposition follows. □
The results in Propositions 2 and 3 can be visualized in a fashion similar to that of Proposition 1,
though with the important difference that, while profits, input demand and output are all
decreasing in the tax rate, only profit is guaranteed to be convex in the tax rate. Appendix B
offers an illustration of Proposition 3.
Tax uncertainty thus exerts many of the same effects on expected output as it does on
expected input use. In particular, if tax uncertainty increases expected profits
(because      0 ) then it also increases expected output. Again, however, the converse is not

12

true: tax uncertainty reduces expected profits but increases expected output if
0      

   1     
. Comparing the critical values in Propositions 2 and 3, the
 1   

additional 1    in the denominator of the latter means that while a reduction in expected input
use is a sufficient condition for expected output also to fall, it is not necessary: there is a range of
values of     over which tax uncertainty is associated with greater expected input use but
reduced expected output.

3.4

Interpretation
Figure 2 summarizes the relationships between the value of     and the signs of the

effects of tax uncertainty on expected profits, input use, and output implied by Propositions 1, 2
and 3. At sufficiently low (negative) values of     , for example, revenue neutral tax rate
randomization reduces the expected levels of profits, input use, and output. At the other
extreme, if (and only if)     is strictly positive does a revenue neutral tax rate randomization
increases all three. In between, there is a ready intuition for the hierarchy of results shown in
Figure 2. Concavity of the production function implies that for any expected level of input use,
the expected level of output declines with tax-induced variation in input use. This means,
loosely speaking, that output is more likely to be a concave function of revenue than is input
use—and so uncertainty reduces output more readily than it reduces inputs. And since profits are
concave in output they are in turn more likely to be reduced by uncertainty than are outputs.
To illustrate these results, consider the effects of taxation when firms have identical
Cobb-Douglas production functions given by:
(15)

q  x   kx ,

13

with k  0 and 1    0 . The first order condition for profit maximization implies
x1 

k
; differentiating this with respect to  yields:
1   

(16)

   


.
1   1   

    

1

Differentiating again produces:
(17)

1    1   
2

.

It is clear from (17) that, as claimed earlier, in this case      0 , so that, by Proposition 1, tax
uncertainty reduces firm profits. This reflects the fact that in the Cobb-Douglas case the tax
elasticity of input demand is zero in the absence of taxation, steadily rising in magnitude with
higher tax rates and ultimately converging to

1
. Furthermore, (16) and (17) together
1   

imply:

   
1 1   
1

 ,
   1       1      

(18)

where the inequality in (18) follows from the restriction that    R   0 , which implies     1
and therefore, from (16), that  1     1 . Applying Propositions 2 and 3, equation (18) implies
that with Cobb-Douglas production functions tax uncertainty also reduces both expected input
use and expected output.
A numerical example for this Cobb-Douglas case, to be exploited further below, is
presented in Table 1. The initial tax rate is   2 and the production function has   0.2 , and k
chosen so that x = 10 initially.17 With these input demand parameters, initial tax revenue is 20,
output is 150, and profits are 120. Tax uncertainty takes the form of reducing the tax rate to 1.6
with probability 0.5, and raising it to 2.86 with probability 0.5, an asymmetric change that leaves
17

This entails k = 94.64.

14

expected tax revenue unchanged at 20. As reflected in the table, this tax rate fluctuation reduces
expected profits to 118.5, and similarly reduces expected input use to 9.65 and expected output
to 148.15. The rising tax sensitivity of input demand requires a significantly higher tax rate in
the state of the world with high taxes to compensate for a lower tax rate in the state of the world
with low taxes, distorting production and reducing expected input use and profits.

4.

Heterogeneous firms

The focus so far has been on economies with representative firms, or equivalently,
economies in which all firms are identical—and, moreover, are taxed identically ex post. Of
course this is not an accurate representation of the world. This section considers the
consequences of taxpayer heterogeneity, finding that differences among taxpayers significantly
increase the likelihood that tax uncertainty will lead to higher profits, greater input use, and
greater output.

4.1

Heterogeneity with a fixed number of firms
Consider first a setting with a fixed number of heterogeneous firms, indexed by i.

Letting xi   denote firm i’s demand for productive input x,  i   its corresponding tax
elasticity of input demand, and  i   its profits, the requirement that aggregate tax revenue
increase with the tax rate now implies that

 x   1      0 .
i

i

Taking this requirement to

be met, the tax rate can again be written as a function of aggregate revenue,  R  , with

(19)

  R 

1
,
1   A     xi  

in which  A   is the elasticity of aggregate input demand, which in turn is simply a weighted
average of the individual demand elasticities:

(20)

 A   

  xi  
  wi    i   ,
 xi  

15

with the weight wi   

xi  
being firm i’s share of aggregate input demand.
 xi  

Consider then the impact of revenue neutral local tax rate randomization on aggregate
profits   R     i   R   . From Shephard’s lemma,   R      R   xi  R  ; hence from
(19), it follows that   R  

1

1   A  

. Thus (7) also applies to aggregate profits in the

heterogeneous firm case, with    replaced by  A   , and     replaced by  A   .
Differentiating (20), noting that
wi   

(21)

and using

1



wi    i     A    ,

 w     0 to replace  w      
i

i

i

 A     wi    i   

(22)

with

 w           , gives
i

i

A

1

 w         

i

i

A

2

.

Consequently:
PROPOSITION 4: With an unchanging set of active firms a revenue neutral local tax rate
randomization reduces expected aggregate profits if and only if  A    0 , where  A   is given
by (22). Conversely, a revenue neutral local tax rate randomization increases expected
aggregate profits if and only if  A    0 .
Proposition 4 is a straightforward generalization of Proposition 1. The structure of the
tax derivative of aggregate demand for the taxed input, however, points to potentially quite
different outcomes. For while the first term on the right side of (22) is negative if all of the

 i   s are negative, the second term, which is the variance of the elasticities (weighted by input
shares), is unambiguously positive under the very mild condition that the elasticities  i  
differ—and that points to  A    0 . In this sense, taxpayer heterogeneity increases the

16

likelihood that revenue neutral tax rate randomization increases aggregate expected profits; and
this is so even if  i    0 for each individual firm.18
If, for example, all taxpayers have constant input demand elasticities, but those
elasticities differ, then (22) implies that the aggregate demand elasticity is unambiguously
increasing in the tax rate   A    0  . This follows simply from the fact that the variance term in
(22) is positive. Intuitively, what happens in this case is that, as the tax rate increases, input
demands by firms with relatively inelastic demands decline proportionately less than input
demands by firms with more elastic demands, so aggregate demand  A   becomes less elastic.
Conversely, as the tax rate decreases input demands by firms with relatively elastic demands
increase disproportionately, so aggregate demand becomes more elastic. The resulting induced
positive correlation between the tax rate and the aggregate demand elasticity gives the aggregate
demand elasticity a positive derivative. Profits increase because higher tax rates apply
disproportionately to firms with inelastic demands: tax uncertainty serves, in effect, as a
screening device for focusing taxation on firms with less elastic input demands.19
Proceeding similarly for aggregate output and aggregate input, analogs to Propositions 2
and 3 follow easily, the only difference being that terms in    are replaced by terms in  A   ,
and     is replaced by  A   . But this difference evidently matters; and even if there is
insufficient taxpayer heterogeneity to make the tax derivative of the aggregate demand elasticity
positive, heterogeneity may so elevate the derivative of the aggregate demand elasticity that tax
uncertainty will stimulate greater expected input use or output.
To illustrate these results, it is instructive to introduce firm heterogeneity into the
example of section 3.4. Suppose that half of input demand comes from firms with identical
Cobb-Douglas production functions given by (15), while the other half comes from firms with
production functions that give them (over the relevant tax range) perfectly inelastic input
18
It is perhaps counterintuitive that there are situations in which, from the standpoint of any individual firm, a
revenue neutral tax rate randomization would reduce its profits, yet an aggregate revenue neutral tax rate
randomization for all firms subject to the same tax rates would increase aggregate profits. The explanation is simply
that with heterogeneous firms, a tax rate randomization that keeps aggregate tax payments constant generally will
not keep constant the expected tax payments of each firm.
19
Appendix B illustrates Proposition 4 by revisiting the analysis in Figure 1 above.

17

demands. Since half of input demand arises from firms with zero demand elasticities, it follows
that the aggregate demand elasticity is half its value in (16):

 A   

(23)



2 1   1   

.

Furthermore, (19) and (23) together imply that, for the half of the firm population with CobbDouglas production functions,      2 A    1     . Consequently, (22) implies:

    A  
 A    A

.
 1   

2

(24)

And applying (23), (24) produces:

(25)

 A   

  2 1   
4 1    1   
2

2

.

It is clear from (25) that there exist values of  and  for which  A    0 , and for which
therefore expected inputs, outputs, and profits all increase with tax uncertainty; and this is so
despite the fact that neither type of individual firm exhibits      0 .
Table 2 revisits the tax uncertainty scenario examined in Table 1, now adding an equal
number of firms with inelastic input demands. 20 Given the assumed parameter values, and as
above, at a tax rate   2 firms of both types demand 10 units of x, produce output of 150, have
profits of 120, and generate tax revenue of 20. A tax rate of 1.6 is associated with greater input
use and output by the type 1 firms with Cobb-Douglas production functions, and unchanged
input use and output by the type 2 firms; profits rise for both firm types, and tax revenues
decline. It is now the case that a high tax rate of only 2.43 is necessary to accompany the low tax
rate of 1.6 for the government to collect (in expectation) the same revenue as with a certain tax
rate of 2. This high tax rate is of course associated with reduced input demand and output by
firms of type 1, but over the two possible tax rates firms of type 1 have expected input demand of
20

These firms have production functions q  0, x  10 and q  150, x  10 .

18

10.25, exceeding their input demand with a certain tax of 2, and an expected output of 150.3,
also exceeding output with tax certainty. Since firms of type 2 do not change their inputs and
outputs, aggregate expected input demand and output increase with tax uncertainty. Similarly,
tax uncertainty increases firm 1’s expected profits from 120 to 120.25, and since firm 2’s
expected profits decline from 120 to 119.85, aggregate expected profits rise.
4.2

Endogenous entry and exit

In practice, tax and subsidy policies can affect numbers of active firms—indeed that is
sometimes an objective, especially of subsidy policy. This makes it important also to consider
settings with endogenous entry, particularly since firm heterogeneity means that different firms
will enter and exit at different tax rates.
Note first that while a small tax change may induce firm entry or exit, these entries and
exits will not directly affect aggregate profits, since entering and exiting firms have zero profits.
Consequently, even with endogenous entry the effect of a small tax change on aggregate profits
is given by  xi   . Similarly, if entering and exiting firms have zero input demands and zero
outputs at their points of entry, then endogenous entry does not alter the effect of a small tax
change on levels of aggregate inputs, outputs, and tax revenue. Proposition 5 identifies a
sufficient condition for this to be the case.
PROPOSITION 5: With endogenous entry and exit, if firm output is nonnegative in the absence
of inputs, then Propositions 1, 2, 3 and 4 continue to hold.

Proof: Denoting firm i’s production function by qi  xi  , Proposition 5 posits that qi  0   0 . If
qi  0   0 then there is no value of  at which the firm exits; hence entry and exit occur only for

firms with qi  0   0 , so attention can be restricted to this case. Consequently:

(26)


xi

qi  xi    qi  z dz .
0

19

The firm’s first order condition implies that if xi is a profit maximizing input choice then
qi  xi   1    . Strict concavity of the production function qi xi   0 implies that
qi  z   1    z  xi , so applying (26) yields, for any xi  0 :
qi  xi   1    xi .

(27)

It follows from (27) and the definition of firm profits (1) that firms are profitable at any positive
input levels that satisfy their first order conditions for profit maximization. Hence entry and exit,
if they occur at all, occur only when a firm’s first order condition is satisfied at zero inputs, and
then only when output and profits are also zero. Consequently, endogenous entry and exit in
these circumstances does not change the effect of small tax changes on aggregate input use,
output, tax revenue, or profits. □
Proposition 5 requires that firm output not be negative at zero input levels, which
corresponds to there being zero net fixed costs—or, in settings with additional productive inputs,
that the firm be profitable even without purchasing any of input x. If instead some firms have
fixed costs that make them unprofitable in the absence of input x then entry occurs once the tax
rate becomes low enough that a firm can generate sufficient quasirents from use of x to
compensate for the fixed costs it must incur. The resulting discontinuity of input demand and
output at the point of firm entry or exit would then invalidate the differential analysis used in
Propositions 1, 2, 3, and 4; but in the absence of such fixed costs these propositions remain valid.

5.

Efficient tax uncertainty and the marginal cost of public funds

Any kind of taxation is apt to affect the efficiency of resource allocation. While the
analysis in sections 3 and 4 largely concerns the effects of tax uncertainty on incentives and
outcomes for firms, it also carries implications for aggregate economic efficiency. This section
turns to implications for deadweight loss and efficient tax design, beginning by characterizing
the ranges over which tax randomization is efficient and then considering the effect of efficient
randomization on the marginal cost of public funds.

20

5.1

Deadweight loss

Proposition 1 can be interpreted in terms of the deadweight loss associated with input
taxation, denoted DL  R  and defined as the difference between the tax-induced loss of profits
and the amount of tax revenue collected:
DL  R     0     R   R  0 .

(28)
Rearranging gives:

  R     0   R  DL  R  ,

(29)

from which it follows directly that profit is concave (resp. convex) in tax revenue if and only if
deadweight loss is convex (concave) in tax revenue. The effects of an increase in tax revenue on
profits and on deadweight loss are thus mirror images: a revenue neutral tax rate randomization
reduces expected profit, for instance, if and only if deadweight loss is convex in tax revenue, so
that the randomization also increases expected deadweight loss. And convexity of deadweight
loss in tax revenue, as stressed at the outset, is not implied by conditions that make deadweight
loss convex in the tax rate. Specifically, it follows from (28) and (7) that

(30)

DL  R    '' ( R) 

   
1     

2

  R ,

so that, consistent with Proposition 1, it is the tax elasticity of derived demand that shapes the
convexity/concavity of deadweight loss in revenue and so determines the effect of tax rate
randomization. Equation (30) implies that:
PROPOSITION 6: A revenue neutral local tax rate randomization increases expected
deadweight loss if and only if      0 . Conversely, a revenue neutral local tax rate
randomization reduces expected deadweight loss if and only if      0 .
5.2

Efficient uncertain tax ranges

21

In order to understand the effect of tax uncertainty on the marginal cost of public funds it
is necessary to broaden the analysis to incorporate more than local tax rate randomizations. In
circumstances when it is efficient to impose uncertain taxes, the resulting tax rates over which
the government randomizes will differ substantially, producing a wide range of rates that the
government will never find it efficient to impose with certainty. The top panel of Figure 3
depicts the possible scope for and consequences of tax rate randomization that is efficient in the
sense of minimizing expected deadweight loss subject to raising some given amount of expected
tax revenue. The solid locus plots the deadweight losses produced by tax rates implied by
different tax revenue levels; it is possible to reduce expected deadweight loss by randomizing tax
collections between any two points on this solid locus for which a line connecting them lies
below it. While there are many such possibilities between the revenue levels R1 and R2 at which
marginal deadweight loss is equal, intuition suggests (and it will shortly be proved) that the
greatest efficiency gains are to be had by randomizing between these two levels.
It is clear that the region R1 – R2 includes points over which deadweight loss is concave
in tax revenue; indeed, the purpose of randomization is to exploit these ranges of tax revenue to
minimize the expected cost of tax collections. But it is also apparent from Figure 3 that the
region R1 – R2 contains points over which deadweight loss is convex in tax revenue, including
the endpoints R1 and R2 themselves. It may seem paradoxical to randomize tax collections
between points at which deadweight loss is convex in tax revenue, but this follows simply from
the nature of the exercise being performed. An efficient program cannot include positive
probability of imposing taxes at points where deadweight loss is concave in tax revenue, since
randomizing away from these points reduces expected deadweight loss while maintaining
expected revenue; hence deadweight loss must be convex in tax revenue at R1 and R2. Indeed in
order for the deadweight loss minimizing choices of R1 and R2 fully to exploit the opportunity
created by the concavity of deadweight loss over a region of revenue levels between them, that
interval must also contain ranges over which deadweight loss is convex in revenue. More
precisely, the following formalization of these intuitions shows that the interval R1 – R2 must
contain equally sized (with appropriate weighting) regions over which deadweight loss is
concave and convex; consequently, a greater degree of local concavity of the deadweight loss
function widens the R1 – R2 range.

22

PROPOSITION 7: For any range R1 – R2 of tax revenue over which tax rates are efficiently
randomized: (i) Marginal deadweight loss is equal at R1 and R2, and so marginal deadweight
loss under efficient randomization is perfectly certain; (ii) There are equal-sized (weighted)
regions over which deadweight loss is concave and convex in tax revenue; and (iii)
Deadweight loss is convex in tax revenue at the revenue levels R1 and R2.

Proof: If the government efficiently randomizes tax rates over some range R1 – R2, then there
exists an expected revenue level R for which R1, R2 and  minimize expected deadweight loss,
given by

 DL  R1   1    DL  R2  ,

(31)

where  is the probability of the tax rate corresponding to revenue level R1, subject to the
expected revenue requirement

 R1  1    R2  R ,

(32)

and the restriction that 1    0 . This minimization problem’s first order conditions over the
choices of R1, R2 and  are:

(33)

DL  R1   DL  R2   

(34)

DL  R1   DL  R2     R1  R2  ,

in which  is the multiplier corresponding to the constraint (32). Since the analysis considers
circumstances in which randomization is efficient, the restrictions on  are assumed not to bind,
so that both revenue levels occur with strictly positive probability.
The first part of Proposition 7 follows from (33), which also implies
that DL  R2   DL  R1   0 . Applying the fundamental theorem of the calculus to this equation,

(35)



R2

R1

DL  R  dR  0 .

23

Defining A1 to consist of tax revenue levels in R1 – R2 over which DL  R   0 , and A2 to consist
of tax revenue levels over which DL  R   0 , (35) implies



(36)

A1

DL  R dR    DL  R dR .
A2

Then taking the absolute magnitude of the degree of curvature of deadweight loss with respect to
tax revenue, DL  R  , to be weights, the second part of the proposition follows.
The third part of Proposition 7 comes from the second-order conditions corresponding to
the cost-minimizing choices of R1 and R2. These conditions are
(37a)

DL  R1   0

(37b)

DL  R2   0 ,

from which this part of the proposition follows directly. □

5.3

The marginal cost of public funds
The marginal cost of public funds is the cost that government imposes on society in the

course of raising an additional dollar of tax revenue. This includes not only the dollar of
resources extracted from the population but also any cost of economic distortions that
accompany the use of the tax system. In the setting depicted in Figure 3 the marginal cost of
public funds at revenue level R1, for example, is 1  DL  R1   , reflecting the additional
deadweight loss associated with an incremental dollar of tax revenue. Recall too that efficient
randomization implies that marginal deadweight loss is perfectly certain, and equal to its
common value at R1 and R2.
A key reason for the centrality of concept of the marginal cost of public funds is in
shaping the efficient level of public spending. Efficient government policy equates the marginal
value of additional public spending to the marginal cost of public funds, so a higher marginal

24

cost of public funds usually entails a lower efficient level of public spending. This may not be
the case, however, with efficient randomization of tax rates.
To illustrate this, the bottom panel of Figure 3 depicts the marginal cost of public funds at
different revenue levels; this is simply one plus the slope of the corresponding solid locus in the
top panel of Figure 3. As stressed above, the marginal cost of public funds at revenue level R1
must equal that at R2. Between R1 and R2 the marginal cost of public funds first rises, then falls,
and then rises again, exceeding its initial level over roughly half of the R1 – R2 interval, and lying
below it over the other half. Since with efficient tax rate randomization the marginal cost of
public funds is constant at its R1 and R2 levels over the entire R1 – R2 range, it follows that the
effect of tax rate randomization (relative to fully certain levels of tax revenue within this range)
is to reduce the marginal cost of public funds at some expected revenue levels and increase it at
others. And indeed, equation (36) implies that area A in Figure 3 is equal in size to area B.
Proposition 8 brings out a key implication of these observations:
PROPOSITION 8: Relative to fully certain tax policy, efficient tax rate randomization reduces

the marginal cost of public funds at some expected revenue levels and increases it at others.
Proof: Equations (34) and (33), together with the fundamental theorem of the calculus,
collectively imply
(38)

DL  R2   DL  R1    DL  R  dR   R2  R1  DL  R1  .
R2

R1

It follows from (38) that:
(39)

 1  DL  R   1  DL  R  dR  0 .
R2

R1

1

Equation (33) indicates that when tax rates are efficiently randomized the additional deadweight
loss associated with raising a marginal unit of public funds is given by   DL  R1  , so the
second bracketed term in (39), 1  DL  R1   , is the marginal cost of funds with efficient tax rate
randomization. The first bracketed term is the marginal cost of public funds at each revenue
level without randomization. Since from (37a), 1  DL  R   will exceed 1  DL  R1   at

25

revenue levels just exceeding R1, and from (37b), 1  DL  R   will be less than 1  DL  R1   at
revenue levels just below R2, it follows that 1  DL  R   must differ from 1  DL  R1   at
various points in the R1 – R2 range. From equation (39) the integral of these differences is zero,
implying that since randomization reduces the marginal cost of public funds at some revenue
levels it must increase it at others. □
The intuition for Proposition 8 stems from recognizing that randomization does not
reduce total deadweight loss at revenue level R2. Consequently, to the extent that randomization
reduces marginal deadweight loss at revenue levels above R1, it must increase marginal
deadweight loss at some revenue levels in the interval R1 – R2. Indeed, the property that tax rate
randomization increases the marginal cost of public funds at some levels of expected tax revenue
and reduces it at others does not depend on the randomization being chosen to minimize
expected deadweight loss.
The importance of Proposition 8 lies in pointing to the existence of circumstances in
which a spending rule equating the marginal value of public expenditure to the marginal cost of
public funds will entail reduced public expenditures upon the adoption of efficiency-enhancing
tax rate randomization, notwithstanding that this tax rate randomization reduces the deadweight
cost of collecting any given level of revenue within the range of the randomization. This
spending implication follows from the mixed effect of tax rate randomization on the marginal
cost of public funds; Figure 4 offers an illustration. This figure reproduces the bottom panel of
Figure 3, superimposing schedules D1 and D2 representing two alternative specifications of
marginal values of public expenditures (which for illustration are taken to be declining in
spending levels and unaffected by tax policy choices). If public expenditures are valued
according to D1, then equating marginal valuation to the marginal cost of public funds, and
balancing the government’s budget only in expectation, entails a spending level of S1. In this
case, adoption of efficient tax rate randomization reduces the marginal cost of public funds and
so supports a higher efficient spending level S2 > S1. If, however, public expenditures are valued
according to D2, then the adoption of efficient tax rate randomization increases the marginal cost
of public funds and so lowers the efficient spending level from S4 to S3. In either case, however,
the randomization improves efficiency in taxing and spending.

26

One further implication is of note. Efficient tax uncertainty consists of tax rates that
exhibit discrete jumps between settings or time periods. Gradually rising government revenue
needs will not change the rates at which activities are taxed, but will slowly increase the
likelihood that the government imposes a higher tax rate, and correspondingly reduce the
likelihood that the government imposes a lower tax rate. Consequently, one sign that a
government has adopted an efficiency-enhancing uncertain tax policy is that its tax rates do not
change gradually in response to changing revenue needs.

6.

Evaluating tax uncertainty

The proposition that price uncertainty enhances firm profitability is due originally to Oi
(1961), which considered output prices and attracted immediate qualifications that the
proposition depends on firms’ abilities costlessly to adjust production levels (Tisdell, 1963; Oi,
1963) and that uncertainty take the form of mean-preserving price variability (Zucker, 1965). As
it happens, an earlier21 contribution of Waugh (1944), together with comments (Howell, 1945;
Lovasy, 1945) and reply (Waugh, 1945), considered the symmetric problem from the consumer
standpoint, analogously concluding that price instability increases consumer welfare. Samuelson
(1972) subjected these lines of inquiry to scorching critiques, noting their inattention to budget
constraints and the patent invalidity of their apparent joint implication that random price
variations unconnected to fundamentals somehow benefit both firms and consumers. As
Samuelson (1972) notes, the contemplated random price variations are infeasible,22 in that the
gains to consumers come from reducing the expected returns of producers, and vice versa, so the
only way for both consumers and producers to gain would be with the injection of external

21

And apparently overlooked, at least until the appearance of Waugh (1966), by those analyzing the effect of price
uncertainty on firm profits. Samuelson (1972, p. 476) notes that the first version of Samuelson’s 1972 critique of
Waugh (1944) was accepted for publication by the Quarterly Journal of Economics in 1944/45, but that “when the
manuscript was lost in the editorial process, the exigencies of war did not seem to warrant preparing a new copy.”
22

“That is, unless you have a Santa Claus; but then if you do have a Santa Claus available, who needs the Waugh-Oi
theorems?” (Samuelson, 1972, p. 488).

27

resources. Thus “Waugh’s result can never be applied so as to permit a society to lift its welfare
by its own bootstraps through manufactured instability.”23
This brutal conclusion does not apply, however, to tax uncertainty: its properties differ
from those of the price uncertainty considered by this earlier literature, as taxation creates
inefficiencies whether or not tax rates are uncertain.24 The general lesson of the literature on
marginal deadweight loss is that prescriptions are situation-specific, implying that the simple
intuition that marginal deadweight loss rises with tax revenue, making total deadweight loss
convex in tax revenue, need not describe reality, as there can be ranges, such as those depicted in
Figure 3, over which marginal deadweight loss declines.25 There is a common presumption,
drawn from implicitly linearizing behavioral response functions, that tax uncertainty will
increase deadweight loss due to the convexity of deadweight loss in tax revenue. While this
presumption is intuitively appealing for a world of identical economic agents, even then it is
valid in an unknown portion of cases; and is considerably less likely to hold in settings
characterized by extensive taxpayer heterogeneity.
Tax stability entails choosing just one point on the deadweight loss-revenue locus in
Figure 3, with the choice dictated by government revenue needs. Tax uncertainty can afford the
government the opportunity to extend its taxation into ranges of tax rates over which marginal
deadweight loss declines, making it possible to reduce total deadweight loss. The ability to
exploit tax ranges over which there are low values of marginal deadweight loss is part of the
basis of Stiglitz’s (1982b) normative argument favoring random taxation.26 Interpretation of the
Stiglitz model is complicated by its randomization across individuals with differing social
welfare weights and marginal propensities to consume taxed goods, but its case for

23

Samuelson (1972, p.476).

24

This is the basis of the welfare consequences of random taxation analyzed by Balcer and Sadka (1982, 1986) and
those of insurance policy differentiation considered by Arnott and Stiglitz (1988).
25
See, for example, Atkinson and Stern (1974), Ballard (1990), Mayshar (1990), Triest (1990), Fullerton (1991),
Kaplow (1996), Snow and Warren (1996), Auerbach and Hines (2002), and Gahvari (2006); Dahlby (2008) offers an
interpretive survey of this literature.
26

This is implied by conditions (13), (14) and (14´) of Stiglitz (1982b); analogous terms appear in Chang and
Wildasin (1986) and Brito et al. (1995), though in all cases without the elasticity formulation of Proposition 1.

28

randomization relies at least in part on the ability of governments that randomize to raise tax
revenue over ranges in which marginal deadweight loss is particularly low.
In the spirit of Stiglitz’s argument, the model of sections 2-4 might be applied across
individual firms, with some finding themselves facing higher tax rates and others lower tax rates,
subject to an aggregate revenue requirement. Firm-specific application would not change the
model’s implications, since input and output prices are exogenously determined; though the
possibility that tax uncertainty increases expected profits would presumably offer cold comfort to
those firms randomly subject to high rates of taxation. Governments with fixed budgets might
additionally consider whether input subsidies more effectively stimulate aggregate output if
spread equally across identical firms or if concentrated among a smaller number; Proposition 3
identifies the relevant condition. Evaluating the welfare impact of tax rate randomization taken
to the level of individual firms would require a framework that incorporates the resulting
distributional consequences, though it remains possible to evaluate the effect of randomization
on aggregate profits and firm operations.
One notable implication of the possibility that tax rate uncertainty can increase expected
profits is that firms themselves may seek to create such uncertainty, even at no expected revenue
cost to the government. Taxpayers might, for instance, seek Advance Pricing Agreements
(governing acceptable transfer pricing practices) as ways of testing the authorities’ reaction to
aggressive tax planning that holds some prospect of being rebutted by the authorities, and even
penalized, but which nonetheless have some chance of success. Or exporters may claim
favorable classifications of certain items for tariff purposes, rather than simply accept some
moderate rate, in the knowledge that this risks being challenged and triggering penalties large
enough to equal the possible reduction in duties. Firms might even lobby for preferential tax
treatment to be given to some but not all firms. Taking risky tax positions can be good corporate
strategy even if not expected to reduce the amount of tax paid.
It is also worth noting that the paper’s analysis of taxation applies with equal force to
subsidies. With   0 , the elasticity    as defined in (4) becomes positive, but it is readily
verified that all the results above—as summarized for Propositions 1-4 in Figure 2, for

29

example27—continue to hold as stated.28 For example, a government eager to stimulate business
activity with a limited budget will find that a revenue neutral local subsidy rate randomization
increases expected input use if and only if the condition identified in Proposition 2 holds.
Economists have long noted the profit opportunities created by price uncertainty even
while extolling the benefits of tax stability in limiting deadweight loss and maintaining
incentives for forward-looking economic activities. Since in the framework of this paper firms
bear the cost of inefficiencies introduced by the tax system,29 the effect of tax uncertainty on
profitability is really the effect of tax uncertainty on efficiency. The second-best nature of
resource allocation in the presence of taxation creates the possibility that tax uncertainty can
reduce deadweight loss and encourage output by imposing taxes in ranges over which aggregate
behavior is relatively unresponsive to taxation. The possibility, counter to ‘common sense,’ that
tax uncertainty encourages firm operations and enhances profitability is just one aspect of the
reality that tax policy adjustments may have very different effects on economies significantly
distorted by prior taxation than they do on economies starting from efficient production points in
the absence of taxation.

27

Note that     remains negative.

28

Restricting  to negative values may, however, change the likelihood of various possibilities; for instance,    

becomes unambiguously negative for the production function in (8).
29
If either inputs or outputs were less than perfectly elastically supplied or demanded then their prices would be
affected by tax rates, and firms would share some of the tax burden with other economic actors. Even with firms
bearing the full burden of the tax plus deadweight loss, imposition of the tax may well affect the real incomes of
economic actors outside the model, since in general equilibrium their returns are functions of supply and demand,
notwithstanding the indiscernible effect of the tax on input and output prices (Bradford, 1979; Kotlikoff and
Summers, 1987).

30

References

Abel, Andrew B., Optimal investment under uncertainty, American Economic Review, March
1983, 73 (1), 228-233.
Alm, James, Uncertain tax policies, individual behavior, and welfare, American Economic
Review, March 1988, 78 (1), 237-245.
Arnott, Richard and Joseph E. Stiglitz, Randomization with asymmetric information, RAND
Journal of Economics, Autumn 1988, 19 (3), 344-362.
Alvarez, Luis, Vesa Kanniainen, and Jan Sodersten, Tax policy uncertainty and corporate
investment: A theory of tax-induced investment spurts, Journal of Public Economics,
February 1998, 69 (1), 17-48.
Atkinson, A. B. and N. H. Stern, Pigou, taxation and public goods, Review of Economic Studies,
January 1974, 41 (1), 119-128.
Auerbach, Alan J. The theory of excess burden and optimal taxation, in Alan J. Auerbach and
Martin Feldstein eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 1 (Amsterdam: NorthHolland, 1985), 61-127.
Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines Jr., Investment tax incentives and frequent tax reforms,
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, May 1988, 78 (2), 211-216.
Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines Jr., Taxation and economic efficiency, in Alan J.
Auerbach and Martin Feldstein eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3
(Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2002), 1347-1421.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, Measuring economic policy uncertainty,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2016, 131 (4), 1593-1636.
Balcer, Yves and Efraim Sadka, Horizontal equity, income taxation and self-selection with an
application to income tax credits, Journal of Public Economics, December 1982, 19 (3),
291-309.
Balcer, Yves and Efraim Sadka, Equivalence scales, horizontal equity and optimal taxation under
utilitarianism, Journal of Public Economics, February 1986, 29 (1), 79-97.
Ballard, Charles L., Marginal welfare cost calculations: Differential analysis vs. balanced-budget
analysis, Journal of Public Economics, March 1990, 41 (2), 263-276.
Bloom, Nicholas, Fluctuations in uncertainty, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2014,
28 (2), 153-176.
Bloom, Nick, Stephen Bond, and John van Reenen, Uncertainty and investment dynamics,
Review of Economic Studies, April 2007, 74 (2), 391-415.
Bradford, David F., Factor prices may be constant but factor returns are not, Economic Letters,
November 1978, 1 (3), 199-203.

31

Brito, Dagobert L., Jonathan H. Hamilton, Steven M. Slutsky, and Joseph E. Stiglitz,
Randomization in optimal income tax schedules, Journal of Public Economics, February
1995, 56 (2), 189-223.
Chang, F. R. and D. E. Wildasin, Randomization of commodity taxes: An expenditure
minimization approach, Journal of Public Economics, December 1986, 31 (3), 329-345.
Dahlby, Bev, The Marginal Cost of Public Funds: Theory and Applications (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2008).
Delipalla, Sofia, and Michael Keen, The comparison between ad valorem and specific taxation
under imperfect competition, Journal of Public Economics, December 1992, 49 (3), 351–
367.
Edmiston, Kelly D., Tax uncertainty and investment: A cross-country empirical examination,
Economic Inquiry, July 2004, 42 (3), 425-440.
Fullerton, Don, Reconciling recent estimates of the marginal welfare cost of taxation, American
Economic Review, March 1991, 81 (1), 302-308.
G20, Leaders’ Communique, Hangzhou Summit, China, 4-5 September 2016.
Gahvari, Firouz, On the marginal cost of public funds and the optimal provision of public goods,
Journal of Public Economics, August 2006, 90 (6-7), 1251-1262.
Goerke, Laszlo, Commodity tax structure under uncertainty in a perfectly competitive market,
Journal of Economics/Zeitschrift fur Nationaloekonomie, July 2011, 103 (3), 203-219.
Goerke, Laszlo, Frederik Herzberg, and Thorsten Upmann, Failure of ad valorem and specific
tax equivalence under uncertainty, International Journal of Economic Theory, December
2014, 10 (4), 387-402.
Hamilton, Alexander, The Continentalist No. VI; 4 July, 1782.
Handley, Kyle and Nuno Limao, Trade and investment under policy uncertainty: Theory and
firm evidence, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, November 2015, 7 (4),
189-222.
Harberger, Arnold C., The measurement of waste, American Economic Review, May 1964, 54
(3), 58-76.
Harberger, Arnold C., Three basic postulates for applied welfare economics, Journal of
Economic Literature, September 1971, 9 (3), 785-797.
Hartman, Richard, The effects of price and cost uncertainty on investment, Journal of Economic
Theory, October 1972, 5 (2), 258-266.
Hassett, Kevin A. and Gilbert E. Metcalf, Investment with uncertain tax policy: Does random tax
policy discourage investment? Economic Journal, July 1999, 109 (457), 372-393.

32

Hines, James R., Jr., Three sides of Harberger triangles, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Spring 1999, 13 (2), 167-188.
Howell, L.D., Does the consumer benefit from price instability? Quarterly Journal of
Economics, February 1945, 59 (1), 287-295.
International Monetary Fund and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
Tax certainty: IMF/OECD report for the G-20 finance ministers, 2017.
International Monetary Fund and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
Update on Tax Certainty: IMF/OECD report for the G-20 finance ministers, 2018.
Kaplow, Louis, The optimal supply of public goods and the distortionary cost of taxation,
National Tax Journal, December 1996, 49 (4), 513-533.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence H. Summers, Tax incidence, in Alan J. Auerbach and
Martin Feldstein eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 2 (Amsterdam: NorthHolland, 2002), 1043-1092.
Kotsogiannis, Christos and Konstantinos Serfes, The comparison of ad valorem and specific
taxation under uncertainty, Journal of Public Economic Theory, February 2014, 16 (1),
48-68.
Lovasy, Gertrud, Further comment, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1945, 59 (1),
296-301.
Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael D. Whinston and Jerry R. Green, Microeconomic Theory (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1995).
Mayshar, Joram, On measures of excess burden and their application, Journal of Public
Economics, December 1990, 43 (3), 263-289.
Niemann, Rainer, Tax rate uncertainty, investment decisions, and tax neutrality, International
Tax and Public Finance, May 2004, 11 (3), 265-281.
Niemann, Rainer, The impact of tax uncertainty on irreversible investment, Review of
Managerial Science, March 2011, 5 (1), 1-17.
Oi, Walter Y., The desirability of price instability under perfect competition, Econometrica,
January 1961, 29 (1), 58-64.
Oi, Walter Y., Uncertainty, instability, expected profit: Rejoinder, Econometrica, January-April
1963, 31 (1-2), 248.
Pestieau, Pierre, Uri Possen, and Steven M. Slutsky, The value of explicit randomization in the
tax code, Journal of Public Economics, January 1998, 67 (1), 87-103.
Pindyck, Robert S., Adjustment costs, uncertainty, and the behavior of the firm, American
Economic Review, June 1982, 72 (3), 415-427.

33

Samuelson, Paul A., The consumer does benefit from feasible price stability, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, August 1972, 86 (3), 476-493.
Skinner, Jonathan, The welfare cost of uncertain tax policy, Journal of Public Economics,
November 1988, 37 (2), 129-145.
Smith, Adam, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Vol. III, 10th ed.
(London: Cadell and Davies, 1802).
Snow, Arthur and Ronald S. Warren, Jr., The marginal welfare cost of public funds: Theory and
estimates, Journal of Public Economics, August 1996, 61 (2), 289-305.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Self-selection and Pareto efficient taxation, Journal of Public Economics,
March 1982a, 17 (2), 213-240.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Utilitarianism and horizontal equity: The case for random taxation, Journal of
Public Economics, June 1982b, 18 (1), 1-33.
Suits, Daniel B. and Richard A. Musgrave, Ad valorem and unit taxes compared, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, November 1953, 64 (4), 598-604.
Tisdell, Clem, Uncertainty, instability, expected profit, Econometrica, January-April 1963, 31
(1-2), 243-247.
Triest, Robert K., The relationship between the marginal cost of public funds and marginal
excess burden, American Economic Review, June 1990, 80 (3), 557-566.
Waugh, Frederick V., Does the consumer benefit from price instability? Quarterly Journal of
Economics, August 1944, 58 (3), 602-614.
Waugh, Frederick V., Reply, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1945, 59 (1), 301-303.
Waugh, Frederick V., Consumer aspects of price instability, Econometrica, April 1966, 34 (2),
504-508.
Weiss, Laurence, The desirability of cheating incentives and randomness in the optimal income
tax, Journal of Political Economy, December 1976, 84 (6), 1343-1352.
Weyl, E. Glen and Michal Fabinger, Pass-through as an economic tool: Principles of incidence
under imperfect competition, Journal of Political Economy, June 2013, 121 (3), 528-583.
Zangari, Ernesto, Antonella Caiumi and Thomas Hemmelgarn, Tax uncertainty: Economic
evidence and policy responses, Taxation Papers, European Commission, Taxation and
Customs Union, Working paper no. 67, 2017.
Zucker, Albert, On the desirability of price instability: An extension of the discussion,
Econometrica, April 1965, 33 (2), 437-441.

34

Figure 1
Effect of Tax Uncertainty on Firm Profitability
Firm profits

Profit

Additional profit =

Slope = -xL

1

1   L 
Slope = -xH

Lost profit =

0




1

 xL 1   L  

L  

L

H




1

 xH 1   H  

H  

1

1   H 

Tax rate

Note: Figure 1 depicts the effect on firm profits of broadening the scope of tax uncertainty. The
solid locus is firm profits as a function of the tax rate. Initially there is tax uncertainty: the tax
rate is  H with probability 0.5 and  L with probability 0.5. The figure considers the effect of
increasing  H by an amount that raises $1 of additional tax revenue while lowering  L by an
1
, which
amount that reduces tax revenue by $1. This variation increases  H by
 X H 1   H  
1
1
1
, which reduces profits by
, and reduces L by
.
 X L 1   L  
1   H 
1   L 
1
Consequently, the net effect on profits depends on the extent to which
increases or
1     

reduces profits by

decreases with  .

35

Figure 2
Effects of Tax Uncertainty on Inputs, Output, and Profit

decrease

Profits
decrease

Output
Inputs

increase

decrease

   1     


increase
increase
increase
increase

   1     
 1   

0

   

Note: Figure 2 depicts the signs of the effects of tax uncertainty on expected inputs, expected
output, and expected profits for differing values of     . If      0 then tax uncertainty
increases expected input use, output, and profits. Tax uncertainty is associated with greater
expected output even for some negative values of     , and is associated with greater expected
input use for an even wider range of negative values of     .

36

Figure 3
Deadweight Loss and the Marginal Cost of Public Funds
Deadweight loss

slope = 

0

R1

R2

Tax revenue
Marginal cost of public funds

Area A

1 

Area B

1

0

R1

R2

37

Tax revenue
Note to Figure 3: The solid locus in the top panel depicts deadweight loss as a function of tax
revenue. Deadweight loss is increasing in tax revenue, with regions of convexity and concavity.
A deadweight-loss-minimizing program does not impose taxes that collect revenues between R1
and R2, but instead randomizes tax collections between R1 and R2 in order to raise needed
revenue in that range. The solid locus in the bottom panel of Figure 3 depicts the marginal cost
of public funds, which is one plus marginal deadweight loss (given by the slope of the locus in
the top panel). Randomizing tax rates between R1 and R2 produces a marginal cost of public
funds equal to 1   , where  is the slope of the dotted line in the top panel. Area A is equal in
size to Area B.

38

Figure 4
Efficient Government Spending with and without Tax Uncertainty
Marginal cost of public funds and
marginal valuation of public services

1 

1
D1

0

S1

S2

D2

S3 S4

Tax revenue and expenditure

Note: Figure 4 presents the marginal cost of public funds schedules that appear in the bottom
panel of Figure 3, superimposing two functions representing marginal valuations of public
expenditure. If the marginal valuation of public expenditure is given by D1, then in the absence
of tax rate randomization the efficient spending level is S1, whereas with efficient tax rate
randomization the marginal cost of public funds is 1   , and the implied efficient spending level
S2 > S1. If instead the marginal valuation of public expenditure is given by D2, then in the
absence of tax rate randomization the efficient spending level is S4, whereas with efficient tax
rate randomization the implied efficient spending level S3 < S4.

39

Table 1
Tax Uncertainty with Cobb-Douglas Production Functions
Tax Rate

Inputs

Output

Profits

Tax Revenue

2.0

10

150

120

20

1.6

12

155.5

124.4

19.1

2.86

7.3

140.8

112.6

20.9

Note: the table presents inputs, output, profits and tax revenue produced by
firms with production functions given by q  (94.64) x 0.2 . These firms seek

to maximize profits given by q  1    x , in which x is their input demand;
and they produce tax revenue of  x .

40

Table 2
Tax Uncertainty with Heterogeneous Firms
Tax Rate

Firm

Inputs

Output

Profits

Tax Revenue

2.0

1

10

150

120

20

2

10

150

120

20

1

12

155.5

124.4

19.1

2

10

150

124

16

1

8.5

145.1

116.1

20.6

2

10

150

115.7

24.3

1.6

2.43

Note: the table presents inputs, output, profits and tax revenue generated by two types of
firms. Firms of type 1 have production functions given by q  (94.64) x 0.2 ; firms of type
2 have production functions given by q  0, x  10 and q  150, x  10 . Both types of
firms seek to maximize profits of q  1    x , in which x is their input demand; and each
type generates tax revenue of  x .

41

Appendix A: Multiple Taxed Inputs

The model in Sections 2 and 3 easily generalizes to incorporate scenarios in which firms
have multiple taxed inputs. Denoting each of n inputs by x j , the effect on total tax revenue of a
n

change in the tax rate on input i is x i   j
j 1

x j
, in which  j is the tax rate on input j. As before,
 i

the analysis is restricted to ranges over which higher tax rates yield greater tax revenue. From
Shephard’s lemma, the effect of the tax rate change on firm profits remains  xi . Consequently,
if the government is constrained to raise any additional revenue by adjusting only the tax on
input i, then:

  R 

(A1)

 xi
x j
x   j
 i
j 1
n

.

i

It is possible to simplify (A1) by using symmetry of the input demand matrix to replace
x j
x i
with
, and by denoting the cross elasticity of demand for input i with respect to the tax
 i
 j
on input j as  ij 

(A2)

 j xi
. Doing so produces:
xi  j
  R 

1
n

1    ij

.

j 1

Then differentiating both sides of (A2) with respect to R yields:
n

(A3)

   R  

 ij

 
j 1

i



1    ij 
 j 1 
n

2

 i  R  .

42

The expression (A3) clearly incorporates (7) as a special case with a single taxed input,
and has a similar interpretation, in that the sign of    R  , and therefore the concavity or
convexity of the profit function, depends on the effects of tax changes on the sum of cross-price
tax elasticities of demand for good i.30 A similar exercise for input demands and output in
settings with multiple taxed inputs produces expressions that are analogous to (12) and (14).

30

For an alternative interpretation, it can be shown that



j

 ij is the elasticity of demand for xi with respect to a

uniform proportionate increase in all input taxes; denoting this elasticity by ˆi , it plays a role analogous to that of

   in the main text, in the sense that the sign of    R  is the same as that of partial derivative ˆi  i .

43

Appendix B: Propositions 3 and 4 Illustrated.

This appendix offers diagrammatic expositions of Propositions 3 and 4.
Proposition 3

Figure B1 illustrates the effect of greater tax uncertainty on expected output, as posited in
Proposition 3. Consider a revenue neutral tax rate randomization, one that increases  H to





1
1
 and reduces  L to  L  
 . The solid locus depicts firm output as a


1
1
x
x






H 
L 
 H
 L

H  

function of the tax rate. The change in output induced by tax rate change is given by q   x   ,
and that is the slope of the locus in Figure B1. The firm’s first-order condition is
that q  x   1    ; and from the definition of the tax elasticity of input demand,
x   

   x  
   x  1   
.
. Hence the slope of the locus in Figure B1 is given by



Consequently, the lost output from increasing  H is the product of this slope and the tax change,
which is

by



 H 1   H 
1
. By a similar calculation, reducing  L to  L  
 increases output
 H 1   H 
 xL 1   L  

 L 1   L 
. The net output effect of additional tax uncertainty is thus to reduce output if and
 L 1   L 

only if

  1   
decreases with the tax rate; which is the condition in Proposition 3.
 1     

Proposition 4
Figure B2 illustrates Proposition 4 by considering the profit functions of two firms, 1 and
2. The increment to  H necessary to generate an additional dollar of tax revenue is thus given


1
by 
 , in which x1H and 1H are respectively firm 1’s input demand
1
1
x

x








1H
2H
2H 
 1H
and demand elasticity at  H , while x2 H and  2H are analogous values for firm 2. The slope of
firm 1’s profit function at  H is  x1H . Consequently the effect of such an increase in  H is to

44



 x1H
reduce firm 1’s profits by 
 ; this can be written as
x
x
1

1








1
H
1
H
2
H
2
H




 w1H
 1  w   w   , in which w1H is firm 1’s share of input demand at  H . By similar
1H 1 H
2H 2H 


reasoning, and with analogous notation, the tax increase reduces firm 2’s profits by


 w2 H
 1  w   w   . Since w1H  w2 H  1 , the effect on total profits is a reduction of
1H 1 H
2H 2H 



1
 1  w   w   . Similar calculations show that lowering  L by an amount required to
1H 1H
2H 2H 



1
reduce tax collections by a dollar will increase total profits by 
 . Hence the
 1  w1L1L  w2 L 2 L 

net aggregate profit effect of greater tax uncertainty depends on the extent to which


1

 increases or decreases with the tax rate. This is a function not
1
w
w
















1
1
2
2


only of tax rate effects on 1   and  2   , but also of the extent to which tax rates shift the
weights attached to the demand elasticities of different firms. Since w1    0 and w2    0 if

1     2   , it follows that the endogeneity of firm weights with respect to the tax rate has the
effect of increasing the likelihood that tax uncertainty contributes to aggregate profitability.

45

Figure B1
Effect of Tax Uncertainty on Output
Output

Slope =

xL L 1   L 

L

Slope =

Greater output =

0

xH  H 1   H 

H

Reduced output =

 L 1   L 
 L 1   L 




1

 xL 1   L  

L  

L

H

 H 1   H 
 H 1   H 




1

 xH 1   H  

H  

Tax rate
Note: Figure B1 depicts the effect on output of broadening the scope of tax uncertainty. The
solid locus is firm output as a function of the tax rate. Initially there is tax uncertainty: the tax
rate is  H with probability 0.5 and  L with probability 0.5. The figure considers the effect of
increasing  H by an amount that raises $1 of additional tax revenue while lowering  L by an


1
amount that reduces tax revenue by $1. This variation increases  H by 
 , which
 xH 1   H  


 1   H 
1
reduces output by H
, and reduces  L by 
 , which increases output by
 H 1   H 
 xL 1   L  

46

 L 1   L 
. Consequently, the net effect on profits depends on the extent to which
 L 1   L 

  1   
increases or decreases with  .
 1     

47

Figure B2
Effect of Tax Uncertainty on Profitability with Heterogeneous Firms
Firm profits

Profit 1
Profit 2

Slope = -x2L
Additional profit =
w2 L
1  w1L1L  w2 L 2 L 

Slope = -x2H

Additional profit =
w1L
1  w1L1L  w2 L 2 L 

Lost profit =
 w2 H
1  w1H 1H  w2 H  2 H 

Lost profit =
 w1H
1  w1H 1H  w2 H  2 H 

Slope = -x1L

Slope = -x1H




1
1






1
1
x
x





1L
2L
2L 
 1L

L  

L

H




1
1




1
1
x
x







1H
2H
2H 
 1H

H  

Tax rate

Note: Figure B2 depicts the effect on the profits of two firms, 1 and 2, of broadening the scope of
tax uncertainty. The lower solid locus describes the profits of firm 1 as a function of the tax rate;
the higher solid locus describes the profits of firm 2. Initially there is tax uncertainty: the tax rate
is  H with probability 0.5 and  L with probability 0.5. The figure considers the effect of
increasing  H by an amount that raises $1 of additional tax revenue while lowering  L by an
amount that reduces tax revenue by $1. This variation increases  H by


1
1
 w1H

and

 , which reduces profits of firm 1 by
1  w1H 1H  w2 H  2 H 
 x1H 1  1H  x2 H 1   2 H  

48

reduces profits of firm 2 by

 w2 H
, thereby reducing total profits by
1  w1H 1H  w2 H  2 H 



1
1
1

. The variation also reduces  L by 
 , which
1  w1H 1H  w2 H  2 H 
 x1L 1  1L  x2 L 1   2 L  
increases profits of firm 1 by

w1L
and increases profits of firm 2 by
1  w1L1L  w2 L 2 L 

w2 L
1
, so increases total profits by
. Consequently, the net
1  w1L1L  w2 L 2 L 
1  w1L1L  w2 L 2 L 

effect on profits depends on the extent to which
decreases with  .

1
increases or
1  w1   1    w2    2   

49

