                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FEMALE EARNINGS INEQUALITY:
              THE CHANGING ROLE OF FAMILY CHARACTERISTICS ON
                    THE EXTENSIVE AND INTENSIVE MARGINS

                                        David Card
                                       Dean R. Hyslop

                                     Working Paper 25387
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25387


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2018




This research was supported in part by the Royal Society of New Zealand Marsden Fund Grant
MEP1301. We thank Janet Currie for very useful comments on an earlier draft. We also thank
Dave Mare for many helpful discussions and Thomas Xiao for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by David Card and Dean R. Hyslop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Female Earnings Inequality: The Changing Role of Family Characteristics on the Extensive
and Intensive Margins
David Card and Dean R. Hyslop
NBER Working Paper No. 25387
December 2018
JEL No. J22

                                         ABSTRACT

Although women make up nearly half the U.S. workforce, most studies of earnings inequality
focus on men. This is at least in part because of the complexity of modeling both the decision to
work (i.e., the extensive margin) and the level of earnings conditional on work (the intensive
margin). In this paper we document a series of descriptive facts about female earnings inequality
using data for three cohorts in the PSID. We show that inequality in annual earnings of women
fell sharply between the late 1960s and the mid-1990s, with a particularly large decline in the
extensive margin component. We then fit earnings-generating models that incorporate both
intensive- and extensive-margin dynamics to data for the three cohorts. Our models suggest that
over 80% of the decline in female earnings inequality can be attributed to a weakening of the link
between family-based factors (including the number of children of different ages and the presence
and incomes of partners) and the intensive and extensive margins of earnings determination.


David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu

Dean R. Hyslop
Motu Economic and Public Policy Research Trust
PO Box 24390
Wellington 6142
New Zealand
dean.hyslop@motu.org.nz
1         Introduction

In contrast to the vast literature on the rise in earnings inequality among U.S. men
(e.g., Katz and Autor, 1999;Haider, 2001; DeBacker et al., 2013), far less is known
about the patterns for women. Figure 1 shows a simple measure of inequality –
the standard deviation of log annual earnings for those with positive earnings – for
male and female workers age 24-60 over the period from 1968 to 2014.1 While male
earnings inequality has risen over the past 50 years, female earnings inequality has
fallen, and is now only slightly higher than the level among working men.
        The difference in trends in Figure 1 raises a number of questions. An important
initial question is whether the same relative trends are evident when the measure of
inequality is broadened to include both workers and non-workers. Although female
employment rates have risen substantially since the 1960s, they remain lower and
more intermittent than those of men. Thus, it is important to consider measures of
inequality that incorporate both the extensive and intensive margins of variation
in earnings among women.2 A second and related question is whether the trends
in inequality for women and the changes in the intensive and extensive margin
components can be described by a simple behavioral model that incorporates both
the decision to work in a given year (as in Heckman, 1978 and Hyslop, 1999)
and earnings conditional on work (as in MaCurdy, 1982; Abowd and Card, 1989;
    1
      These data are drawn from the March Current Population Survey (CPS). For consistency
with the earnings concept in our PSID samples we sum labor earnings, self-employment earnings,
and farm earnings, though the results are quite similar if we only focus on labor earnings. We
have censored (Winsorized) earnings for those with positive reported values at the 5th and 99th
percentiles of the distributions in each year for each gender. We do not exclude allocated earnings
or make any attempt to deal with topcoding: we note that top-coding probably leads to some
understatement in the rise in inequality for males (e.g., Katz and Autor, 1999).
    2
      An alternative approach is to focus on earnings for those who work, but adjust for changing
selectivity of the group with positive earnings. This is the approach adopted by Mulligan and
Rubinstein (2008), for example, in studying changes in the level of female wages.


                                                1
Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004 and Guvenen, 2007). Assuming that is the case, it is
then interesting quantify the impacts of different factors – including family-related
factors such as the presence of children and partners – in explaining the changes
in earnings inequality among women.
   In this paper we address these questions using data on three consecutive cohorts
of women drawn from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Specifically, we
study working age women who are observed in 10-year panels covering the intervals
1968-77, 1978-87, and 1988-97. Consistent with trends for the female population
as a whole, the average employment rate in our PSID samples rose from 55% in
1968 to just under 80% in 1997. Thus our samples capture an important share of
the remarkable rise in female employment that occurred in the second half of the
20th century (see e.g., Goldin, 1990).
   We begin with a descriptive analysis of the relative contributions of the ex-
tensive and intensive margins to the total variation in individuals’ annual earn-
ings. We develop a simple decomposition of the squared coefficient of varia-
tion (CV 2 ) of earnings in a panel setting that partitions overall inequality into
within-person components, between-person components, and an interaction term
(which in our case is small). We then show how the within- and between-person
components can be decomposed into intensive-margin and extensive-margin com-
ponents. Much of the existing literature on earnings dynamics focuses on the
within-person/intensive-margin component. For individuals who always work this
is (approximately) the within-person variance of earnings, and is closely related
to measures of the “transitory” component of earnings in the earnings volatility
literature (Gottschalk and Moffitt, 1994; Shin and Solon, 2011). The comple-
mentary extensive-margin component of within-person inequality depends on an

                                         2
individual’s average probability of employment, and is zero for those who always
work. Finally, the intensive- and extensive-margin components of between-person
inequality depend on the variance of average earnings when employed and the aver-
age employment rate, respectively. In a population that always works, the former
is just the variance in “permanent” earnings, defined as the individual-specific
mean of earnings over all years in the panel.
       Applying this framework to the three cohorts of women from the PSID we reach
three main conclusions. First, consistent with the trend documented in Figure 1,
we find that overall inequality in female earnings has declined remarkably, with
a 50% decline in CV 2 between the early cohort (observed 1968-77) and the late
cohort (observed 1988-97). Second, this fall is attributable to declines in both
the within-person and between-person components. Indeed, the relative shares
of these components have remained quite stable, with the between-person share
remaining at about 80%. Third, a relatively large share of the decline in between-
person inequality is attributable to reductions in the extensive-margin component,
reflecting the rise in the average probability of employment for women in the third
cohort relative to the first.
       In contrast to these trends among women, we show that earnings inequality in-
creased significantly for men in the same three cohorts, with most of the increase
attributable to rises in the intensive-margin components. Consistent with Haider
(2001), we find that the relative share of the within-person/intensive margin com-
ponent of inequality – which corresponds to the “transitory” earnings component
in his analysis – was roughly constant.3
   3
    Celik et al. (2012) show that trends in the purely transitory component of earnings inequality
for males are somewhat different in the PSID than in other data sets, including the Survey of
Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and administrative earnings records.


                                                3
       Following this descriptive analysis, we then develop a statistical earnings gener-
ating function (EGF) that jointly summarizes the extensive and intensive margins
of earnings variation. Our approach combines a standard specification for the
evolution of individuals’ latent earnings (Abowd and Card, 1989; MaCurdy, 1982;
Meghir and Pistaferri, 2011), with a dynamic discrete choice model of employment
(Heckman, 1978; Hyslop, 1999), allowing a fairly general correlation structure be-
tween the underlying error components in the two models.4 We fit the model sep-
arately by cohort to the observed participation and earnings data for each woman
in the sample, taking as given the number and ages of her co-resident children and
her marriage/partnership status in each year.5 We show that this model captures
the main features of the earnings data for women in all three cohorts through a
combination of observed factors (including family-based factors) and unobserved
error components that capture both permanent and transitory shocks to latent
earnings.
       A feature of our approach is that we can flexibly model the channels through
which the observable factors affect the choice of whether to work or not in a given
year and earnings conditional on work. Building on a standard correlated random
effects specification we include the average characteristics of a person’s family,
such as the fraction of years she has children under age 5 at home, the fraction
of years she has a partner, and the average earnings of her spouse/partner, as
   4
     We do not attempt to separately model hours and wages for those who work. Altonji et al.
(2013) estimate a dynamic model of hours and employment with a simplified specification of
behavioral responses to current wage opportunities. They find that the behavioural responses
are quite small on both the intensive and extensive margins. This suggests it may be relatively
costless to ignore these responses and focus on the extensive (employment) and intensive (wages
and hours) margins of earnings.
   5
     We do not attempt to model fertility, or the co-residency decisions of older children, or a
woman’s partnership status, though these would be interesting extensions of our approach.



                                               4
well as the corresponding period-specific variables (whether she has any children
under age 5 in the current year, whether she has a partner in the current year, and
the deviation of her partner’s income from its long-term average). This allows us
to separate the selection effects associated with average differences in the family
variables from the current year effects.
   Using our models to simulate the effects of the family-related variables in each
cohort, we show that a key factor in the decline of earnings inequality between our
three cohorts is the systematic weakening of family-related forces. In our earliest
cohort of women, child- and partner-related variables explain over half of overall
inequality in earnings, reflecting the powerful impact of family circumstances on
the labor supply choices of women born prior to World War II. These variables
matter far less for women in our latest cohort, accounting for only about one-fifth of
earnings inequality. Comparing across cohorts we conclude that the diminishing
effect of family-related variables accounts for over 80% of the overall decline in
female earnings inequality.
   Our work draws together and contributes to three separate strands of litera-
ture. First, we contribute to the literature that analyzes the factors behind the rise
in female employment over recent decades (e.g., Juhn and Murphy, 1997; Blau and
Kahn, 2007). We generalize the standard specifications in that literature – which
use repeated cross sectional data - by incorporating both current period charac-
teristics and average family characteristics. This allows us to compare the direct
impacts of family-related variables in the current year with the selection effects
associated with different average family circumstances. Second, we contribute to
the literature on earnings dynamics (e.g., MaCurdy, 1982; Abowd and Card, 1989;
Baker and Solon, 2003; Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004; Guvenen, 2007) which has

                                           5
mainly focused on the earnings of continuously employed men. Specifically, we
extend the standard permanent-transitory specification of the dynamic behavior
of earnings conditional on work to incorporate periods of zero earnings. Third,
we contribute to the earnings inequality literature (e.g., Haider, 2001; Kopczuk
et al., 2010) by offering an analysis of female earnings inequality that incorporates
non workers, and by separately identifying the contributions of the extensive and
intensive margins to the overall variation in earnings.
        In the next section of the paper we briefly summarizing the broad trends in
female earnings inequality over the past 50 years, using data from the Current
Population Survey (CPS) and the PSID. We then develop a simple framework
for decomposing the components of variation in earnings, and apply this to the
three cohorts of women from the PSID. With this background we then specify
our earnings generating model, present the estimation results, and summarize the
model’s ability to describe earnings outcomes. In the final section we use the model
to ask how the changing role of family-related factors has led to changes in the
overall variation in female earnings, and the various components of this variation.



2         Setting and Descriptive Overview

2.1        Trends in female earnings inequality

We begin by summarizing the main trends in female employment and earnings
since the late 1960s, using data from the March CPS for women age 24-60.6 Fig-
    6
    Note that age is measured at the time of the CPS survey (usually in March) while earnings
are reported for the previous calendar year. For simplicity we use the year of the survey as our
index of time. We censor (Winsorize) total reported earnings each year at the 5th and 99th
percentiles. We do not exclude observations with allocated earnings or attempt to address the



                                               6
ure 2 shows real mean earnings (including non workers with 0 earnings) and condi-
tional real mean earnings (excluding the 0’s), as well as the fraction who received
positive earnings in the year.7 The figure confirms two well-known facts. First,
real earnings of women in the U.S. have risen substantially over the past 5 decades.
Second, part of the upward trend until year 2000 was a rising probability of work.
Over the 20 years from 1968 to 1988 the growth in employment rates was par-
ticularly impressive, averaging about 1 percentage point per year. Thereafter the
trend stalled, with a notable decline from the peak rate of around 78% in 2000 to
73% in the 2014 survey.
    Next, in Figure 3, we plot three measures of earnings inequality: (1) the con-
ditional coefficient of variation, CV c , formed by dividing the standard deviation
of annual earnings for those who work by the conditional mean earnings; (2) the
standard deviation of log(annual earnings) for those with positive earnings, as in
Figure 1; and (3) the coefficient of variation of annual earnings for all women,
including those with zero earnings, CV . For reference we also show the employ-
ment rate. As noted in the introduction, the standard deviation of log(earnings)
among female workers has gradually trended down during our sample period, from
a value of 1.1 in the 1968 survey to about 0.85 in the 2014 survey. In contrast,
CV c has trended upward relatively steadily from a value of about 0.75 in 1968 to
0.83 in 2014.8 Most remarkably, the overall coefficient of variation CV has fallen
top-coding of earnings in the CPS. Finally, we present unweighted statistics throughout this
paper, though these are not very different from weighted statististics using the weights provided
for the March CPS earnings supplements.
   7
     We deflate nominal earnings using the CPI to 2013 dollars.
   8
     A common simplifying assumption is that earnings for those who work are log-normally
distributed. Under that assumption, CV c = (exp(σ 2 )−1)1/2 where σ is the standard deviation of
log earnings. The differing trends in CV c and the standard deviation of log earnings suggest that
the log-normality assumption is inappropriate for female annual earnings. This has implications
for our modeling strategy later.


                                                7
substantially. The downward trend was particularly strong from the late 1960s to
the early 1990s, coincident with the era of rising employment rates.9
       A salient feature of all four series shown in Figure 3 is that most of the changes
over the past 5 decades occurred during the 30 year period from the late 1960s to
the late 1990s. Fortunately, this coincides with the period during which the PSID
collected annual information on households and individuals. To take advantage
of the rich information in the PSID without building a complex model that can
accommodate the switch to a biennial interview schedule after 1997, we therefore
limit our attention in the remainder of the paper to this three-decade period.


2.2       PSID Samples

From 1968 to 1997 the PSID conducted an annual survey of 5,000 or so families
in the first half of the year that inquired about income and work during the previ-
ous calendar year (similar to the Annual Demographic Supplement to the March
CPS). In selecting samples from the PSID for our analysis, we include individuals
from both the nationally representative subsample of the PSID and the poverty
subsample drawn from the Survey of Economic Opportunity (SEO), which made
up about one-third of the original PSID families. As we discuss below, the trends
in inequality are broadly similar whether we include the SEO subsample or not.
To maintain larger sample sizes we therefore retain the SEO group.10
       We have drawn separate panel samples of females and males from the annual
survey over three non-overlapping 10-year periods (1968–77, 1978–87, and 1988–
97). We require sample members to be between the ages of 24 and 60 in every year
   9
    The simple correlation between CV and the employment rate is -0.98.
  10
    We have excluded the Latino sample, which was part of the PSID from 1990 until 1995,
because as discussed below we require individuals to be interviewed for 10 consecutive years.

                                             8
of the panel: thus each panel is (broadly) representative of “working age” adults
during the particular years of the panel. Our female samples consists of women
who responded to the PSID survey for 10 consecutive years and were either “heads”
(of a single-headed family) or “wives” (married or unmarried female heads of dual-
headed families) in each year.11 We emphasize that we do not require a woman
to have the same partnership status from year to year: only that she be recorded
as either a head or wife in each year. Similarly, our male samples consist of men
who responded to the survey for 10 consecutive years and were a “head” of a
single-headed or dual headed family in every year.
       Table 1 presents summary statistics on the demographic characteristics and
labor market outcomes of females in each of our three panels. We have between
2,000 and 2,500 individuals in each panel, yielding 20,000-25,000 person-year ob-
servations per panel. The modest number of individuals in each panel reflects
the limited size of the original PSID sample, our fairly tight age restrictions, and
sample attrition from the PSID.12 The average age of the women is about 40 in
each panel; average education is about 11 years for the first panel, rising to just
over 13 years for the third panel.
       One unusual feature of our samples is the high fraction of African Americans
(37% in the first panel, falling to 31% in the third).13 This is due to our inclusion
of the SEO subsample. For reference, in Appendix Table 1 we show a parallel set
of summary statistics for samples that exclude the SEO subsample. This restricted
  11
     The PSID defines the “head” to be the male in a dual-headed family, and the “wife” to be
the female. This terminology is both anachronistic and confusing, because “wives” do not have
to be married to their male partner.
  12
     See Fitzgerald et al. (1998) for an analysis of attrition in the PSID.
  13
     The absence of Hispanic and Asian women reflects the demographic composition of the U.S.
at the time the PSID was created.



                                             9
sample has a very similar age structure to our main sample, and somewhat higher
mean education, but has only 8-9% African Americans.
       Another striking feature of our PSID samples is the relative stability in the
fraction of women with a partner present (71% in the first two panels, rising slightly
to 74% in the third). This contrasts with the roughly 20 percentage point decline
in the fraction of adult women in the U.S. who are married with a spouse present
over our sample period (e.g. Stevenson and Wolfers, 2007). The discrepancy in
trends between the PSID and national samples is present even when we drop the
SEO sample. As shown in Appendix Table 1, the average fraction with a partner
is around 84% in the first cohort when we exclude the SEO, falling only slightly
to 81% in the third cohort.14 Nevertheless, within each of our PSID panels the
trend in partnership rates closely parallels the general trend in marriage rates
for women of the same ages in the same years. In Appendix Figure 1 we show
the mean fraction of women with a partner for each calendar year in our PSID
samples, along with the fraction of women who are married with spouse present in
a March CPS sample with the same age restrictions. Although the average levels
of partnership/marriage are different in the PSID and CPS samples, in both data
sources we see a fairly steep fall in rates in the 1968-77 period, a smaller fall-off in
the 1978-87 panel, and near stability in the 1988-97 panel.
       In contrast to the relative stability in partnership rates across the three cohort
samples, there is a notable decline in the fraction of women with a co-resident
child. For example, in the 1968-77 cohort, 75% of women have a co-resident child
  14
    The discrepancy appears to be due to a combination of our panel requirements, which causes
us to drop women who attrit from the PSID, and features of the PSID sample. Fitzgerald et al.
(1998) show that the fraction of males with a partner present in the PSID in 1989 is about
10 percentage points higher than in the CPS. They also show attrition rates are higher for
non-married sample members and those with more marital transitions.


                                             10
in any year and 59% always have at least one child at home. In the 1988-97
cohort these rates are 68% and 50%, respectively. There is greater stability in
the fraction with a child under 6 at home (27-29% across all three cohorts). In
Appendix Figure 2 we compare the fractions of women with a child under 6 at
home in our PSID samples to rates for women of the same ages in the March CPS.
We find a somewhat higher rate in our PSID samples, but the gap between the
PSID and CPS samples is relatively stable across cohorts, and the trends within
each cohort are also similar.
       The middle panel of Table 1 shows a variety of statistics on employment and
earnings for women in our samples. The average fraction of women working in
any year rises from 58% in the earliest cohort to 80% in the latest cohort.15 The
fraction of women who work in all years rises by even more, from 29% to 55%, while
the fraction who never work falls from 15% to 5%. Not surprisingly, these changes
were accompanied by shifts in the year-to-year transition probabilities between
work and non work. For example, the fraction of women who were observed
working in a given year following 2 prior years of non work rises from 13% to 17%
between the first and third cohorts, while the fraction who are observed working
after 2 prior years of work rises from 92% to 95%.
       The PSID reports annual labor earnings for heads and wives, which includes
wages and salaries, farm income, and self-employment income. In order to reduce
the impacts of outliers, we have censored (Winsorized) the reported data at the
5th and 99th percentiles in each year. Average annual earnings (measured in 2013
dollars) more than doubles from $11,400 in our first panel to $25,600 in our third
  15
    We define a person to be working if they report positive labor earnings over the (previous)
calendar year, and also positive hours of work over the year. We reset earnings to 0 for individuals
with 0 hours but positive earnings.


                                                11
panel. This rise is driven by combination of an increase in average employment
rates, an increase in hours conditional on working (from about 1,380 hours per
year for the first panel to 1,660 hours per year for the third panel), and a rise in
real hourly wages (from an average of $14.40 per hour for the first panel to $20.30
for the third). As shown in Appendix Table 1, the levels of average annual earnings
are higher in each panel but the rise across panels is similar when we exclude the
SEO sample.
   The bottom panel of Table 1 shows some mean characteristics of spouses/partners
for the 70-74 percent of women who have a partner at the time of the survey. On
average the partners are in their early 40’s, have about a 95% employment rate,
and work about 2,200 hours per year if they are employed. Partners’ annual earn-
ings rise from an average of about $53,200 to $65,100 between the first and third
panels, reflecting a roughly 20% rise in real hourly wages. Excluding the SEO
sample, average partner earnings are higher in each panel but rise more slowly
between panels. However, the fraction of spouses/partners who work in a given
year is about the same whether the SEO sample is included or excluded.
   Table 1 also shows mean characteristics of the women who are employed or
not employed in a given year. As would be expected, working women have higher
education than non workers, with a slightly larger gap in the third cohort than
the first. In the 1968-77 panel, working women are less likely to have a partner
present (66% versus 78%) and less likely to have any children at home (71% versus
81%). In the 1988-97 panel these gaps are much smaller, reflecting a fall in the
impacts of partner status and the presence of children in determining employment
status. Interestingly, among women with a partner present there are relatively few
differences in partners’ employment rates or hours between women who work and

                                        12
those who do not.


2.3    Comparisons of PSID Samples with CPS

Given the small and somewhat unrepresentative nature of our PSID panels, an
important question is whether the trends in earnings outcomes within and between
the three panels broadly match the trends for the overall population of females in
the U.S. Figures 4a-4d overlay estimates of four key earnings outcomes based on
annual observations from each of our panels against the corresponding estimates
derived from the CPS. Specifically, we examine the average employment rate,
mean earnings conditional on work, the unconditional CV of earnings, and the
standard deviation of log earnings. Our reading of these figures is that the trends
in employment, earnings, and the dispersion in earnings are broadly similar across
the two data sources, with our PSID panels capturing the three main features that
are apparent in the national CPS samples, including a rising employment rate,
a falling coefficient of variation of overall earnings, and a relatively flat standard
deviation of earnings conditional on working.
   One interesting feature of the PSID samples is that we can potentially iso-
late the component of the trend in female labor market outcomes that is due to
differences between cohorts. Looking at Figure 4a, for example, it appears that
the year-to-year growth in employment rates within a panel is slower than the
economy-wide growth rate, and that there are large jumps between the 3 panels.
In fact, about 15 percentage points of the overall 20 percentage point increase in
average female employment rates from 1968 to 1997 occurs at the between-cohort
jumps. Similarly, 0.26 of the roughly 0.40 decline in the CV of unconditional



                                         13
earnings over the sample period occurs at the between-cohort jumps.


2.4       Volatility of Earnings

While our primary focus in this paper is on understanding overall earnings in-
equality and the changing contributions of intensive- and extensive-margin com-
ponents, an important strand of recent research focuses more narrowly on the
variability of within-person changes in earnings. This literature originated with
Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994), who argued that the variance of the transitory
component of male earnings in the PSID had increased in the 1980s, potentially
accounting for an important share of the overall rise in male earnings inequality.
Shin and Solon (2007) noted that this variance component is closely related to the
cross-sectional variance of individual earnings changes, which can be calculated
using rolling 2-year panels. Many subsequent papers (e.g., Sabelhaus and Song,
2010; DeBacker et al., 2013) have used a variety of different data sources and
samples to construct three main measures of earnings changes: (1) the standard
deviation of the “arc-percentage” change in earnings between consecutive years;16
(2) the standard deviation of the arc-percentage change in earnings for those who
work in both years; and (3) the standard deviation of the change in log earnings
for those who work in both years.
       Figure 5 shows all three of these measures for our PSID samples. Consistent
with the findings in recent studies that report data for female workers (e.g., Dahl
et al., 2011, Figure A-2; Ziliak et al., 2011; Celik et al., 2012) we see a decline
in the variability of earnings changes for those who are observed with positive
  16
    Letting yit denote earnings of a given person i in year t, the arc-percent change is: 2(yit −
yit−1 )(yit + yit−1 ). The variance of this is numerically equal to the mean squared coefficient of
variation of within-person earnings changes – see below.

                                                14
earnings in consecutive years. As we discuss below, these measures of volatility
are closely related to the within-person component of variation that arises from our
broader decomposition. The downward trends in year-to-year volatility shown in
Figure 5 are consistent with decreases in the within-person components of earnings
inequality discussed below.



3       Quantifying the components of earnings in-

        equality

In this section we present a simple statistical framework for quantifying the com-
ponents of earnings inequality in a panel data setting with both intensive and
extensive margin variation. In order to handle zero earnings associated with pe-
riods of non-employment, we use the squared coefficient of variation of earnings
(CV 2 ) as our summary measure of inequality. In the absence of observations
with zero earnings, CV 2 provides a first-order approximation to the variance of
log earnings (V LN ). It therefore provides a natural starting point for extending
the conventional V LN measure that has been used in many previous studies of
earnings inequality (e.g., Katz and Autor, 1999; Haider, 2001).17
      We first derive a decomposition of the aggregate earnings inequality into between-
person and within-person contributions. We then decompose both the within-
person and between-person components into sub-components attributable to in-
tensive and extensive margin variation (i.e., differences in the probability of work
versus differences in the amount of earnings conditional on working).
 17
      See Levy and Murnane (1992) for a discussion of alternative measures of inequality.




                                               15
3.1    Within and between person contributions to inequality

Consider a balanced panel data setting where we observe the earnings yit of a set
of individuals i = 1, ..., N in periods t = 1, ..., T . Let y t represent mean earnings
in period t (including workers and non workers), and let y represent the grand
mean of earnings across all years. In year t, the squared coefficient of variation in
earnings is:

                          2                                   2
                      1         1 X                1 X yit − y t
      CVt2    =                                 2
                                    (yit − y t ) =                  .              (1)
                      yt        N i                N i     yt

The average squared coefficient across all years in the sample is:

                                     2
          21X     2   1 X X yit − y t
      CV =     CVt =                     .                                         (2)
           T t       NT t i     yt

And, for a given person the within-person squared coefficient of variation is:

                                                        2
                  1 1X                     1 X yit − y i
      CVi2    =                         2
                            (yit − y i ) =                  .                      (3)
                (y i )2 T t                T t     yi


Notice that if there are only two observations per person, CVi2 is the squared arc-
percent change in earnings of person i, which is a standard metric of volatility in
the earnings instability literature.
   Starting from the definition of CV 2 it is easy to show that it can be decomposed
into the sum of a within-person component (W ), a between person component (B),
and a cross-term (C), where




                                                  16
                    2                 2
             1 X X yi          yit − y i
        W =
            NT t i   yt            yi
                               2
             1 X X yi − yt
        B=                                  .                                 (4)
            NT t i      yt
             2 X X (yit − y i )(y i − y t )
        C=
            NT i t          y 2t


Expanding the expression for W , we get:

                 2 ( X  2             2 )
            1 X yi    1       y  yit − y i
        W =
            N i  y    T t     yt     yi
                 2                            .                             (5)
            1 X yi
          ≈          CVi2 ≡ W ∗
            N i  y


Assuming that y t is relatively stable over time (i.e., y t ≈ y), W ≈ W ∗ and the
within-person component can be expressed as a weighted sum of CVi2 terms, where
the weight for person i is the squared ratio of their average earnings to overall
average earnings.
   Similarly, the between person component can be expressed as
                       2
             1 X yt − y
                ∗
     B = B +               ,                                                  (6)
             T t   yt

where

                      2  2
         ∗1 X X yi − y     y
     B ≡                 ×     .
         NT i t    y       yt

Note that when y t ≈ y, B ≈ B ∗ . In this case B is approximately the squared
proportional deviation between y i and y, and provides a simple measure of the

                                         17
dispersion in “permanent earnings” across individuals in the sample.
   Finally, letting δt = y t − y and δit = yit − y i represent the deviations of average
and individual earnings from their means over time, respectively, the cross term
can be written as:

              2 X X δit (y i − y)    2 X X δit δt
      C=                          −               .
             NT i t       y 2t      N T i t y 2t

The first term in this expression is very small in our setting, so the cross term is
dominated by the second term, which depends on the covariance over time between
individual and average earnings. As we show below, C is always negative but is
relatively small in the two later cohorts.


3.2    Intensive and extensive margin contributions

Next, we consider how the within- and between-person components, W and B,
can be decomposed into contributions representing intensive and extensive margin
variation.


Within-person Let pi represent the average employment rate of individual i
(i.e., the fraction of years in which they have positive earnings), let y ci represent
their mean earnings conditional on employment, and note that y i = pi y ci . A few
simple substitutions establish that, for individuals with at least one year of positive
earnings (i.e., those with pi > 0):

                            2
               1 X yit − y i     1           1 − pi
      CVi2   =                  = (CVic )2 +        ,                               (7)
               T t     yi        pi            pi




                                          18
where (CVic )2 , the conditional squared coefficient of variation, is defined as:

                                     2
                      1 X yit − y ci
                            
         (CVic )2   = +                 ,
                     Ti y>0   y ci


and Ti+ = pi T is the number of years of positive work by i. (For people who
never work, CVi = 0). Equation (7) decomposes CVi2 into an intensive margin
component that depends on CVic and an extensive-margin term that depends on
pi .
       Using the approximation for W in equation (5) above, we can write:
                      2
                 1 X yi
                      ∗
         W ≈ W =          CVi2 = W int + W ext                                      (8)
                 N i  y

where
                          2
                     1 X yi      1
         W   int
                   =                (CVic )2 ,
                     N i   y     pi
                             2
                     1 X yi      1 − pi
         W ext     =                    .
                     N i   y        pi

These are just weighed sums of the person-specific intensive and extensive margin
components of CVi2 ,where the weight depends on y i /y. In a population of people
who always work W ext = 0, and W = W int is just a weighted average of individual-
specific coefficients of variation of earnings.


Between-person Using another simple substitution we can we can decompose
B ∗ , the main term in the between-person component of overall inequality, as:


         B ∗ = B ext + B int + B cross ,                                            (9)


                                            19
where

                            2         2  c 2
            ext      1 XX y       pi − p     yi
        B         =                                ,
                    NT i t  yt       p       yc

                            2  c      2
            int      1 XX y      yi − yc
        B         =                         ,
                    NT i t  yt      yc
                              2  c   c
                                         yi − yc
                                                         
            cross      2 XX y      yi               pi − p
        B           =                                        .
                      NT i t  yt   yc       yc         p

Assuming that the gap between B and B ∗ is small (as it is in our samples),
these three terms summarize the extension-margin component, the intensive mar-
gin component, and a joint covariance component of the overall between-person
component of earnings inequality. Note that B cross depends on the (weighted)
covariance between y ci − y c and pi − p. This term will be larger, the greater the
degree of “positive selection” among people with higher average probabilities of
work.
   In the absence of extensive margin variation, pi = 1, y ci = y i , and y c = y. In
this case B ext = B cross = 0, and

                   2         
            1 XX y       yi − y     1 X              2
        B=                        ≈     ln y i − ln y .
           NT i t  yt       y       N i

In other words, when the population of interest is always employed, the between
component of CV 2 is (approximately) the between-person variance in average log
earnings.




                                           20
3.3    Measuring the changes in intensive and extensive mar-

       gin contributions

With this setup we turn to the estimates in Table 2, which quantify the various
components of overall earnings inequality for women in our three 10-year pan-
els. For comparative purposes we also show the same components for males in
three parallel panels. For reference, Appendix Table 2 presents some descriptive
summary statistics for the men in our three male panels.
   The entries in the first panel of Table 2 show the overall value of CV 2 for each
cohort and the within-person, between-person, and cross terms in equation (4) .
We also show the value of the approximation given by equation (5) for the within-
person component of inequality. Comparisons of the various terms for our three
cohorts, and between women and men, lead to four main conclusions. First, total
earnings inequality as measured by the squared coefficient of variation is substan-
tially greater for women than men. Second, overall inequality falls dramatically
between the three panels for women but rises somewhat for men. Third, for both
men and women the between-person component represents about 80% of overall
earnings inequality, with a slight decline across the panels for both genders. Fi-
nally, the approximation in equation (5) is very good for all cohorts and genders
except the 1968-77 cohort of females. Women in this cohort experienced relatively
large increases in average earnings during the 10-year period they were observed
in our data, leading to a slight departure between W and W ∗ .
   The rows in the second panel of Table 2 present the extensive and intensive mar-
gin components of W ∗ as specified by equation (8). We see that for women, both
the extensive-margin and intensive-margin components of within-person inequality


                                        21
fell between the cohorts, with a proportionally larger reduction in the extensive
margin component. Consequently, the share of overall inequality attributable to
within-person/extensive margin variation fell from 9% in the 1968-77 cohort to
6% in the 1988-97 cohort. In contrast, for men, the extensive margin component
is very small across all three cohorts, contributing only 2-4% of overall earnings
inequality. For men, however, we do see some rise in the within-person/intensive
margin component, implying that earnings instability rose somewhat across the
three cohorts in our sample. Nevertheless, the share of overall earnings inequality
attributed to this component is relatively stable (16% in the first panel, 20% in
the second).
   The rows in the bottom panel of Table 2 present the three components of B ∗
specified by equation (8), as well as the deviation B−B ∗ attributable to variation in
y t within each panel (see equation 6), which is relatively small. Here the contrasts
between women and men are even larger. For women, we see that B ext , the
between-person/extensive margin component of inequality, fell in magnitude from
0.40 to 0.08. This decline accounts for nearly 40% of the overall decline in CV 2
between the earliest and latest cohort. For men, by comparison, the between-
person/extensive margin component of inequality is very small and stable in size,
accounting for 2% of overall earnings inequality in each panel.
   For women we also see a relatively large decline between cohorts in B cross , which
depends on the covariance between y ci − y c and pi − p. Together, the decline in
B ext and B cross account for about two-thirds of the overall decline in CV 2 between
the 1968-77 and 1988-97 cohorts of women.
   Finally, we also see a decline in the between-person/intensive margin compo-
nent B int for women between the three cohorts. Relative to the other components

                                         22
of CV 2 , however, the proportional change in B int was smaller. Consequently, the
share of overall earnings inequality among women attributed to differences in mean
earnings conditional on working rose from 33% to 50%. Among men in our three co-
horts, B int rose in magnitude, but at a slower rate than the within-person/intensive
margin component (W int ), so the share of overall earnings variation attributable
to B int fell slightly, from 74% to 68%.
       The relative size of the five main components of CV 2 for the 1968-77 and
1988-97 panels of women are summarized in Figure 6. For comparative purposes
we also summarize the same components using samples that exclude the SEO
subsample, and that use the overall PSID samples but reweight the samples to have
the same joint distribution of age, education, and fraction black as the Current
Population Survey (for the same calendar years). Reassuringly, the main features
of the decomposition are similar regardless of whether we exclude the SEO or
reweight our overall sample.18
       The figure highlights two main conclusions from our decomposition exercise.
First, overall female earnings inequality as summarized by the squared coefficient
of variation fell by nearly 50% between the 1968-77 and 1988-97 cohorts. Second, a
relatively large share of the decline in earnings inequality was due to a decline in the
magnitude of the extensive margin components of inequality. For example, using
our main PSID samples, the combined extensive margin components (including
W ext , B ext , and the covariance term B cross ) fell from 0.99 to 0.31, accounting for
about 80% of the overall decline in CV 2 .
  18
    In Appendix Table 3 we present a parallel analysis to Table 2, using the non-SEO samples.
A comparison of the results with and without the SEO suggests that the relative shares of the
variance components are quite similar.




                                             23
4     Modeling earnings dynamics

4.1    Modeling intensive and extensive margin dynamics

At the micro-econometric level there has been relatively little research attempting
to model both the extensive and intensive margins of earnings variation. Three
recent papers present relatively sophisticated intertemporal choice models of con-
sumption and labor supply that incorporate variation in earnings at the extensive
margin. Low et al. (2010) focus on men, allowing heterogeneity between educa-
tion and age groups but not within these groups. Their approach thus cannot
address issues related to overall earnings inequality. Altonji et al. (2013) model
both the intensive and extensive margins of earnings determination for men, using
a “semi-structural” model of hours and employment with a simplified specification
of behavioral responses to current wage opportunities. Interestingly, Altonji et al.
(2013) find that these behavioral responses are quite small – a conclusion that
suggests it may be relatively costless to ignore them, as is implicitly done in much
of the consumption and inequality literature. Finally a recent study by Eckstein
and Lifshitz (2011) focuses on inter-cohort trends in labor force participation of
women, with little direct attention on earnings.
    Rather than incorporating both intensive and extensive margins of earnings
variation, most of the existing literature has focused on either the intensive mar-
gin of male earnings dynamics, or on the extensive margin of female employ-
ment dynamics. Early studies of the longitudinal structure of US male earn-
ings by MaCurdy (1982) and Abowd and Card (1989) led to the characterization
of earnings as consisting of an individual-specific non-stationary (random walk)
permanent component of earnings, a low-order stationary autoregressive moving-

                                        24
average (ARMA) transitory component, and a purely transitory component which
is typically interpreted to represent classical measurement errors (see Meghir and
Pistaferri, 2011). A non-stationary representation of the permanent component of
earnings is often preferred conceptually because it captures the “permanent income
hypothesis” formulation of expected lifetime earnings. It is also useful statistically
because the variance of individuals’ earnings tend to increase over the life cycle.
   Similarly, the extensive margin literature on female employment dynamics has
built on a series of papers by Heckman (Heckman, 1978, Heckman, 1981), that es-
tablished the now-standard approach to modeling employment dynamics as com-
bining state dependence – often through a first order Markov process – and under-
lying heterogeneity that can include persistent and transitory unobserved factors.
Typically in this literature researchers find that family-based influences, includ-
ing the presence of young children and spousal earnings, exert some influence on
extensive margin choices of women.
   Our approach is to build on these two literatures, specifying a dynamic par-
ticipation equation with state dependence and unobserved heterogeneity and a
model of log earning conditional on work that incorporates permanent and tran-
sitory components. In contrast to much of the literature on earnings dynamics,
however, we explicitly model the effects of family-based factors on earnings condi-
tional on work.




                                         25
4.2    A model for the extensive and intensive margins of

       earnings

On the extensive margin, we specify a dynamic panel data model for the event
that individual i is observed working in year t (Eit = 1) that includes a first-order
dynamic binary response model for t = 2...10, and a reduced-form specification for
the initial condition in t = 1:

               0
      Ei1 = 1(Xei1 βe0 + ei1 > 0),
                                                                                 (10)
                             0
      Eit = 1(γEit−1 +      Xeit βe   + eit > 0), t = 2, ..., 10.


As explained in more detail below, the vectors Xeit include a set of individual and
family characteristics that we take as exogenous determinants of the probability
of employment in each year, including the first year of the panel. We assume that
the latent error components are all normally distributed so the employment model
amounts to a dynamic probit model.
   For the intensive margin, we specify a standard log-linear specification for
latent earnings (Yit∗ ), which are realized as observed earnings (Yit ) conditional on
employment:


      Yit∗ = Xyit
              0
                  βy + yit , t = 1, ..., 10;
                                                                                 (11)
      Yit =   Eit .Yit∗ .


As discussed below, we assume that the vector Xyit includes all the characteristics
included in Xeit plus the logarithm of real median earnings in the economy (inter-
acted with individual education) to capture within-panel trends in real earnings
growth.

                                                 26
   Following the literature on EGF’s for males (e.g. Abowd and Card, 1989;
Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004), we assume that yit consists of a “permanent” com-
ponent (αyit ) that follows a random walk and a “transitory” component (uyit ) that
is a stationary MA(1). Recognizing that our samples include individuals at differ-
ent stages of their life cycles, we allow the variance in the initial period permanent
component of latent earnings, αyi1 , to vary with age in period 1 (agei1 ). We adopt
a parallel specification for the error terms in the employment model. Specifically
we assume that eit consists of a person-specific random walk component and a
stationary MA(1) component, and allow the variance in αei1 , the initial period
permanent component of the employment determination model, to vary linearly
with age.
   To account for potential non-random selectivity of employment and correlated
shocks to employment and earnings, we also allow each of the respective error
components of the employment and earnings equations to be contemporaneously
correlated. Specifically, for j = e, y we assume:


      eit = αeit + ueit , t = 2, ..., 10

      yit = αyit + uyit , t = 1, ..., 10

      αjit = αjit−1 + ηjit = αji1 + Σts=2 ηjis ; t = 2, ..., 10
                    2       2      2      2
      αji1 ∼ N (0, σαj1 ), σαj1 = σαj0 + σαj ∗ (agei1 − 24)
                                                                                   (12)
                      2
      ηjis ∼   N (0, σηj );   t = 2, ..., 10

      ujit = θj ωjit−1 + ωjit ; t = 1, ..., 10
                    2
      ωjit ∼ N (0, σωj ); t = 0, ..., 10

      ρα = corr(αei1 , αyi1 ), ρη = corr(ηeit , ηyit ), ρω = corr(ωeit , ωyit ).


                                                 27
To deal with the initialization of the Markov process for employment we also
assume that ei1 , the first-period employment shock, consists of the initial perma-
nent component (αei1 ), modified by a factor loading (δe1 ), plus a transitory error
component (uei1 ):


         ei1 = δe1 αei1 + uei1 .


For identification, we normalize the employment equation’s initial-period total
                                           2      2                2
error variance to 1. Specifically, we set σαe1 + σue = 1, so that σue              2
                                                                      = (1 + θe2 )σωe =
     2
1 − σαe1 .19
       Finally, because the distributions of log earnings for women in our samples
show evidence of bi-modality (reflecting the presence of both full-time and part-
time workers), we actually allow the earnings equation errors to be a mixture of
two underlying normally distributed errors, each of which follows the dynamic
process specified in (12).20 We adopt a relatively parsimonious formulation for the
error components, allowing the means of the two underlying normal distributions
to differ, but restricting the variances of both the permanent and transitory com-
ponents to vary by the same scale parameter. Specifically, we specify that the error
component in earnings, yit , is the sum of two normally distributed shocks that
are themselves each a combination of a persistent and a transitory component:


         yit = (1 − φ)0yit + φ1yit ,                                                         (13)
  19
     Note that this normalization is applied to the (t=1) (latent) structural error term, αei1 +uei1 ,
whose components are part of the permanent random walk and transitory MA(1) components
respectively.
  20
     An alternative would be to attempt to classify workers in each year as part-time or full-
time and extend the discrete choice model for employment to model the choice between these
alternatives, possibly allowing for part-year employment as well.


                                                 28
where kyit = αyit
               k
                   + ukyit (k = 0, 1), as in equation (12); 0yit ∼ N (0, σy0
                                                                           2
                                                                               ); and
1yit ∼ N (µy1 , δy1 σy0
                      2
                          ), and the variance scale parameter δy1 is the same for both
                1
the permanent (αyit ) and transitory (u1yit ) error components of kyit . This adds
three additional parameters to the model: (φ, µy1 , δy1 ).


4.3    Specification of controls

A final specification issue is the choice of control variables to include in the pair
of vectors (Xeit ,Xyit ). Both vectors include education, a dummy for black race, a
quadratic function of age, and the aggregate unemployment rate. We also include
a relatively rich set of family variables, with both current period variables and
averages of these variables across the 10 years of the panel. Specifically, we include:



   • a dummy for living with a partner (i.e., being classified as a “wife” in the
     PSID survey) in the current year, and the mean of this variable over all 10
     years

   • a dummy for whether the partner (if present) is currently employed, the
     mean of this variable over all years that a partner is present, and a dummy
     for having a partner who is never employed

   • partner’s mean log earnings (over the years a partner is present) and the
     current year deviation of partner’s log earnings from partner’s mean log
     earnings

   • the current number of children living with the woman and the average of
     this variable over all 10 years

   • a dummy for whether there is any co-resident child under 5 and the average
     of this variable over all 10 years

   • a dummy for whether there is any co-resident child age 6-17 and the average
     of this variable over all 10 years




                                          29
Note that we construct averages across the partner variables for a given women
without accounting for the possibility that the woman is observed with two or
more partners (although this is relatively rare). Effectively, we are assuming that
the specific identity of different partners does not matter.
    For the model for employment in the first year of the panel we include the
same variables (apart from the contemporaneous unemployment rate). Finally, as
noted above, in the earnings models we also include the log of median earnings
in the economy, and interactions of this variable with dummies for women with
exactly 12 years of schooling, 13-15 years of schooling, and 16+ years of schooling.
These variables are meant to capture economy-wide wage trends that may differ by
education group, and are potentially important as we do not include year dummies.



5     Results

5.1    Estimation results

The model is estimated using maximum simulated likelihood (MSL) estimation,
with 20 simulation replications. The results of the estimation are summarized in
Table 3. Panel a of the table presents the estimated coefficients for the employment
and log(earnings) equations for each of the three 10-year panels (i.e., βbe and βby );
panel b shows the error components parameter estimates for each model; and the
estimated initial conditions employment equation coefficients (βbe0 ) are presented
in the Appendix Table 4.


Effects of observed factors Focusing first on covariate estimates, we find large
positive effects of lagged employment status on the probability of employment (i.e.,

                                         30
the coefficient γ in equation (10)). The estimated state dependence effect is slightly
larger in the 1968-77 panel than in the two later panels. The magnitude of γ
                                                                           b for
the first cohort suggests that other things equal, women who worked last year are
about 70 percentage points more likely to work in the current year; for the later
cohorts the impact is about 60 percentage points.21
       Focusing next on the child-related variables, the largest coefficients are the ones
representing the effects of a having child under the age of 5 on the probability of
employment. Translating the estimated probit coefficients to marginal effects at
the sample means for each cohort, the implied effects are -10.4 percentage points
for the 1968-77 cohort, -7.7 percentage points for the 1978-98 cohort, and -4.3
percentage points for the 1988-97 cohort.22 We see a similar diminution in the
effect of young children in the initial conditions model for employment in the first
year of each panel, from an implied average marginal effect of -27.6 percentage
points for the first cohort to -13.6 percentage points for the last cohort. In con-
trast, the presence of older children has no significant effect on the probability of
employment.
       The effects of the partner-related variables are harder to assess because the
presence of a partner “turns on” a whole set of variables simultaneously, includ-
ing the partner dummy, the average employment probability of the partner, the
average log earnings of the partner, and the dummy for whether the partner is
  21
     Some decline in state dependence is evident from the simple comparisons of probabilities
of employment conditional on employment status in the previous two years in Table 1. In the
1968-77 panel, P (Eit = 1|Eit−1 = 1, Eit−2 = 0) − P (Eit = 1|Eit−1 = 0, Eit−2 = 1) = 0.36 (i.e.,
a 36 percentage point higher employment rate if employed last year than if not, conditional on
1 year of work in the previous 2 years) whereas in the 1988-97 panel this gap falls to 27 points.
Note that these simple comparisons make no adjustments for the effects of the covariates, or for
correlation in the time-varying error component of employment determination.
  22
     The conversion factors are roughly 0.40× the coefficients for the 1968-77 panel, 0.33× the
coefficients for the 1978-87 panel, and 0.29× the coefficients for the 1988-97 model.


                                               31
employed (which is nearly always 1). Taking account of the joint effects of these
variables, however, the impacts of the partner variables fall in magnitude across
the panels. For example, the implied marginal effect on the probability of em-
ployment of moving from unmarried to married status with an “average” spouse is
about -35 percentage points for women in the 1968-77 cohort, but -27 percentage
points for those in the 1988-97 cohort.23
       Beyond the family-related variables, the other socio-demographic variables have
reasonably predictable patterns. Education has positive effects on both employ-
ment and earnings, with increasingly larger effects in later cohorts. The estimated
age effects imply that the age profiles of the probability of work and of earnings
conditional on work both became steeper between ages 24 and 45 for later cohorts,
consistent with other literature showing rises in the return to potential experience
for women between the 1960s and 1980s (e.g., Light and Ureta, 1995; Blau and
Kahn, 2017). Black race has a slightly negative effect on the probability of em-
ployment, with little change across the cohorts.24 In contrast, the effect of black
race on earnings conditional on work shifted from a relatively large negative effect
in the first cohort to a small and statistically insignificant in the later cohorts.
       Finally, looking at the macro-level variables, the models show an increasingly
negative effect of the unemployment rate on the probability of work, suggesting
that women’s employment has become more cyclical over time. In the first panel
there is strong positive relationship between earnings for women who work and
  23
     The implied marginal effects of moving to married status with a partner whose mean log
earnings are only 50% of the average, and has a 85% average employment rate (rather than a
95% rate) are smaller: a -29 percentage point effect for our earliest cohort and a -21 percentage
point effect for our latest cohort.
  24
     We note that about two-thirds of black women in our combined sample were in the SEO
subsample, so black race includes an effect associated with being drawn from the SEO subsample.



                                               32
economy-wide median earnings. This correlation diminishes across the panels,
particularly for less-educated women.


Error structure Next we briefly summarize the dynamic error structure of the
model. We find statistically significant permanent and transitory error components
in both the employment and earnings equations, with a positively correlated MA1
transitory error in earnings (θy ≈ 0.25) but a negatively correlated MA1 transitory
error in the latent determinants of employment (θe ≈ −0.5).25 Shocks to the
permanent components in the two equations are positively correlated, particularly
for the first year observation (i.e., the initial condition), but the correlation declines
across the three panels. Specifically, the estimates of correl(αei1 , αyi1 ) decline from
0.69 in the first panel to 0.55 in the third panel, whereas correl(αeit , αyit ) declines
from 0.33 to 0.13 across the three panels. The positive correlations between αeit
and αyit imply that unobserved but highly persistent factors that cause a woman
to be more likely to work also increase her average earnings if she works (i.e.,
“positive selection” on the unobserved permanent error components). The degree
of positive selection, however, is declining across the three cohorts.
       In contrast to the permanent shocks, the shocks to the transitory components of
latent employment and earnings are negatively correlated. The correlation between
these components is also declining in magnitude over time (from -0.37 in the first
panel to -0.21 in the third). Finally, our estimates imply that the variances of the
initial permanent components of employment and earnings are both increasing
                                                                                   2
with age (i.e., the estimates of the trend coefficients in the initial variances, σαe
  25
    Although the negatively correlated MA1 errors components in employment are unusual,
similar results have been found in the literature on female employment dynamics in models that
include state dependence, and permanent and transitory errors (e.g. Hyslop, 1999)



                                             33
     2
and σαy , are positive) as is predicted by human capital models with unobserved
investments (e.g., Mincer, 1974).
       To help understand the dynamic contributions of the various permanent and
transitory error components to the evolution of employment and log(earnings), we
conducted a series of simulations of the effects of shocks to each of the components
of the error structure.26 Given that the employment and earnings error components
are correlated, a primitive shock to one dimension will generate a correlated shock
in the other dimension that leads to persistent “cross effects”. Appendix Figures
3 and 4 show the impacts of a one standard deviation shock to each of the 3 error
components of employment and earnings, respectively. The top panels of each
figure show the responses of future employment probabilities (left side) and mean
log earnings (right side) to a shock in the initial permanent error components (αei1
and αyi1 ). The middle panels show the responses to a shock to the permanent
error component in year 2 (αei2 and αyi2 ). Finally, the bottom panels show the
responses to shocks in the transitory error components in year 1 (ωei1 and ωyi1 ).
Each panel shows the response functions from the models for each of our three
cohorts, allowing us to assess whether reactions to unobserved determinants of
employment and earnings have changed between cohorts.
       We find that overall shapes of the response functions are fairly similar for
the three PSID cohorts. In particular, looking down the three panels on the
left side of Appendix Figure 3, the dynamic responses of future employment to
  26
    In particular, we simulate the baseline model specification using random draws for each
component, and then add +/-0.5 standard deviation shocks for each component in turn, and
estimate the average difference in the employment and earnings outcomes over time. The shocks
were 1 standard deviation shocks to the age-adjusted initial permanent stock components; 1
standard deviation shocks to the period-2 random walk innovations; and 1 standard deviation
shocks to the period-1 transitory MA innovations.



                                             34
shocks in the three different error components in employment are very similar
across cohorts. Thus, the extensive margin responses to unobserved determinants
of employment do not appear to have changed much across cohorts, despite the
rapid rise in the fraction of women who work. The “cross-effects” of permanent
shocks to employment on future earnings have moderated somewhat between the
three cohorts, as shown in panel e of Appendix Figure 3. This is consistent with
some weakening of the degree of positive selectivity in the subgroup of women who
work.
   The panels on the right side of Appendix Figure 4 show that the effects of
shocks to the permanent and transitory error components of earnings have rel-
atively similar effects on future earnings, suggesting that the intensive margin
responses to unobserved determinants of earnings are similar across cohorts. Simi-
larly, the “cross effects” of shocks to earnings on future employment probabilities,
shown in the three panels on the left side of Appendix Figure 4, are fairly similar
across cohorts. Overall, our interpretation is that apart from some weakening of
the correlation between the persistent shocks to earnings and employment, which
largely determine the selectivity of the subset of workers with respect to their
unobserved earnings potential, the dynamic error structure of employment and
earnings is quite stable across the three cohorts.


5.2     Model fit

How well can our relatively simple model describe the the employment and earnings
outcomes of women in our PSID samples, and the various components of earnings
inequality? Figure 7 shows actual and predicted employment rates, mean log



                                         35
earnings for workers, and coefficients of variation of earnings (CV ) of earnings,
for each year in our sample. (We also show predicted means and the CV 0 s of
“potential” earnings, which we discuss in the next subsection).
   Our model does a relatively good job of fitting the actual employment rates
in our samples. It is somewhat less successful in predicting mean log earnings
of those who work, with a general pattern of under-prediction that is worse in
the later years of the first cohort, and (to a lesser degree) in the later years of
third cohort. Our model also systematically under-predicts the overall coefficient
of variation of earnings, with a 10-15 point gap on average across all three cohorts.
   Table 4 presents a more detailed comparison between the actual and fitted com-
ponents of inequality in each of the three cohorts, using the same decomposition
strategy as in Table 2. We also show, in the two right-most columns of the table,
the changes in the actual and predicted components of variance between the 1968-
77 cohort and the 1988-97 cohort. In general, the model does a reasonable job of
fitting the between-person components of inequality, but is less successful at fitting
the within-person components. The poorest fit is for the within-person/intensive
margin component, which is over-fit by a factor of 90% in the 1968-77 panel, 70%
in the 1978-87 panel, and 62% in the 1988-97 panel. The positive bias in this com-
ponent arises from the fact that our model has a very hard time matching both
the mean and the variation in individual earnings, conditional on work. Because
our models over-fit the within-person components for all three cohorts, however,
the bias in predicting the change in overall inequality (i.e., the change in CV 2 )
between the first and third cohorts is relatively modest (around 7%).




                                         36
5.3       Changing selectivity of workers

As noted in our discussion of the model specification, by allowing the error com-
ponents in the models for employment and earnings to be correlated we address
potential non-random selectivity in the distribution of latent earnings for women
who choose to work. A simple way to assess the degree of non-random selectivity
implied by our model is to compare mean predicted earnings for those who choose
to work in a given year (which are shown in Figure 7b by the points labeled “Model
Observed”) versus the predicted mean earnings for all women (which are shown
in Figure 7b by the points labeled “Model Potential”). As expected given the
positive estimated correlations between the permanent components of the error
processes for employment and earnings, mean predicted earnings for those who
work are higher than mean predicted earnings for the entire sample. The average
selectivity gap is 22 log points for the first cohort, 18 log points for the second co-
hort, and 10 log points for the third cohort. The decreasing selectivity gap implies
that the growth in mean log earnings among working women understates the
growth in potential earnings among all women between the first and third cohorts
by about 12 log points. This is a relatively large effect, amounting to about a 0.6
log point per year understatement of mean real earnings growth.27
       Our model also implies a selectivity gap between the predicted coefficient of
variation taking account of zero earnings for non workers (labeled as “Model Ob-
served” in Figure 7c), and the predicted CV 0 s under the assumption that all women
work (labeled as “Model Potential” in Figure 7c). As would be expected, the pre-
  27
    A number of earlier studies, including Mulligan and Rubinstein (2008) and Jacobsen et al.
(2015) have attempted to address the changing selectivity in hourly wages of female workers.
Our results are not directly comparable because the selectivity in annual earnings incorporates
both selectivity in wages and in hours of work.


                                              37
dicted CV 0 s assuming everyone works are substantially lower than the predicted
CV’s assuming selective work behavior, with an average gap of 0.46 for the 1968-77
cohort, 0.26 for the 1978-86 cohort and 0.18 for the 1988-97 cohort. The selectivity
gaps in the squared coefficients of variation (CV 2 ) are roughly twice as large: 1.12
for the first cohort, 0.54 for the second, and 0.35 for the third. The implication
of this decreasing selectivity is that a significant fraction of the predicted decline
in earnings inequality for women is attributable to a reduction in the extensive
margin component of predicted inequality, as implied by the results in Table 4.


5.4    Implications for inequality: the changing effects of fam-

       ily

We now use our estimated model to address the changing effects of family-related
factors – specifically the presence of children in different ages and presence and
characteristics of spouses/partners – on female earnings inequality. For simplicity,
we focus on changes between our earliest cohort, who are observed between 1968
and 1977, and our latest cohort, who are observed between 1988 and 1997.


Effects of children Table 5a shows the results of a three alternative simulations
of our model: the full simulation (already summarized in Table 4); a version of
our model in which we “turn off” the direct effects of children in the current year
(e.g., the dummy for having a child under 5 in the current year), but leave in place
the effects of the average values of the child variables in our model, which capture
differences in unobservable characteristics between women with no children and
those with different average numbers of children during our panel; a version in
which we turn off the effects of the average values of the child variables (which we

                                         38
call the “selection effects” of children) but leave in place the current-year direct
effects; and a version in which we turn off all the child-related variables, effectively
making each person childless in all years.
   In general, both the direct and selection effects of children are larger in the
early cohort. For example, in the first row of the table we see that in the 1968-77
cohort, the direct effects of children lower average employment by 7 percentage
points (ppts) (from 66% to 59%), the selection effects lower average employment
by a similar amount, and the combination lowers average employment rates by 14
ppts (from 73% to 59%). In the 1988-97 cohort the corresponding impacts are all
small: approximately 0 for the direct effects of children, -3 ppt for the indirect
effects, and -2 ppts for the combined effect.
   The net impacts of these changes are summarized in Table 5b. Again starting
with the top row, we see that the actual change in average employment rates
between the cohorts was 22 ppts, as was the predicted change in our full simulation.
Taking away the direct effects of children the simulated increase would have been
14 ppts, taking away the selection effects of it would have been 18 ppts, and taking
away all child factors it would have been 11 ppts. Thus, we infer that the changing
effects of children account for 22-11=11 ppts of the increase, or a 50% share of the
simulated 22 ppt increase in employment.
   Carrying out the same exercise for the change in CV 2 – our measure of over-
all earnings inequality – and its main components, the results in Table 5a and 5b
suggest three conclusions. First, both the direct and selection effects of children in-
crease earnings variation. Second, these effects were becoming smaller in the three
decades we study. Third, as a result of the second factor, the gradual diminution of
child-related factors has contributed to a narrowing of most components of female

                                          39
earnings inequality, with a typical “explained share” around 60 percent.


Effects of partner/spouse Table 6 shows the a parallel analysis for the effects
of the partner variables included in our model. We simplify the analysis relative
to Table 5a by simply comparing our full model simulation to a simulation from
a model with all the spousal-related factors “turned off”. In general, the results
suggest that spouse-related factors are an important source of variation in female
earnings, though again the effects are notably smaller for the later cohort. We
emphasize that this is not a reflection of a fall in partnership rates: across our
three cohorts the rate of marriage/partnering is quite stable at around 70% (see
Table 1). Instead it reflects falling magnitudes for the impacts of the spouse-related
variables.
   Looking at the right-most column of Table 6 we see that spousal variables
explain about 40% of the rise in employment rates between the 1968-77 cohort and
the 1988-97 cohort, and close to 60% of the rise in overall earnings inequality, with
similar explained shares of most of the main components of changing inequality.


Combined effects of family-related factors Finally, in Table 7 we show the
results from a simulation in which we “turn off” all child-related and spouse-related
variables – essentially assuming that all the women in all three cohorts were single
heads with no children. The combined effects of the two sets of variables are
quite large for the 1968-78 cohort. For example, the model suggests that average
employment rates of women would have been 82% in the absence of these factors
- nearly the same as the actual average employment rate of women in our 1988-97
cohort. By the third cohort the combined variables are still working in the same



                                         40
direction, but their net effects are far smaller. Thus, we conclude that the changing
effects of children and spouse-related variables can account for about 70% of the
rise in average employment rates.
    A similar conclusion applies to CV 2 , our overall measure of inequality. For the
early cohort, the model suggests that CV 2 would have been only about one-half as
large (1.07/2.10) if we removed the effects of all the family variables. For the later
cohort the implied change in overall inequality is relatively modest (0.95 versus
1.19). Thus, comparing the simulated changes with and without the effects of
children and partners, we conclude that about 87% of the fall in overall earnings
inequality between the earlier and later cohort can be explained by a diminishing
effect of family-related variables on the labor supply choices of women.



6     Concluding discussion

In this paper we examine trends in the inequality of annual earnings among women
in the U.S. Our starting point is the observation that to understand the evolution
of earnings inequality among women, one needs to take account of changes in the
probability of work – the extensive margin of earnings variation. We lay out a
simple descriptive framework that allows us to partition overall inequality into
within- and between-person components, and then show how these can be further
decomposed into intensive-margin and extensive-margin components. In a popu-
lation that always works the extensive margin components are zero; the within-
person/intensive margin component corresponds to the “transitory” component of
individual earnings variation; and the between-person/extensive margin compo-
nent corresponds to the “permanent” component of individual earnings variation.


                                         41
More generally, both the within-person and between-person components of earn-
ings variation include an extensive margin component; while the between-person
component also includes a “covariance” between the average level of earnings con-
ditional on working and the average probability of work, reflecting the average
selectivity of the working subpopulation.
   Applying this framework to three cohorts of women from the PSID, observed
1968-77, 1978-87, and 1988-97, we show that overall inequality in female earnings
has declined by about 50% between the early and late cohorts. A large share
of the decline is attributable to reductions in the extensive-margin component,
reflecting the rise the average probability of employment for women in the third
cohort relative to the first.
   We then extend the existing literature on earnings dynamics by introducing
a statistical earnings generating function that combines a standard model for the
evolution of individuals’ latent earnings with a dynamic discrete choice model of
employment. We incorporate a relatively rich specification of the effects of family-
related variables in our models of employment and earnings, including both current
period characteristics and average family characteristics that capture differences
in unobserved preferences between women. Estimating the model separately by
cohort we show that, apart from a reduction in the degree of positive selection
of workers, the correlation structure of the unobserved components driving the
probability of work and earnings conditional on work have not changed very much.
Instead, the main difference in our models is in the diminishing effects of the
family-related variables. This decline accounts for over 80% of the overall decline
in female earnings inequality.
   Our modeling framework is highly simplified, in that we take as given the num-

                                        42
ber and ages of co-resident children for each woman, and her marriage/partnership
status in each year. We also make no attempt to separately model the determina-
tion of hours of work and wages per hour. Both of these issues would be important
avenues for extending our findings in future research.



References

Abowd, J. M. and D. Card (1989). On the covariance structure of earnings and
  hours changes. Econometrica 57 (2), 411–445.
Altonji, J. G., A. A. Smith, and I. Vidangos (2013). Modeling earnings dynamics.
  Econometrica 81 (4), 1395–1454.
Baker, M. and G. Solon (2003). Earnings dynamics and inequality among canadian
  men, 1976–1992: Evidence from longitudinal income tax records. Journal of
  Labor Economics 21 (2), 289–321.
Blau, F. D. and L. M. Kahn (2007). Changes in the labor supply behavior of
  married women: 1980-2000. Journal of Labor Economics 25 (3), 393–436.
Blau, F. D. and L. M. Kahn (2017). The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and
  explanations. Journal of Economic Literature 55 (3), 789–865.
Celik, S., C. Juhn, K. McCue, and J. Thompson (2012). Recent trends in earnings
  volatility: Evidence from survey and administrative data. The BE Journal of
  Economic Analysis & Policy 12 (2).
Dahl, M., T. DeLeire, and J. A. Schwabish (2011). Estimates of year-to-year
  volatility in earnings and in household incomes from administrative, survey, and
  matched data. Journal of Human Resources 46 (4), 750–774.
DeBacker, J., B. Heim, V. Panousi, S. Ramnath, and I. Vidangos (2013). Rising


                                        43
  inequality: transitory or persistent? new evidence from a panel of us tax returns.
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2013 (1), 67–142.
Eckstein, Z. and O. Lifshitz (2011). Dynamic female labor supply. Economet-
  rica 79 (6), 1675–1726.
Fitzgerald, J., P. Gottschalk, and R. Moffitt (1998). The impact of attrition in
  the panel study of income dynamics on intergenerational analysis. Journal of
  Human Resources 33 (2), 300–344.
Goldin, C. (1990). Understanding the gender gap: An economic history of Amer-
  ican women. Oxford Press.
Gottschalk, P. and R. Moffitt (1994). The growth of earnings instability in the us
  labor market. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1994 (2), 217–272.
Guvenen, F. (2007). Learning your earning: Are labor income shocks really very
  persistent. American Economic Review 97 (3), 687–716.
Haider, S. J. (2001). Earnings instability and earnings inequality of males in the
  united states: 1967–1991. Journal of labor Economics 19 (4), 799–836.
Heckman, J. J. (1978). Simple statistical models for discrete panel data devel-
  oped and applied to test the hypothesis of true state dependence against the
  hypothesis of spurious state dependence. Annales de l’INSEE 30–31, 227–269.
Heckman, J. J. (1981). Heterogeneity and state dependence. In S. Rosen (Ed.),
  Studies in Labor Markets, pp. 91–139. Chicago and London: University of
  Chicago Press.
Hyslop, D. R. (1999). State dependence, serial correlation and heterogeneity in
  intertemporal labor force participation of married women. Econometrica 67 (6),
  1255–1294.
Jacobsen, J., M. Khamis, and M. Yuksel (2015). Convergences in mens and womens

                                        44
  life patterns: Lifetime work, lifetime earnings, and human capital investment. In
  S. W. Polacheck, K. Tatsiramos, and K. F. Zimmerman (Eds.), Gender Conver-
  gence in the Labor Market Research in Labor Economics Volume 41, Chapter 1,
  pp. 1–33. Emerald Group.
Juhn, C. and K. M. Murphy (1997). Wage inequality and family labor supply.
  Journal of labor economics 15 (1), 72–97.
Katz, L. F. and D. H. Autor (1999). Changes in the wage structure and earnings
  inequality. Handbook of labor economics 3, 1463–1555.
Kopczuk, W., E. Saez, and J. Song (2010). Earnings inequality and mobility in the
  united states: Evidence from social security data since 1937. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 125 (1), 91–128.
Levy, F. and R. J. Murnane (1992). Us earnings levels and earnings inequality:
  A review of recent trends and proposed explanations. Journal of economic
  literature 30 (3), 1333–1381.
Light, A. and M. Ureta (1995). Early-career work experience and gender wage
  differentials. Journal of Labor Economics 13 (1), 121–154.
Low, H., C. Meghir, and L. Pistaferri (2010). Wage risk and employment risk over
  the life cycle. The American economic review 100 (4), 1432–1467.
MaCurdy, T. E. (1982). The use of time series processes to model the error struc-
  ture of earnings in a longitudinal data analysis. Journal of econometrics 18 (1),
  83–114.
Meghir, C. and L. Pistaferri (2004). Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity.
  Econometrica 72 (1), 1–32.
Meghir, C. and L. Pistaferri (2011). Earnings, consumption and life cycle choices.
  Handbook of Labor Economics 4, 773–854.

                                        45
Mincer, J. (1974). Schooling, experience and earnings. University of Chicago Press
  for NBER.
Mulligan, C. B. and Y. Rubinstein (2008). Selection, investment, and women’s
  relative wages over time. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1061–1110.
Sabelhaus, J. and J. Song (2010). The great moderation in micro labor earnings.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (4), 391–403.
Shin, D. and G. Solon (2007). New evidence on real wage cyclicality within
  employer–employee matches. Scottish Journal of Political Economy 54 (5), 648–
  660.
Shin, D. and G. Solon (2011). Trends in men’s earnings volatility: What does the
  panel study of income dynamics show? Journal of public Economics 95 (7-8),
  973–982.
Stevenson, B. and J. Wolfers (2007). Marriage and divorce: Changes and their
  driving forces? Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2), 27–52.
Ziliak, J. P., B. Hardy, and C. Bollinger (2011). Earnings volatility in america:
  Evidence from matched cps. Labour Economics 18 (6), 742–754.




                                       46
                                     Figure 1: Standard Deviation of Log Annual Earnings

                                     1.2

                                     1.1
Standard Dev. Of Log Ann. Earnings




                                     1.0

                                     0.9

                                     0.8

                                     0.7

                                     0.6                                                                                        Females
                                                                                                                                Males
                                     0.5

                                     0.4
                                       1968           1973          1978          1983          1988          1993          1998         2003          2008          2013

                                           Note: sample restricted to individuals age 24-60 in all years. CPS sample weights are not used. Earnings are censored at 5th and
                                           99th percentiles, with no adjustment for topcoding.
                                     Figure 2: Real Mean Annual Earnings of Females in March CPS


                                     45,000                                                                                                                         1

                                     40,000
Mean Annual Earnings (Real 2013 $)




                                     35,000                                                                                                                         0.9

                                     30,000




                                                                                                                                                                          Fraction Working
                                                                                                                                                                    0.8
                                     25,000

                                     20,000
                                                                                                                                                                    0.7
                                     15,000                                                            Mean Earnings if Positive

                                     10,000                                                            Mean Earnings Including Zeros
                                                                                                                                                                    0.6
                                                                                                       Fraction Working (right axis)
                                      5,000

                                           0                                                                                                                        0.5
                                           1968         1973        1978        1983        1988 1993 1998                        2003        2008         2013
                                                                                            CPS Survey Year
                                          Note: sample restricted to females age 24-60 in all years. Sample weights are not used. Earnings are censored at 5th and 99th
                                          percentiles, with no adjustment for topcoding.
  Figure 3: Trends in Female Earnings Inequality ‐ Annual Data from March CPS

1.6
                                                           Coeff of Variation (Including 0's)
1.4                                                        Std Dev of Log Earnings
                                                           Coeff of Var. Pos Earnings Only

1.2                                                        Fraction Working


1.0


0.8


0.6


0.4
  1968       1973         1978         1983         1988    1993             1998         2003         2008         2013
                                                       CPS Year
      Note: sample restricted to females age 24‐60 in all years. Earnings in real 2013 dollars are censored at 5th and
      99th percentiles with no adjustment for topcoding.
Figure 4: Comparisons of PSID Panels and CPS

a: Fraction of Females Working During Year - PSID vs. CPS                                                                                   b: Mean Earnings Conditional on Working - PSID vs. CPS

                                       0.9                                                                                                                                             40,000
                                                   PSID 1968-77 Panel                                                                                                                                       PSID 1968-77 Panel




                                                                                                                                                  Mean Annual Earnings (Real 2013 $)
                                                   PSID 1978-87 Panel
        Fraction Working During Year




                                                                                                                                                                                       35,000               PSID 1978-87 Panel
                                       0.8         PSID 1988-97 Panel                                                                                                                                       PSID 1988-97 Panel
                                                   March CPS Cross Sections
                                                                                                                                                                                       30,000               March CPS Cross Sections
                                       0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                       25,000

                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                       20,000


                                       0.5                                                                                                                                             15,000
                                         1968    1971     1974     1977       1980     1983     1986    1989     1992      1995                                                               1968     1971      1974     1977     1980    1983     1986   1989    1992     1995
                                                                              PSID/CPS Survey Year                                                                                                                                PSID/CPS Survey Year



c: Coefficient of Variation of Female Earnings - PSID vs. CPS                                                                               d: Standard Deviation of Log Earnings - PSID vs. CPS

                           1.60                                                                                                                                                        1.30
                                                                                                PSID 1968-77 Panel                                                                                                                                    PSID 1968-77 Panel
                           1.50
                                                                                                PSID 1978-87 Panel                                                                     1.20                                                           PSID 1978-87 Panel
Coefficient of Variation




                           1.40




                                                                                                                                                Standard Deviation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PSID 1988-97 Panel
                           1.30                                                                 PSID 1988-97 Panel
                                                                                                                                                                                       1.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      March CPS Cross Sections
                           1.20                                                                 March CPS Cross Sections
                                                                                                                                                                                       1.00
                           1.10

                           1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.90
                           0.90

                           0.80                                                                                                                                                        0.80
                                        1968     1971     1974     1977       1980     1983     1986    1989     1992      1995                                                           1968       1971      1974     1977      1980    1983     1986    1989    1992     1995
                                                                              PSID/CPS Survey Year                                                                                                                               PSID/CPS Survey Year




                                       Note: samples restricted to females age 24-60 in all years. PSID and CPS sample weights are not used. Earnings are censored at 5th and 99th percentiles with no adjustment for topcoding in CPS.
                 Figure 5: Measures of Year-to-Year Volatility in Earnings

                     1.2
                                                                 SD of arc-pct change in earnings (incl 0's)
                     1.1                                         SD of arc-pct change in earnings (if positive)
                                                                 SD of change in log earnings
                     1.0
Standard Deviation




                     0.9

                     0.8

                     0.7

                     0.6

                     0.5
                                 Cohort 1 (1968-77)        Cohort 2 (1978-87)             Cohort 3 (1988-97)
                     0.4
                       1968       1971      1974   1977   1980     1983      1986     1989      1992     1995

                     Note: see note to Figure 4.
 Figure 6: Changes in Components of Earnings Inequality for Female Heads

2.4

2.2
          Overall Sample          Exclude SEO Subsample       Overall Sample - Weighted
2.0
        1.76                                                     1.80
                                                                                            Within:
1.8                                                                                         Extensive Margin
                                    1.60
1.6                                                                                         Between:
                                                                                            Extensive Margin
1.4
                 0.99                                                      1.04
                                             0.88                                           Between: Cross
1.2
                                                                                            Effect
1.0                      0.94                                                      0.93
                                                     0.88                                   Within: Intensive
0.8              0.31                                                                       Margin
                                             0.28                        0.31
0.6                                                                                         Between:
                                                                                            Intensive Margin
0.4
                                                                                            All Other
0.2                                                                                         Components

0.0

-0.2
       1968-77          1988-97    1968-77          1988-97    1968-77            1988-97
Figure 7: Comparisons of Actual and Predicted Outcomes

a: Actual and Predicted Employment Rates
                       0.85

                       0.80

                       0.75
Employment Rate




                       0.70

                       0.65

                       0.60
                                                                                            1968-77 Actual        1978-87 Actual        1988-97 Actual
                       0.55                                                                 Model Predicted       Model Predicted       Model Predicted

                       0.50
                                                       1968         1971    1974    1977     1980      1983     1986         1989        1992      1995
                                                                                               PSID survey year


 b: Actual and Predicted Mean Log Earnings
                                           10.2

                                           10.0
            Average log(earnings)




                                                       9.8

                                                       9.6

                                                       9.4

                                                       9.2                                       1968-77 Actual       1978-87 Actual        1988-97 Actual
                                                                                                 Model Observed       Model Observed        Model Observed
                                                       9.0
                                                                                                 Model Potential      Model Potential       Model Potential
                                                       8.8
                                                         1968        1971    1974    1977      1980      1983     1986        1989         1992      1995
                                                                                                 PSID survey year


c: Actual and Predicted Coefficient of Variation of Earnings
                                                       1.6
                                                                                              1968-77 Actual        1978-87 Actual       1988-97 Actual
                                                       1.4                                    Model Observed        Model Observed       Model Observed
                            Coefficient of variation




                                                                                              Model Potential       Model Potential      Model Potential
                                                       1.2

                                                       1.0

                                                       0.8

                                                       0.6
                                                             1968    1971    1974    1977     1980      1983        1986      1989        1992     1995

                                                                                                 PSID survey year
Table 1: Characteristics of Female Heads in Three 10-year Panels of PSID
                                                1968-77                                        1978-87                                        1988-97
                                     All        Not Emp.      Employed              All        Not Emp.       Employed              All       Not Emp.       Employed
Age                                 41.6          41.5          41.6               39.8          40.8           39.4               39.2         39.7           39.0
Education                           11.2          10.8          11.5               12.6          11.7           12.9               13.2         12.4           13.4
Black                               0.37          0.35          0.38               0.33          0.35           0.33               0.31         0.37           0.29
Partner present                     0.71          0.78          0.66               0.71          0.76           0.69               0.74         0.76           0.74
Always with partner                 0.59          0.68          0.54               0.60          0.66           0.58               0.63         0.67           0.62
Never with partner                  0.20          0.16          0.22               0.19          0.18           0.20               0.16         0.17           0.16
Any kids present                    0.75          0.81          0.71               0.68          0.74           0.66               0.68         0.74           0.67
Number kids present                 2.14          2.48          1.90               1.44          1.72           1.34               1.41         1.77           1.33
Kid under 6 present                 0.27          0.35          0.22               0.27          0.35           0.24               0.29         0.40           0.26
Kid 6-17 present                    0.48          0.45          0.49               0.41          0.39           0.43               0.39         0.33           0.41
Ever have kids present              0.88          0.91          0.85               0.85          0.88           0.84               0.82         0.86           0.81
Always have kids present            0.59          0.66          0.54               0.47          0.53           0.45               0.50         0.57           0.49
Own employment outcomes:
Fraction years employed             0.58          0.23           0.84              0.72          0.29           0.89              0.80           0.34           0.92
Always employed                     0.29          0.00           0.50              0.45          0.00           0.63              0.55           0.00           0.68
Never employed                      0.15          0.36           0.00              0.08          0.30           0.00              0.05           0.25           0.00
P[Et=1|Et-1=0,Et-2=0]               0.13            --            --               0.16            --            --               0.17             --            --
P[Et=1|Et-1=1,Et-2=0]               0.70            --            --               0.73            --            --               0.75             --            --
P[Et=1|Et-1=0,Et-2=1]               0.34            --            --               0.39            --            --               0.48             --            --
P[Et=1|Et-1=1,Et-2=1]               0.92            --            --               0.95            --            --               0.95             --            --
Earnings (including 0's)           11,360           0           19,422            18,095           0           25,129            25,587            0           31,889
Avg. earnings all years            11,360         2,598         17,578            18,095         3,747         23,672            25,587          5,873         30,443
Partner employment outcomes (in years partner present):
Partner age                 44.5        44.7         44.4                          42.3           43.5          41.8              41.7           43.1           41.4
Partner employed            0.94        0.93         0.95                          0.93           0.88          0.95              0.94           0.89           0.95
Partner hours this year     2,245       2,287        2,210                         2,185          2,212         2,174             2,257          2,296          2,248
Partner earnings this year 53,224      55,357       51,451                        58,948         61,938        57,741            65,131         71,310         63,632
Mean partner earnings      51,268      53,312       49,701                        56,906         58,793        56,170            62,416         67,710         61,171

Number person-year obs.            20,760         8,617         12,143            25,000         6,998         18,002            22,860          4,518         18,342
Notes: Each cohort sample consists of balanced 10-year panel. Earnings measures are censored annually at the 5th and 99th percentiles, and adjusted to real 2013 dollars
using the CPI-U index. Employed and not-employed subgroups are based on employment status in current year . P[Et=1|Et-1=0,Et-2=0] represents probability of
employment in year t conditional on not being employed in year t-1 or year t-2.
Table 2: Decomposition of Total Earnings Inequality into Within/Between Person and Extensive/Intensive Margins

                                                             Female Heads:                                          Male Heads:
                                              1968-1977        1978-1987        1988-1997           1968-1977       1978-1987     1988-1997
            2
  Total CV of annual earnings                     1.76             1.12             0.90               0.37             0.41        0.51
   Within-person component                        0.46             0.24             0.21               0.07              0.10        0.12
        (share of total)                         (0.26)           (0.22)           (0.23)             (0.20)            (0.23)      (0.23)
                     2
   Wtd. avg of CV i (approx. within)              0.42             0.24             0.21               0.07             0.10        0.12

   Between-person component                       1.44             0.91             0.71               0.31              0.32        0.39
       (share of total)                          (0.82)           (0.81)           (0.79)             (0.82)            (0.77)      (0.77)
   Cross-term                                    -0.15            -0.03            -0.02               -0.01            0.00        -0.01
 Decomposition of within-person component:
  Extensive margin component            0.15                       0.07             0.05               0.01              0.01        0.02
       (share of total)                (0.09)                     (0.06)           (0.06)             (0.03)            (0.02)      (0.04)
   Intensive margin component                     0.27             0.17             0.16               0.06              0.08        0.10
        (share of total)                         (0.15)           (0.15)           (0.18)             (0.16)            (0.19)      (0.20)
 Decomposition of between-person component:
   Extensive margin component                     0.40             0.15             0.08               0.01              0.01        0.01
        (share of total)                         (0.23)           (0.13)           (0.09)             (0.02)            (0.02)      (0.02)
    Intensive margin component                    0.58             0.49             0.45               0.27              0.28        0.35
        (share of total)                         (0.33)           (0.43)           (0.50)             (0.73)            (0.68)      (0.68)
    Cross-term                                    0.44             0.26             0.18               0.03              0.03        0.04
        (share of total)                         (0.25)           (0.23)           (0.20)             (0.07)            (0.07)      (0.08)
    Time variation                                0.02             0.01             0.00               0.00             0.00        0.00
Notes: See text for details of decomposition. Samples are desribed in Table 1 (females) and Appendix Table 2 (males).
Table 3: Female Intensive and Extensive Margin Model Estimates, by Cohort
                                            Employment equation             log(Earnings) equation
                                         1968-77 1978-87 1988-97          1968-77 1978-87 1988-97
a. Parameter Estimates for Observed Determinants of Employment and Earnings
lag(Emp)                                  1.832      1.495    1.549           ---             ---         ---
                                        (0.067)    (0.080)  (0.079)
Partner Present                           1.957      2.230    2.896       -0.292          -0.679       -0.564
                                        (0.339)    (0.376)  (0.405)      (0.299)         (0.184)      (0.188)
Average (Partner Present)                 0.049     -0.020    0.092       -0.201          -0.054        0.022
                                        (0.072)    (0.076)  (0.085)      (0.039)         (0.028)      (0.031)
Education                                 0.059      0.106    0.119        0.099           0.103        0.115
                                        (0.007)    (0.009)  (0.011)      (0.006)         (0.005)      (0.006)
Black                                    -0.038     -0.054   -0.056       -0.157          -0.034       -0.040
                                        (0.037)    (0.041)  (0.047)      (0.033)         (0.023)      (0.024)
Age/10                                    0.629      1.048    1.138        0.363           0.452        0.629
                                        (0.166)    (0.168)  (0.206)      (0.092)         (0.058)      (0.063)
Age-squared/100                          -0.088     -0.140   -0.145       -0.053          -0.055       -0.065
                                        (0.020)    (0.020)  (0.025)      (0.011)         (0.007)      (0.008)
No. Children Present                     -0.025     -0.076   -0.074       -0.040          -0.025       -0.039
                                        (0.018)    (0.022)  (0.029)      (0.008)         (0.006)      (0.007)
Average (No. Children Present)           -0.013     -0.011   -0.067       -0.007          -0.066       -0.105
                                        (0.023)    (0.032)  (0.039)      (0.017)         (0.018)      (0.022)
Child<5 Present                          -0.264     -0.237   -0.133       -0.032          -0.066       -0.027
                                        (0.069)    (0.065)  (0.079)      (0.026)         (0.015)      (0.015)
Average 1(Child < 5 Present)             -0.183     -0.108   -0.090       -0.058           0.195        0.277
                                        (0.119)    (0.119)  (0.133)      (0.091)         (0.063)      (0.067)
Child 6-17 Present                       -0.038      0.004    0.087        0.025          -0.019        0.005
                                        (0.058)    (0.055)  (0.070)      (0.020)         (0.012)      (0.013)
Average( Child 6-17 Present)              0.018      0.051    0.202       -0.183           0.090        0.094
                                        (0.088)    (0.093)  (0.108)      (0.056)         (0.046)      (0.049)
Partner Never Employed (in years         -2.524     -2.742   -3.147        0.128           0.702        0.477
    present)                            (0.368)    (0.397)  (0.436)      (0.316)         (0.191)      (0.195)
Partner Currently Employed               -0.098      0.011    0.140       -0.034           0.029       -0.003
                                        (0.090)    (0.076)  (0.083)      (0.039)         (0.020)      (0.016)
Average( Partner Currently Employed)      0.325      0.775    0.466       -0.102          -0.064       -0.047
                                        (0.167)    (0.149)  (0.180)      (0.130)         (0.065)      (0.079)
Partner's Mean(log earnings)             -0.235     -0.297   -0.341        0.034           0.064        0.055
                                        (0.033)    (0.037)  (0.041)      (0.030)         (0.018)      (0.019)
Deviation: Partner log earnings          -0.132     -0.186   -0.130        0.011           0.012        0.023
   from Mean(log earnings)              (0.050)    (0.040)  (0.046)      (0.017)         (0.010)      (0.008)
National Unemployment Rate (%)           -0.008     -0.016   -0.048        0.012           0.002       -0.002
                                        (0.009)    (0.008)  (0.015)      (0.004)         (0.002)      (0.003)
log(Median Annual Earnings)                  ---        ---      ---       1.826           0.927        0.416
                                                                         (0.179)         (0.247)      (0.614)
  ×(Educ=12 years)                           ---        ---      ---       0.045           0.116        0.110
                                                                         (0.191)         (0.271)      (0.643)
  ×(13<=Educ<=15 years)                      ---        ---      ---       0.225           0.690        0.842
                                                                         (0.279)         (0.302)      (0.665)
  ×(Educ>=16 years)                          ---        ---      ---      -0.252           1.022        0.856
                                                                         (0.292)         (0.309)      (0.670)
Intercept                                -1.947     -2.869   -3.189        7.296           7.063        6.671
                                        (0.343)    (0.348)  (0.418)      (0.216)         (0.137)      (0.148)
Notes: All models estimated using simulated MLE with 20 simulation replications. Standard errors in
parentheses. Table continues.
Table 3: Female Intensive and Extensive Margin Model Estimates, by Cohort (continued)

                                             Employment equation                 log(Earnings) equation
                                          1968-77      1978-87    1988-97     1968-77    1978-87      1988-97
b. Error components
Var(Initial Permanent Component)             0.092       0.211      0.172        0.462       0.838      0.717
                                           (0.023)     (0.032)    (0.031)      (0.064)     (0.065)    (0.071)
Var(Age-component)*10                        0.095       0.101      0.132        0.280       0.251      0.439
                                           (0.012)     (0.012)    (0.015)      (0.055)     (0.055)    (0.074)
Var(Permanent shock)                         0.025       0.042      0.051        0.065       0.092      0.087
                                           (0.005)     (0.007)    (0.008)      (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.005)
Var(MA(1) component)                            ---         ---        ---       0.491       0.359      0.341
                                                                               (0.014)     (0.010)    (0.009)
MA(1) Correlation                           -0.514      -0.394     -0.609        0.261       0.253      0.230
                                           (0.040)     (0.041)    (0.085)      (0.016)     (0.015)    (0.014)
Type-2 distribution
Mean-shift                                      ---         ---        ---       1.078       1.040      0.898
                                                                               (0.033)     (0.030)    (0.034)
Variance-scale                                  ---         ---        ---       0.719       0.692      0.634
                                                                               (0.013)     (0.010)    (0.011)
Probability of Type 2                           ---         ---        ---       0.102       0.064      0.067
                                                                               (0.004)     (0.002)    (0.002)
Correlation (Extensive & Intensive error components)
Initial Permanent Components                   ---          ---        ---       0.689       0.658      0.563
                                                                               (0.035)     (0.029)    (0.033)
Permanent shocks                                ---         ---        ---       0.324       0.201      0.128
                                                                               (0.055)     (0.034)    (0.034)
MA(1) shocks                                    ---         ---        ---      -0.370      -0.256     -0.212
                                                                               (0.025)     (0.026)    (0.025)

log Likelihood                                  ---         ---        ---   -18,870.9 -21,412.1 -18,526.8

No. Observations                                                               20,760      25,000      22,860
Notes: All models estimated using Simulated MLE with 20 simulation replications. Standard errors in
parentheses. Initial conditions models reported in Appendix.
Table 4: Actual and Predicted Components of Total Earnings Inequality of Females in PSID

                                                                                                         Change: 1968‐77 to
                                    1968‐77                   1978‐87                   1988‐97               1988‐97
                            Actual      Simulated     Actual      Simulated     Actual      Simulated    Actual    Simulated

Mean employment rate         0.58             0.59     0.72             0.72     0.80             0.81    0.22       0.22

Total CV2 of ann. earns      1.76             2.10     1.12             1.39     0.90             1.19   ‐0.85       ‐0.92

Within‐person comp.          0.46             0.79     0.24             0.42     0.21             0.34   ‐0.26       ‐0.44
               2
Wtd Avg. of CVi              0.42             0.75     0.24             0.42     0.21             0.34   ‐0.21       ‐0.40

Between‐person comp.         1.44             1.53     0.91             1.02     0.71             0.89   ‐0.73       ‐0.64

Cross‐term                  ‐0.15             ‐0.22    ‐0.03        ‐0.05       ‐0.02         ‐0.05       0.13       0.17

Decompostion of within‐person component

Exten. margin comp.          0.15             0.23     0.07             0.12     0.05             0.08   ‐0.10       ‐0.15
Inten. margin comp.          0.27             0.51     0.17             0.30     0.16             0.26   ‐0.11       ‐0.25

Decompostion of between‐person component
Exten. margin comp.          0.40             0.42     0.15             0.17     0.08             0.09   ‐0.33       ‐0.32
Inten. margin comp.          0.58             0.64     0.49             0.56     0.45             0.58   ‐0.12       ‐0.06
Cross term                    0.44         0.45          0.26        0.28        0.18         0.21       ‐0.26       ‐0.24
Time‐variation                0.02         0.03          0.01        0.01        0.00         0.01       ‐0.02       ‐0.02
Note: see notes in Table 2. Simulated entries are based on estimated model presented in Table 3.
Table 5a: Actual and Simulated Changes in Inequality Between 1968‐77 and 1988‐97 Cohorts

                                              Early Cohort (1968‐77)                              Late Cohort (1988‐97)
                                                     Remove Remove                                      Remove Remove
                                                      Direct Selection Remove                            Direct Selection Remove
                                           Full      Effs. of   Effs. of All Effs.             Full     Effs. of   Effs. of All Effs.
                                 Actual Simulation     Kids      Kids    of Kids     Actual Simulation    Kids      Kids    of Kids
Mean Employment Rate              0.58      0.59        0.66     0.66      0.73      0.80      0.81       0.81      0.84       0.83
        2
Total CV of annual earnings      1.76       2.10        1.72     1.70      1.43      0.90      1.19       1.19      1.06      1.09
Within‐person component          0.46       0.79        0.64     0.61      0.51      0.21      0.34      0.34       0.30      0.32
               2
Wtd Avg. of CVi (~within)        0.42       0.75        0.61     0.59      0.50      0.21      0.34      0.34       0.31      0.32
Between‐person component         1.44       1.53        1.23     1.21      1.00      0.71      0.89      0.89       0.80      0.81
Cross‐term                       ‐0.15      ‐0.22       ‐0.15    ‐0.12     ‐0.07     ‐0.02     ‐0.05     ‐0.05      ‐0.04     ‐0.04
Decomposition of within‐person component
Extensive margin component      0.15    0.23            0.17     0.17      0.13      0.05      0.08       0.08      0.06       0.07
Intensive margin component      0.27    0.51            0.43     0.43      0.37      0.16      0.26       0.26      0.24       0.25

Decomposition of between‐person component
Extensive margin component         0.40      0.42        0.25    0.25      0.16      0.08      0.09       0.09      0.06       0.07
Intensive margin component         0.58      0.64        0.60    0.59      0.55      0.45      0.58       0.58      0.57       0.56
Cross term                         0.44      0.45        0.35    0.35      0.27      0.18      0.21       0.21      0.17       0.17
Time‐variation                     0.02      0.03        0.02    0.01      0.01      0.00      0.01       0.01      0.01       0.00
Notes: see text for description of alternative simulations.
Table 5b: Actual and Simulated Changes in Components of Earnings Inequality, Early to Late Cohort

                                           Simulated Changes, 1968‐77 (Early) to 1987‐97 (Late) Cohort             Share of Change
                                                                                    Remove                          Attributable to
                                                                Remove Direct Selection Effs. Remove All          Changing Effect of
                                       Actual    Full Simulation Effs. of Kids       of Kids      Effs. of Kids           Kids
Mean Employment Rate                    0.22           0.22             0.14           0.18           0.11              0.50
        2
Total CV of annual earnings            ‐0.85           ‐0.92           ‐0.53          ‐0.63           ‐0.34             0.63
Within‐person component                ‐0.26           ‐0.44           ‐0.29          ‐0.30           ‐0.19             0.57
               2
Wtd Avg. of CVi (approx. within)       ‐0.21           ‐0.40           ‐0.26          ‐0.29           ‐0.18             0.56
Between‐person component               ‐0.73           ‐0.64           ‐0.34          ‐0.41           ‐0.19             0.71
Cross‐term                              0.13            0.17            0.10          0.07             0.03             0.79
Decomposition of within‐person component
Extensive margin component           ‐0.10             ‐0.15           ‐0.09          ‐0.10           ‐0.06             0.63
Intensive margin component           ‐0.11             ‐0.25           ‐0.17          ‐0.18           ‐0.12             0.51
Decomposition of between‐person component
Extensive margin component             ‐0.33           ‐0.32           ‐0.16          ‐0.19           ‐0.09             0.72
Intensive margin component             ‐0.12           ‐0.06           ‐0.02          ‐0.02           0.01              1.12
Cross term                             ‐0.26           ‐0.24           ‐0.14          ‐0.19           ‐0.10             0.58
Time‐variation                         ‐0.02           ‐0.02           ‐0.02          ‐0.01           ‐0.01             0.78
Notes: Entries are changes between 1968‐77 cohort and 1988‐97 cohort.
Table 6: Actual and Simulated Components of Earnings Inequality, Early to Late Cohort


                                     Early Cohort (1968‐77)              Late Cohort (1988‐97)          Change from Early to Late Cohort
                                                                                                                                           Share of Change
                                                        Remove                             Remove                            Remove      Attributable to
                                             Full       Effects of               Full      Effects of             Full       Effects of Changing Effs. of
                                Actual    Simulation     Spouse      Actual   Simulation    Spouse      Actual Simulation     Spouse         Spouse
Mean Employment Rate             0.58         0.59          0.71     0.80       0.81         0.84        0.22      0.22         0.13            0.40
        2
Total CV of annual earnings      1.76         2.10          1.48     0.90       1.19         1.10       ‐0.85      ‐0.92        ‐0.38           0.59
Within‐person component          0.46         0.79          0.53     0.21       0.34         0.32       ‐0.26      ‐0.44        ‐0.21           0.52
Wtd Avg. of CVi2 (~within)       0.42         0.75          0.51     0.21       0.34         0.32       ‐0.21      ‐0.40        ‐0.19           0.53
Between‐person component         1.44         1.53          1.08     0.71       0.89         0.83       ‐0.73      ‐0.64        ‐0.24           0.62
Cross‐term                       ‐0.15       ‐0.22          ‐0.13    ‐0.02      ‐0.05        ‐0.05       0.13      0.17         0.08            0.52

Decomposition of within‐person component
Extensive margin component       0.15         0.23          0.13     0.05       0.08         0.06       ‐0.10      ‐0.15        ‐0.07           0.55
Intensive margin component       0.27         0.51          0.38     0.16       0.26         0.26       ‐0.11      ‐0.25        ‐0.12           0.52

Decomposition of between‐person component
Extensive margin component       0.40         0.42          0.18     0.08       0.09         0.06       ‐0.33      ‐0.32        ‐0.12           0.63
Intensive margin component       0.58         0.64          0.57     0.45       0.58         0.58       ‐0.12      ‐0.06        0.01            1.14
Cross term                       0.44         0.45          0.30     0.18       0.21         0.18       ‐0.26      ‐0.24        ‐0.12           0.51
Time‐variation                   0.02         0.03          0.02     0.00       0.01         0.01       ‐0.02      ‐0.02        ‐0.01           0.39
Note: see text for decription of alternative simulations.
Table 7: Actual and Simulated Components of Earnings Inequality, Early to Late Cohort

                                          Early Cohort (1968‐77)                  Late Cohort (1988‐97)             Change: Early to Late Cohort
                                                                                                                                                     Share of Change
                                                            Remove                                  Remove                            Remove Effects Attributable to
                                                           Effects of                              Effects of                              of        Changing Effs. of
                                 Actual       Simulation Spouses/Kids    Actual       Simulation Spouses/Kids    Actual    Simulation Spouses/Kids     Spouse/Kids

Mean empl. rate                   0.58           0.59          0.82       0.80           0.81             0.89   0.22         0.22          0.07            0.69

Total CV2 of ann. earns           1.76           2.10          1.07       0.90           1.19             0.95   ‐0.85        ‐0.92         ‐0.12           0.87

Within‐person comp.               0.46           0.79          0.36       0.21           0.34             0.27   ‐0.26        ‐0.44         ‐0.10           0.78
                 2
Wtd Avg. of CVi (~within)         0.42           0.75          0.36       0.21           0.34             0.27   ‐0.21        ‐0.40         ‐0.09           0.78

Between‐person comp.              1.44           1.53          0.76       0.71           0.89             0.72   ‐0.73        ‐0.64         ‐0.04           0.94

Cross‐term                        ‐0.15          ‐0.22         ‐0.05      ‐0.02          ‐0.05        ‐0.04      0.13         0.17          0.02            0.90

Decomposition of within‐person component
Exten. margin comp.               0.15           0.23          0.07       0.05           0.08             0.04   ‐0.10        ‐0.15         ‐0.03           0.82
Inten. margin comp.               0.27           0.51          0.29       0.16           0.26             0.23   ‐0.11        ‐0.25         ‐0.06           0.76

Decomposition of between‐person component
Exten. margin comp.               0.40           0.42          0.07       0.08           0.09             0.04   ‐0.33        ‐0.32         ‐0.03           0.90
Inten. margin comp.               0.58           0.64          0.51       0.45           0.58             0.55   ‐0.12        ‐0.06         0.05            1.83
Cross term                        0.44           0.45          0.18       0.18           0.21             0.13   ‐0.26        ‐0.24         ‐0.05           0.79
Time‐variation                    0.02           0.03          0.01       0.00           0.01             0.00   ‐0.02        ‐0.02         0.00            0.83
Note: see text for decription of alternative simulations.
       Appendix Figure 1: Fraction of Females Married/with Partner
                                1.0


                                0.9
Fraction Married/with Partner




                                0.8


                                0.7

                                                      PSID 1968-77 Panel
                                0.6
                                                      PSID 1978-87 Panel

                                0.5                   PSID 1988-97 Panel
                                                      March CPS Same Age as PSID
                                0.4
                                   1968        1971        1974       1977        1980        1983           1986     1989        1992        1995
                                                                                      PSID/CPS Survey Year

                                Note: PSID samples restricted to females age 24-60 in all years. March CPS samples have same age limits in survey year as
                                corresponding PSID samples.
                              Appendix Figure 2: Fraction of Females with Child Under 6
                              0.6
                                                       PSID 1968-77 Panel

                              0.5                      PSID 1978-87 Panel
Fraction with Child Under 6




                                                       PSID 1988-97 Panel
                              0.4                      March CPS Same Age as PSID

                              0.3


                              0.2


                              0.1


                              0.0
                                 1968        1971        1974       1977        1980        1983        1986        1989        1992        1995
                                                                               PSID/CPS Survey Year
                              Note: PSID samples restricted to females age 24-60 in all years. March CPS samples have same age limits in survey year as
                              corresponding PSID samples.
Appendix Figure 3: Dynamic responses of Employment and log(earnings) to employment shocks
Appendix Figure 4: Dynamic responses of Employment and log(earnings) to earnings shocks
Appendix Table 1: Characteristics of Female Heads in Three 10-year Panels of PSID (Excluding SEO Subsample)
                                         1968-77                                1978-87                                1988-97
                                All      Not Emp.    Employed          All      Not Emp.    Employed            All    Not Emp.   Employed
Age                            41.7        41.8        41.7           39.5        40.2        39.3             39.7      40.6       39.6
Education                      12.0        11.7        12.2           13.1        12.5        13.3             13.5      12.9       13.6
Black                          0.09        0.06        0.11           0.08        0.09        0.08             0.07      0.08       0.07
Partner present                0.84        0.94        0.77           0.81        0.90        0.78             0.81      0.90       0.79
Always with partner            0.73        0.84        0.66           0.70        0.81        0.67             0.70      0.82       0.68
Never with partner             0.08        0.03        0.11           0.11        0.06        0.12             0.10      0.06       0.11
Any kids present               0.69        0.75        0.65           0.66        0.73        0.64             0.64      0.70       0.63
Number kids present            1.66        1.95        1.47           1.32        1.56        1.23             1.28      1.55       1.21
Kid under 6 present            0.22        0.32        0.16           0.26        0.36        0.22             0.25      0.37       0.23
Kid 6-17 present               0.47        0.44        0.49           0.40        0.37        0.42             0.39      0.33       0.40
Ever have kids present         0.84        0.88        0.82           0.83        0.85        0.82             0.79      0.84       0.78
Always have kids present       0.51        0.58        0.46           0.46        0.54        0.43             0.45      0.51       0.43
Own employment outcomes:
Fraction years employed      0.60           0.23        0.84          0.73        0.31        0.89             0.82     0.36        0.92
Always employed              0.31           0.00        0.52          0.46        0.00        0.62             0.57     0.00        0.69
Never employed               0.15           0.37        0.00          0.07         0.26       0.00             0.04     0.23        0.00
Earnings this year          13,270           0         22,212        19,316         0        26,372           27,260      0        33,296
Mean earn's (including 0's) 13,270         2,860       20,285        19,316       4,182      24,844           27,260    6,523      31,852
Partner employment outcomes (in years partner present):
Partner age                  44.8         44.8        44.8            42.2        43.4        41.7             42.1      43.4       41.8
Partner employed             0.95         0.93        0.97            0.95        0.91        0.96             0.95      0.90       0.96
Partner hours this year     2,314        2,379       2,261           2,245       2,286       2,228            2,284     2,358      2,266
Partner earnings this year 61,324       64,406      58,837           64,089      68,385      62,346           69,289    77,885     67,210
Mean partner earnings      59,813       63,282      57,260           62,637      66,381      61,182           67,056    75,002     65,197
Number person-year obs.       11,170       4,497       6,673         14,290       3,823      10,467           16,880    3,060      13,820
Notes: See note to Table 1.
Appendix Table 2: Characteristics of Male Heads in Three 10-year Panels of PSID
                                          1968-77                                 1978-87                        1988-97
                                 All      Not Emp.    Employed          All       Not Emp.   Employed     All    Not Emp.   Employed
Age                             42.0        49.4        41.8           39.2         44.8       39.0      40.0      43.8       39.8
Education                       11.4        9.0         11.5           13.0         11.2       13.1      13.5      12.1       13.6
Black                           0.27        0.47        0.26           0.25         0.45       0.24      0.23      0.41       0.22
Partner present                 0.91        0.78        0.92           0.87         0.75       0.87      0.85      0.67       0.86
Always with partner             0.81        0.67        0.82           0.74         0.63       0.74      0.74      0.55       0.75
Never with partner              0.03        0.07        0.03           0.05         0.14       0.05      0.07      0.20       0.06
Any kids present                0.76        0.62        0.76           0.67         0.51       0.68      0.65      0.46       0.66
Number kids present             2.14        2.02        2.14           1.40         1.18       1.41      1.32      1.04       1.33
Kid under 6 present             0.31        0.21        0.32           0.31         0.20       0.32      0.29      0.20       0.29
Kid 6-17 present                0.44        0.41        0.45           0.36         0.31       0.36      0.36      0.27       0.36
Ever have kids present          0.90        0.83        0.90           0.85         0.78       0.86      0.82      0.69       0.82
Always have kids present        0.57        0.47        0.57           0.43         0.29       0.43      0.43      0.31       0.44
Own employment outcomes:
Fraction years employed      0.96           0.39        0.99           0.95         0.44       0.98      0.95      0.50       0.97
Always employed              0.89           0.00        0.92           0.85         0.00       0.90      0.82      0.00       0.86
Never employed               0.01           0.25        0.00           0.01         0.20       0.00      0.01      0.13       0.00
Earnings this year          52,699           0         54,688         55,871          0       58,522    60,251       0       63,452
Mean earn's (including 0's) 52,699         13,621      54,174         55,871       16,226     57,752    60,251    20,854     62,344
Partner employment outcomes (in years partner present):
Partner age                  39.0         45.7        38.8             37.0         42.8       36.8      38.0      40.9       37.9
Partner employed             0.53         0.42        0.53             0.71         0.54       0.72      0.80      0.70       0.81
Partner hours this year     1,264        1,400       1,260            1,427        1,488      1,425     1,617     1,764      1,611
Partner earnings this year 17,904       15,499       17,967           23,977       22,652     24,019    31,747    31,670     31,750
Mean partner earnings      14,766       11,369       14,868           21,324       18,293     21,433    29,271    26,765     29,379
Number person-year obs.       15,150        551        14,599         20,550        931       19,619    18,990     958       18,032
Notes: See note to Table 1.
Appendix Table 3: Decomposition of Earnings Inequality, Samples Excluding SEO

                                                            Female Heads:                              Male Heads:
                                              1968-1977      1978-1987         1988-1997   1968-1977   1978-1987     1988-1997
            2
  Total CV of annual earnings                    1.60            1.10            0.88        0.27         0.35         0.47
   Within-person component                       0.38            0.25             0.20       0.06         0.08          0.11
        (share of total)                        (0.24)          (0.22)           (0.23)     (0.21)       (0.24)        (0.24)
   Wtd. avg of CVi2 (approx. within)             0.36            0.24            0.21        0.06         0.08         0.11

   Between-person component                      1.31            0.89             0.68       0.22         0.27          0.36
       (share of total)                         (0.82)          (0.81)           (0.77)     (0.81)       (0.77)        (0.76)
   Cross-term                                   -0.09           -0.04            -0.02       -0.01        0.00         -0.01
 Decomposition of within-person component:
  Extensive margin component            0.13                     0.07             0.05       0.01         0.01          0.02
       (share of total)                (0.08)                   (0.07)           (0.06)     (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.04)
   Intensive margin component                    0.22            0.17             0.16       0.05         0.07          0.10
        (share of total)                        (0.14)          (0.15)           (0.18)     (0.18)       (0.20)        (0.21)
 Decomposition of between-person component:
   Extensive margin component                    0.36            0.14             0.07       0.00         0.01          0.01
        (share of total)                        (0.22)          (0.13)           (0.08)     (0.01)       (0.02)        (0.01)
    Intensive margin component                   0.55            0.49             0.45       0.20         0.24          0.32
        (share of total)                        (0.34)          (0.44)           (0.51)     (0.75)       (0.70)        (0.68)
    Cross-term                                   0.39            0.25             0.16       0.01         0.02          0.03
        (share of total)                        (0.24)          (0.23)           (0.18)     (0.04)       (0.05)        (0.06)
    Time variation                               0.02            0.01            0.00        0.00         0.00         0.00
Notes: See text for details of decomposition. Samples exclude SEO subsample.
Appendix Table 4: Estimated Parameters of Initial Conditions Employment Model

                                           1968-77       1978-87        1988-97
Partner Present                               5.394         6.246         4.070
                                            (0.923)       (1.129)       (1.160)
Average (Partner Present)                    -0.465         0.064         0.194
                                            (0.183)       (0.202)       (0.240)
Education                                    0.115         0.211         0.197
                                            (0.018)       (0.025)       (0.032)
Black                                         0.287         0.059        -0.183
                                            (0.098)       (0.105)       (0.132)
Age/10                                        0.788         0.943         2.246
                                            (0.545)       (0.584)       (0.793)
Age-squared/100                              -0.125        -0.121        -0.315
                                            (0.073)       (0.078)       (0.108)
No. Children Present                         0.056         -0.095        -0.016
                                            (0.056)       (0.062)       (0.098)
Average (No. Children Present)               -0.271        -0.121        -0.565
                                            (0.073)       (0.090)       (0.126)
Child<5 Present                              -0.684        -0.793        -0.475
                                            (0.202)       (0.186)       (0.235)
Average 1(Child < 5 Present)                  0.223         0.306         0.779
                                            (0.302)       (0.311)       (0.395)
Child 6-17 Present                           -0.315        -0.203        -0.023
                                            (0.181)       (0.166)       (0.222)
Average( Child 6-17 Present)                 -0.191        -0.087         0.287
                                            (0.221)       (0.234)       (0.298)
Partner Never Employed (in years             -5.622        -7.600        -5.008
    present)                                (0.974)       (1.216)       (1.255)
Partner Currently Employed                    0.223         0.261         0.508
                                            (0.375)       (0.378)       (0.359)
Average( Partner Currently Employed)          0.756         0.763         0.907
                                            (0.403)       (0.367)       (0.472)
Partner's Mean(log earnings)                 -0.625        -0.719        -0.569
                                            (0.088)       (0.112)       (0.118)
Deviation: Partner log earnings              -0.226        -0.513        -0.191
  from Mean(log earnings)                   (0.155)       (0.143)       (0.167)
Intercept                                    -0.897        -2.496        -3.699
                                            (1.005)       (1.075)       (1.379)
Initial Condition Permanent Component        2.405         2.445         2.656
 Loading Factor                             (0.263)       (0.277)       (0.347)

Note: see note to Table 3.
