                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE EFFECT OF GRADE RETENTION ON ADULT CRIME:
                EVIDENCE FROM A TEST-BASED PROMOTION POLICY

                                        Ozkan Eren
                                    Michael F. Lovenheim
                                       Naci H. Mocan

                                      Working Paper 25384
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25384


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2018




We would like to thank seminar participants at University of Illinois-Urbana Champaign,
National University-Singapore, Singapore Management University, University of California-
Irvine, University of South Carolina, CESifo Area Conference on the Economics of Education,
and the Association for Education Finance and Policy annual meeting for helpful comments and
suggestions. Data used in this study was provided by the Louisiana Department of Education,
Louisiana Office of Juvenile Justice, and Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections,
Adult Services. Access was provided by Louisiana State University. All results, conclusions and
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Ozkan Eren, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Naci H. Mocan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Grade Retention on Adult Crime: Evidence from a Test-Based Promotion Policy
Ozkan Eren, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Naci H. Mocan
NBER Working Paper No. 25384
December 2018
JEL No. I21,I26,J24

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper presents the first analysis in the literature of the effect of test-based grade retention on
adult criminal convictions. We exploit math and English test cutoffs for promotion to ninth grade
in Louisiana using administrative data on all public K-12 students combined with administrative
data on all criminal convictions in the state. Our preferred models use the promotion discontinuity
as an instrument for grade retention, and we find that being retained in eighth grade has large
long-run effects on the likelihood of being convicted of a crime by age 25 and on the number of
criminal convictions by age 25. Effects are largest for violent crimes: the likelihood of being
convicted increases by 1.05 percentage points, or 58.44%, when students are retained in eighth
grade. Our data allow an examination of mechanisms, and we show that the effects are likely
driven by declines in high school peer quality, lowered non-cognitive skill acquisition, and a
reduction in educational attainment. However, we find little effect on juvenile crime, which
suggests the effects on adult criminal engagement are driven by worse job market prospects and
non-cognitive skills that stem from lower educational investments by students. Using the method
proposed by Angrist and Rokkanen (2015), we also estimate effects of grade retention away from
the promotion cutoff and show that our results are generalizable to a larger group of low-
performing students. Our estimates indicate that test- based promotion cutoffs lead to large
private and social costs in terms of higher levels of long-run criminal convictions that are
important to consider in the development and use of these policies.

Ozkan Eren                                                      Naci H. Mocan
Department of Economics                                         Department of Economics
University of California, Riverside                             Louisiana State University
Sproul Hall                                                     2439 BEC
Riverside, CA 92521                                             Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
ozkan.eren@ucr.edu                                              and NBER
                                                                mocan@lsu.edu
Michael F. Lovenheim
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
ILR School, and Department of Economics
Cornell University
264 Ives Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu
1     Introduction

Education policies alter the skills and knowledge of young adults, which influence not only indi-
vidual earnings but also socially relevant outcomes such as civic engagement, health behaviors,
and criminal activity later in life.1 These social returns to education are critical to understand,
because much of the argument for the large role played by the government in funding and de-
livering education services is predicated on the existence of such positive externalities. While a
sizable literature exists that examines the private returns to education investments and policies
in the form of long-run labor market outcomes, there is a paucity of evidence on the existence
and magnitude of social returns (Grossman 2006; Oreopoulos and Salvanes 2011).
    This paper helps fill the gap in our understanding of the social returns to education policy
by estimating the effect of a test-based grade retention policy for promotion to 9th grade in
Louisiana on adult criminal convictions. Crime is one of the most important social outcomes
to examine because it generates enormous costs to society.2 Investigation of the determinants
of criminal activity also is important because delinquency and the ensuing incarceration have
long-run negative effects on a number of outcomes ranging from employment opportunities to
family formation and health (Johnson and Raphael 2009; Charles and Luoh 2010; Agan and
Starr 2017).
    Education can lead to reductions in adult criminal behavior by increasing the opportunity
cost of engaging in crime (Lochner 2004) as well as by altering time discounting (Becker and
Mulligan 1997) and by building non-cognitive skills that contribute to better self-control and
decision-making as adults (Fudenberg and Levine 2006). Despite the strong theoretical argu-
ments linking education to crime, empirical work is sparse because of the difficulty in overcoming
selection into criminal activity: those who obtain less schooling tend to have unobserved char-
acteristics that also make them more likely to commit a crime. Existing work with credible
identification strategies has investigated the impact of education, as measured by the number
of years of schooling, on criminal propensity (e.g., Lochner and Moretti 2004; Machin 2011). In
   1 See Card (2001) and Oreopoulos (2006) for estimates of the effect of education on wages. For estimates of the impact of

education on civic participation, production of health, and crime, see Dee (2004), Lochner and Moretti (2004), Lleras-Muney
(2005) and Chou et al. (2010).
   2 Ferraz and Soares (2018) calculate that the expenditures on the criminal justice system and the cost of victimization add up

to $450 billion in the U.S., and the estimates of Anderson (1999) imply that in 2018 the total cost of criminal activity, including
lost productivity and diminished quality of life, is $1.7 trillion.




                                                                1
this paper, we instead estimate the effect on crime of a specific education policy that governs
promotion to 9th grade. Specifically, we exploit a grade retention policy in Louisiana in a re-
gression discontinuity framework to examine the extent to which having been held back in 8th
grade impacts criminal delinquency up to age 25. Our analysis thus makes contributions both
to the literature on the impact of human capital formation on crime and to the literature that
investigates the consequences of test-based promotion policies.
   The test-based accountability program we analyze was adopted in 1998 and requires 8th
grade students to achieve a certain level of proficiency on both the state math and English
exams in order to be promoted to 9th grade. Students who score below the cutoff on either
test are offered remedial summer classes at no cost, and they retake the failed exam(s) in the
summer regardless of whether they enroll in summer school. If a student fails to reach the
passing threshold on one of the summer exams, she is retained in 8th grade.
   Louisiana was an early of adopter of this test-based accountability program, but these pro-
grams have grown markedly in popularity in the past several decades with the rise of account-
ability policies more broadly. Typically, accountability policies are aimed at teachers (e.g.,
teacher merit pay) or schools (e.g., No Child Left Behind). Test-based promotion policies are a
type of accountability policy aimed directly at students, and currently 16 states as well as many
large school districts incorporate end-of-year exams into the decision to promote the students
to the next grade level. By ending “social promotion,” the goal of these policies is to provide
incentives for students to pass exams that policymakers hope will ultimately increase learning.
A growing literature examines the effect of these policies, and of grade retention more generally,
on measures of academic performance and juvenile crime (e.g., Greene and Winters 2007; Jacob
and Lefgren 2009; Manacorda 2012; Eren et al. 2017; Schwerdt et al. 2017). The effect of these
policies on longer-run adult outcomes has remained unexamined prior to this analysis.
   We employ two detailed administrative datasets from Louisiana to estimate the effect of
being retained in 8th grade due to failing the summer promotion exam. Our data combine
administrative records on all K-12 students in the state from the Louisiana Department of
Education (LDOE) with administrative crime records on individuals up to age 25 from the
Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections, Adult Services. These data are unique



                                                2
in allowing us to link together the universe of K-12 students in Louisiana with the universe
of adult criminal convictions. Because of our focus on adult crime among those 25 years and
younger, we focus on 8th graders from the 1998-1999 through 2000-2001 school years (the 1984-
1987 birth cohorts). Our analysis is further restricted to those who fail one of the initial
exams (in March of the relevant academic year), so the effects we estimate are relative to a
low-performing set of students on the margin of failing to be promoted to 9th grade.
   In our preferred IV model that uses the promotion cutoff as an instrument for grade retention,
we find that being retained in 8th grade increases the likelihood of being convicted of any crime
by a non-statistically-significant 1.25 percentage points. This is a 10.85% increase relative to
the mean. The effect is driven by violent crime: 8th grade retention increases the likelihood of
violent crime conviction as a young adult by a statistically significant 1.05 percentage points
(58.44%). We find no effect on the likelihood of committing a property or drug related crime,
although the point estimates for drug crimes are positive and sizable in magnitude. Examining
the number of convictions instead of just the probability of conviction shows that retention
increases the number of criminal convictions by 0.025 (18.38%), which is composed primarily
of a 0.017 (85.00%) violent crime increase that is significant at the 5 percent level.
   The rich data on educational outcomes allows us to examine several potential mechanisms.
We show that grade retention leads students to be exposed to lower-quality education envi-
ronments, worsens non-cognitive outcomes, and lowers educational attainment. Specifically,
failing the 8th grade promotion exam exposes students to education environments with a higher
minority share and with lower-achieving peers. This occurs because students who fail the pro-
motion cutoff subsequently attend high schools with lower-performing and more disadvantaged
students. We also find that retention in 8th grade increases the number of days absent three
years later by 1.97 (11.14% relative to the mean), increases the number of disciplinary incidents
by at least 1.1 percentage points, and causes students to be 7.17 percentage points more likely
to drop out of high school. We find some evidence that convictions for any juvenile crime
increase by 0.53 of a percentage point and juvenile felony convictions increase by 0.34 of a
percentage point, but neither estimate is statistically significant at conventional levels. Taken
together, the evidence on mechanisms suggests that failing to be promoted to 9th grade on time



                                                3
reduces education quality and human capital investments, which manifests itself in terms of
lower school attendance, more behavioral problems and less educational attainment. The result
is a higher probability of being convicted of a crime as an adult, and this effect is not simply
a reflection of a higher likelihood of being in the criminal justice system as a juvenile. Thus,
retaining students in 8th grade due to not passing this high stakes exam leads to substantially
worse outcomes among a subset of these students into adulthood.
   Finally, we show that the effects are largest for 20+ year olds and that the impact of grade
retention on crime generalizes to students away from the test passing threshold. Using the
technique pioneered by Angrist and Rokkanen (2015), we estimate effects of retention on in-
framarginal students who pass the exam and who fail the exam. The results indicate sizable
positive effects of retention on crime for both groups. Indeed, we find positive and statistically
significant effects away from the cutoff for violent, property and drug-related crime. These find-
ings suggest that our regression discontinuity estimates understate the effects of grade retention
on crime for a broader population of low-scoring students. They also indicate that one cannot
simply move the passing threshold to eliminate the crime effect; the effect of grade retention
on crime is evident at any reasonable retention cutoff in the test score distribution.
   This paper is the first to estimate the causal effect of grade retention, due to test-based
accountability policies, on adult criminal convictions. We thus make contributions to several
strands of the literature. First, this paper adds to a growing body of research that examines
the effect of grade retention on student outcomes. Most studies that credibly overcome selec-
tion concerns investigate test-based student accountability policies in a regression discontinuity
framework as we do here. Jacob and Lefgren (2009) provide the earliest such analysis focused
on the test-based accountability regime in Chicago. They find that test-based grade retention
in the 6th grade has no effect on high school dropout but that 8th grade test-based retention
significantly reduces the likelihood of high school completion. Florida’s test-based retention
program focusing on 3rd grade students has also been analyzed by several researchers. Students
who barely fail the promotion cutoff perform better on standardized exams at first, but this
effect fades out by high school. They also have higher GPAs, but the likelihood of graduating is
unaffected (Schwert et al. 2017; Greene and Winters 2007). Retaining students in early grades



                                                4
may have fundamentally different long-run effects than retaining them in higher grades. This
may explain the differences in findings across these studies.3
    Eren et al. (2017) make use of the same Louisiana policy and employ similar data as we do in
this paper to estimate the effect of summer school on high school dropout. Their supplementary
analysis of grade retention shows that grade retention in the 8th grade has no impact on juvenile
crime convictions.4 This finding, which is also confirmed by our paper, indicates that the effect
of grade retention on adult crime we identify is not the results of a spillover effect; i.e. it is
not due to the continuation of crime commission that started as a juvenile (before the age of
majority). This aspect of our paper underscores the importance of directly examining longer-
run outcomes, such as adult criminal convictions, using a design that can plausibly account for
selection bias. To our knowledge, we are the first to be able to estimate this parameter.
    Second, our analysis contributes to a small literature on the effect of education on crime.5
Lochner and Moretti (2004) use state changes in compulsory schooling laws to estimate the
effect of educational attainment on both arrests and incarceration.6 They find that those who
complete high school because of compulsory schooling are much less likely to be involved with
the criminal justice system. Similarly, Machin et al. (2011) use the increase in the minimum
schooling age in England and Wales to identify an effect of high school educational attainment
on crime. They find that increased high school attainment reduces both property and violent
crime convictions later in life. While similar in many ways to the parameter we estimate,
students who do not complete high school because of compulsory schooling laws likely differ
from those failing the promotion exam in important dimensions related to cognitive and non-
cognitive skills. Additionally, grade retention can impact crime through mechanisms other
than altering the number of years of schooling, as we show. This underscores the importance
of providing direct evidence on how test-based promotion policies impact adult crime.7
    Further evidence on the effect of education on crime comes from the school choice literature:
Deming (2011) shows that an increase in school quality due to winning a school choice lottery in
   3 Ou and Reynolds (2010) and Fruehwirth et al. (2016) provide evidence that the effect of grade retention varies as a function

of when students are retained.
   4 Other work has found evidence of a link between high school attainment and juvenile crime: Anderson (2014) shows that

increasing the high school dropout age leads to a reduction in juvenile arrest rates.
   5 See Lochner (2011) for a more detailed review of the literature on the link between schooling and crime.
   6 Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011) reproduce these results using an expanded sample and a slightly altered specification.
   7 Stephens and Yang (2014) cast doubt on the validity of the difference-in-difference approach surrounding changes in compulsory

schooling laws based on evidence that states that change these policies experience different secular trends from those that do not.
However, they lack the data to explicitly examine the common trends assumption with respect to crime outcomes.


                                                                5
Charlotte-Mecklenberg leads to lower levels of crime 7 years after assignment. These estimates
are identified off of clearly exogenous lottery-based variation, but the affected students tend to
be higher-achieving than those who are on the margin of being retained in our setting.8 Thus,
the school choice results do not necessarily provide insights into potential effects of test-based
grade retention on adult criminal activity.
   Our main findings indicate that grade retention increases the likelihood of being convicted
of a violent crime and the number of violent crimes of which individuals are convicted. Thus,
test-based promotion causes harm to a subset of students, and the effect persists into adulthood.
Because violent crimes have large externalities associated with them, this effect reduces or may
reverse any social benefits to these policies. We calculate that increase in violent crimes, driven
by grade retention, implies a social cost between $2.6 to $18.4 million. Whether test-based
promotion has other offsetting benefits that may make it cost-beneficial is beyond the scope of
our analysis, but the size of the crime effect is such that any benefits would have to be large to
overcome the costs from more crime. Another policy implication relates to where the cutoff for
promotion is located. At the current location of the pass-fail cutoff, there is a long-run effect on
criminal behavior, and our estimates based on the Angrist and Rokkanen (2015) extrapolation
method suggest we would obtain similar effects with a different cutoff. Our results do not
address whether there is an optimal cutoff that balances any positive effects of grade promotion
with the effects on crime and high school dropout. This is an important public policy question
highlighted by our findings. Finally, our results point to specific types of students who are
being harmed by this policy. These students could be targeted with additional resources, which
could perhaps mitigate the effects we identify.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the policy background,
Section 3 describes the data, and Section 4 shows the estimating equation and discusses iden-
tification. Results are shown in Section 5, and Section 6 concludes.
    8 Cullen et al. (2006) show similar estimates among high school students who win a school choice lottery in Chicago. They use

self-reported crime data, however, and do not have information on criminal activity after high school.




                                                               6
2      Policy Background

The Louisiana School and District Accountability system was adopted by the state’s Board
of Elementary and Secondary Education (BESE) in June 1998. The adoption of this policy
was four years before the federal No Child Left Behind Act, which underscores that Louisiana
was an early mover in terms of adopting accountability policies. A core component of the
policy focused on school accountability, with the state setting ten and twenty year goals for
all public schools and requiring schools to demonstrate progress toward these goals. As part
of the overall accountability system, the BESE also included a student-focused accountability
provision that was designed to end “social promotion,” whereby students were passed to the
next grade regardless of their school performance. Under the new test-based promotion policy,
students in eighth grade are required to score at predefined levels on the Louisiana Educational
Assessment Program (LEAP) tests for both English Language Arts (ELA) and math to advance
to the next grade.9
     LEAP tests are criterion-referenced tests and are designed to directly align with the state
content standards. A student’s LEAP score can be expressed as either a continuous scale score
ranging from 100 to 500 points or as a discrete achievement level ranging from unsatisfactory
to advanced. Students must score at least Approaching Basic in both subjects to advance to
the next grade. This is equivalent to 269 and 296 scale points in ELA and math LEAP tests,
respectively.10 In addition to LEAP tests, students in earlier middle school grades were given
Iowa Tests of Basic Skills (ITBS). The ITBS is a low-stakes norm-referenced test for which
scores are compared to a national norm group.11 All tests are first administered in mid-March.
     Students who fail to achieve the promotional standards in March are required to retake each
failed subject exam in July. The school districts must offer, at no cost, a minimum 50 hours
per subject of summer remediation in ELA and math to students who fail to meet the passing
standards in March. The school districts are given the flexibility to determine curriculum used
in summer remediation classes, but the summer programs are monitored by the state on a
regular basis. Evidence from the annual summer school remediation reports and monitoring
    9 Similartest-based promotion policies are implemented in fourth grade as well.
 10 Raw   scores are transformed to scaled scores in a three stage process. They are first mapped onto the Item Response Theory
scale. They are then converted to a reporting scale and finally, they are equated to reflect the differences in item difficulty.
  11 Beginning in Spring 2006, the state replaced ITBS with integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program (iLEAP), a

low-stakes test consisting of both criterion-referenced and norm-referenced components.


                                                               7
visits suggest that teachers in summer schools are proficient in the content area in which
they are teaching and that they are using a variety of creative teaching strategies including
but not limited to small group instruction, use of hands-on materials, and problem solving
teams. However, there are large classrooms in some summer programs (around 20 students per
classroom), which has raised concerns about their effectiveness (Pastorek 2010).
    Students are not required to attend summer school programs to be eligible for the July
testing. Those who pass the July exams move on to the next grade. Students who again fail
are required to repeat the grade unless they are permitted to move to the next grade through
a waiver. A school system may grant waivers for students following extenuating circumstances,
such as physical illness or court-ordered custody issues. Similarly, students may receive waivers
because of local education agency errors or other unique situations not covered under extenuat-
ing circumstances. The state also may grant a waiver to LEP students.12 Conversely, students
can fail a grade if state-mandated attendance requirements are not met, irrespective of LEAP
scores. These institutional features lead us to estimate fuzzy regression discontinuity models,
since failing or passing one of the July LEAP exams does not necessarily determine grade
retention.



3     Data

One of the main innovations of this study is to merge together administrative education records
with administrative criminal records that allow us to observe rich information about the entire
population of Louisiana students and those convicted of a crime. The data for this study come
from two different sources. The first is administrative records from the Louisiana Department of
Education (LDOE). These administrative data include student demographic information such
as gender, race and free/reduced lunch status, as well as scores from the LEAP and ITBS tests
in all years in which these tests were taken. Unique state identification numbers allow us to
track all the students through their tenure in the public school system and therefore, we are
able to identify in which school each student was enrolled. The data also include whether a
student has dropped out without receiving a diploma, the number of days absent in each school
  12 Unfortunately, there were not well defined waiver policies over our sample period. Thus, while we can observe non-compliance

in the data, we do not know why a student is non-compliant.



                                                               8
year, and the number of disciplinary incidents. Note that because we observe all public school
enrollments in the state, attrition only arises if students leave the state, attend a private school
or are home schooled. It is plausible that students who fail the July exam respond by leaving
the state or enrolling in a private option, but as we show below failure is uncorrelated with
the likelihood of attriting from the public education sample. Furthermore, only leaving the
state causes attrition in our crime estimates, as private school and home schooled students are
included in the conviction data.
   The second source of data is the Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections,
Adult Services. These data span from 1996 through 2012 and are merged with the LDOE data
using common state identification numbers from both datasets. The crime data include basic
demographic information, the exact type of crime committed and sentence type (incarceration
or probation) for each conviction. Importantly, only those convicted of a crime are in this
dataset; those who are arrested but never charged or found not guilty are not included. Thus,
these data include the most serious offenses that led to criminal convictions. While 91% of
property crime and 87% of drug-related crime convictions are given probation, only 55 percent
of violent crime convictions receive probation. Thus, serving prison time is common for violent
crime convictions. The high rate of probation for drug-related offenses suggest that most of
these offenses are related to drug use rather than drug dealing.
   Our outcome of interest is adult conviction at age 25 or earlier. We use this age cutoff to be
consistent with the literature (Aizer and Doyle 2015), because most crime is committed by those
25 and younger (Hirschi and Gottfredson 1983), and because of the timing of our education
data. In order to measure criminal activity without any censoring, we limit our focus to eighth
graders from the 1998-1999 to the 2000-2001 academic years, roughly corresponding to the
cohorts born between 1984 and 1987. Our analysis sample also is composed solely of students
who fail to meet the March promotional cutoff and took the July exams. This is important
because summer school can have independent effects on student outcomes (Matsudaira 2008).
That both retained and promoted students had equal access to summer school means our
estimates are net of any summer school effect. Our final analysis sample consists of 22,929
unique student observations. The total number of students in this sample roughly corresponds



                                                 9
to 15% of the universe of eighth graders from the 1998-1999 to the 2000-2001 academic years.
   Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the July testing sample. We show tabulations
for the full sample as well as by retention status. Because we are focused on low-performing
students, the sample disproportionately consists of disadvantaged students and average test
scores are lower than the state average. For example, 45% of the sample is on free/reduced
prices lunch and the mean student in the full sample scores 0.86 and 0.69 standard deviations
below the state average in math and ELA, respectively. Seventy-six percent of the sample is
black. Disproportionate representation of black students and low test scores are even more
pronounced for the sample of retained students, as shown in Column (5). The math exam is
more of an obstacle for promotion than the ELA test, as only 5% of the retained sample is
retained solely because of ELA failure. Note that about 5 percent of the retained students
in eighth grade during our sample period passed the July exams but were retained for other
reasons, such as not meeting the minimum school attendance requirements. This is why the
8th Grade LEAP test outcomes only sum to 95% in Column (5). Furthermore, about 35% of
those promoted also failed the July exam but were given exemptions for various reasons and
were allowed to advance (see Section 2).
   The mean dropout rate for the full sample is quite high, at 45.8%.13 This reflects the low
academic achievement level of the summer school group. Among those retained, the dropout
rate is even higher, at 53.5%. The much higher dropout rate among those who are retained
likely reflects the lower academic achievement level of this group as well as any causal effect of
retention. Our regression discontinuity approach is designed to overcome this selection problem.
We also find that 4 percent of these students were convicted of a crime as a juvenile. Not
surprisingly, juvenile conviction rates are also higher for those who were retained in eighth
grade.
   The final set of descriptive statistics in Table 1 relate to adult crime. We show that 11.5
percent of the students are convicted as adults by age 25. The age at first-time adult conviction
is almost 21, which underscores the importance of examining outcomes into the mid-20s. About
2 percent are convicted of a violent crime, 4 percent of a property crime, 5 percent of drug-
 13 Drop   out statistics do not include students who transferred to private/home school.




                                                                10
related crime, and 1 percent of another type of crime.14 Note that because an individual may
have been convicted of more than one crime, the sum of all crime categories is slightly greater
than the overall conviction rate. Second-degree battery, simple robbery and armed robbery
are the most common violent crime convictions, making up more than 41 percent of violent
offenses. Simple burglary, theft and illegal possession of stolen things make up 57 percent of
all property crime convictions, and almost all drug related convictions fall under the category
of possession and distribution of drugs. Interestingly, while those who are promoted are less
likely to be convicted of a crime by age 25, the differences across the groups is small as are the
distributions of crime types.



4     Empirical Methodology

4.1     Reduced Form and IV Models

The goal of this analysis is to estimate the effect of grade retention on crime during young
adulthood. This parameter is difficult to identify, because students who are retained have
lower academic achievement, are more likely to be minorities, and tend to come from lower-
income households.15 These characteristics also are correlated with the likelihood of having
a criminal conviction as an adult. Even a rich conditioning set is unlikely to fully control
for selection into retention, since students who are retained probably have unobserved skills
and traits (e.g., patience) that make them more likely to commit a crime. This makes the
assumptions underlying selection-on-observables models very strong.
    In order to obtain credible estimates of the effect of grade retention on adult crime convic-
tions, we rely on the exogenous variation generated by the accountability policy in Louisiana in
a regression discontinuity framework. Assuming that there is local randomness to test scores,
all observed and unobserved characteristics of students should move smoothly through the July
test score cutoff. We estimate reduced form models that show the effect of barely failing one
of the July exams as well as two stage least squares models in which we use the discontinuity
created by the accountability policy as an instrument for grade retention among students who
  14 This last category (other crimes) is a very heterogeneous group and includes offenses ranging from hit and run driving to

aggravated incest, from operating a vehicle intoxicated to perjury.
  15 In our setting, minority students are either black or Hispanic. However, because of the demographic makeup of Louisiana,

virtually all minority students in our sample are black.



                                                             11
failed the March exam. Note that because we use the sample of students who failed the March
exam, our estimates should not be confounded by the presence of summer school: those on
both sides of the July cutoff had equal access to summer school, and it is unlikely that summer
school takeup was differential across the cutoff.16 The reduced-form model is as follows:


                            Convictedi = γ0 + γ1 F Pi + f (Indexi ; δ) + Xi0 θ + µi ,                                       (1)


where Convictedi is either an indicator variable that takes the value of one if student i is con-
victed of a crime by the age of 25 or is the count of first-time convictions by age 25 (including
zeros). The first-time conviction count is the number of crimes for which an individual was con-
victed when he was found guilty by a court the first time as an adult (until age 25). This can be
greater than one because people are often convicted of multiple offenses at the same time. Our
two outcome measures thus capture somewhat different margins of criminal engagement. The
variable F Pi is an indicator that takes the value of one if student i scored below Approaching
Basic in either of the July ELA or Math LEAP exams. That is, F Pi takes the value of one if
the minimum of the difference between subject-specific July LEAP scores and their respective
relevant cutoffs is negative. Indexi is the running variable and denotes the minimum of the
subject-specific distances from the respective cutoffs:


                         Indexi = min[SiM ath − Cutof f M ath , SiELA − Cutof f ELA ],                                      (2)


where Si and Cutof f are the LEAP score and the relevant cutoff in math and ELA. The
functional form between Indexi and adult criminal convictions is described by the polynomial
function f (·). Our baseline models employ a linear spline in Indexi , as suggested by Gelman
and Imbens (2017). We show as well that the results are robust to using quadratic splines
and to the use of local linear estimation. The vector Xi is a set of observed covariates that
include indicators for gender, race, free/reduced lunch and immigrant status as well as year
fixed effects. In some specifications, we also control for 8th grade school fixed effects and for
 16 Unfortunately,  we do not have data on which students took up summer school to directly test this assertion because the
administrative data do not include any information on summer school attendance. However, aggregate information from the annual
summer remediation reports (Pastorek 2010) and discussions with the LDOE administrators indicate that the participation rate
was more than 90 percent among eligible students for both subjects. While summer school could increase the likelihood of passing
the test, it is doubtful that summer school participation leads to heaping right over the passing threshold. As long as summer
school participation moves smoothly through the July cutoff, summer school is not a confounding factor in this analysis.



                                                              12
composite test scores in ELA and math from the 7th grade ITBS exams. These scores are avail-
able beginning with the 1999-2000 academic year and are standardized against the statewide
mean and standard deviation, separately by test year and subject. The key identifying assump-
tion underlying the identification of γ1 in equation (1) is that unobserved characteristics move
smoothly through the cutoff, conditional on the controls for Indexi . Under this assumption,
for students near the cutoff, the estimate of γ1 can be interpreted as the intent to treat (ITT)
effect of grade retention.
    Since we observe the actual retention status of the students in the sample, we also estimate a
fuzzy regression discontinuity (RD) model. Using the threshold indicator as an instrument for
actual grade retention yields the local average treatment effect (LATE), which is the impact for
those students whose retention decisions are causally affected by the state’s promotion policy.
Thus, this parameter identifies the effect of grade retention among those who were retained
because they failed a July exam and complied with the decision. This LATE is likely to differ
from retention effects at earlier ages (Fruehwirth et al. 2016) and from effect of retention
that occur for non-test-based reasons. Nonetheless, the LATE estimates we identify are for an
extremely relevant group, as they are the ones impacted by the test-based promotion policy.
Our estimates therefore are more likely to generalize to other states and school districts that
have similar policies for 8th grade promotion. The two stage least squares models is as follows:


                      Retentioni = α0 + α1 F Pi + f (Indexi ; π) + Xi0 φ + ηi                                                   (3)
                                              d i + f (Indexi ; λ) + X 0 ψ + εi ,
                      Convictedi = β0 + β1 Retention                                                                            (4)
                                                                      i



where Retentioni is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if student i is retained in
eighth grade and all other variables are as previously defined. Standard errors in the IV and
reduced form models are clustered by 8th grade school.17 The baseline bandwidth we use is
30 index points on either side of the cutoff. This bandwidth corresponds to 64 percent of our
initial sample. We show that our results are robust to using different bandwidths as well.
    The variable of interest in equation (4) is β1 , which shows the effect of being retained in
  17 Our estimated standard errors are similar if we instead cluster at the level of the running variable (see Online Appendix Tables

A-3 and A-4). We favor clustering at the school level because of recent work by Kolesar and Rothe (2018) that shows standard
error estimation has poor properties when clustering on the running variable in regression discontinuity settings. Furthermore,
students in the same school experience similar education inputs and tend to be similar on observed and unobserved dimensions,
which makes the 8th grade school a sensible variable on which to cluster.


                                                                 13
8th grade on adult criminal convictions. The assumptions underlying the identification of this
causal parameter are very similar to those discussed above for γ1 in the reduced form model.
The additional assumption invoked here is that the entire effect of failing a July exam on
adult crime comes through the effect of failing on retention. If there are independent effects of
failing to meet the threshold, then β1 will over-state the impact of grade retention. Such an
independent effect could be driven by changes in a student’s self-esteem or beliefs about the
value in investing in education that respond to failing the exam. We argue it is unlikely that
such independent effects exist. As we show below, there is only weak evidence of an effect on
juvenile crime, which should be highly impacted by these forces. The non-cognitive responses
to failing also take several years to show up, which suggests that any self-esteem effects are not
immediate and are likely driven by retention rather than failing the July exam per se. Below,
we show both ITT and IV estimates for completeness, since ultimately we cannot test this
assumption. The IV estimates are our preferred results, however, and we focus on them in the
results section.
   The estimates obtained from the RD specification identify effects of retention only among
those who are local to the pass-fail threshold. If there are heterogeneous treatment effects by
student ability, such estimates may not be representative of the effect of retention for larger
groups. To shed light on the generalizability of the estimates to students not local to the
cutoff, we employ the method proposed by Angrist and Rokkanen (2015). This method is
based on a conditional independence assumption, which states that conditional on a set of
observed characteristics, there is no relationship between the running variable and the outcomes
of interest on either side of the cutoff. Under this assumption, one can use these observed
characteristics to estimate counterfactual outcomes among both the treated and untreated
samples. This in turn permits estimation of treatment effects away from the cutoff. We show
that the conditional independence assumption holds in our data, which allows us to estimate the
causal effect of retention on adult criminal convictions for inframarginal treated and untreated
students.




                                               14
4.2     Validity Checks

The core assumption supporting an RD approach in this context is that students are unable
to sort around the cutoff. Given that the running variable consists of test scores, absent direct
cheating behavior it is very unlikely such sorting occurs. In this section, we show evidence that
student characteristics move smoothly through the cutoff and that there is no evidence of sys-
tematic sorting. Table 2 presents reduced form estimates that exclude observed characteristics
as controls and use them as dependent variables. The first column shows that failing a July
exam does not affect the likelihood of being in the data. Thus, students are not leaving the
state due to test failure.18 The next five columns show how a series of immutable or pre-exam
characteristics vary as a function of the promotion cutoff: female, black, white, free/reduced
priced lunch and 7th grade exam scores. All of the estimates are small in absolute value, and
none is statistically significant at even the 10% level. Thus, there is no evidence in Table 2 of
student sorting differentially across the promotion threshold.
    Figure 1 displays the distribution of test scores as a function of the index value. As argued
by McCrary (2008), heaping right over the threshold is evidence of sorting since the running
variable is expected to be distributed smoothly through the cutoff. The test score distribution
exhibits heaping at several relative scores, which is due to the underlying test score distributions.
There is no evidence in the figure of excess score heaping right over the cutoff. Indeed, the
mass right over the cutoff is lower than the mass right above, but this difference is small and
clearly reflects the choppiness of the underlying test score distribution rather than a behavioral
response to the cutoff. Taken together, the estimates in Table 2 and Figure 1 support our
regression discontinuity approach by showing no evidence of student sorting relative to the
promotion cutoffs.
  18 Note that transferring to a private school does not generate attrition in our criminal conviction data. Thus, the only relevant

margin of attrition is out-of-state migration. Tabulations from the American Community Survey show that about 5% of those born
between 1980 and 1985 in Louisiana moved out of the state between ages 18-25. This rate is just above 2% for those with at most
a high school degree.




                                                                15
5     Results

5.1    Main Results

First-stage estimates that show how July test failure relates to grade retention are shown in
Table 3. All estimates include linear splines in the running variable and use a bandwidth of
30 index points on either side of the cutoff. Column (1) includes only test year fixed effects
and the running variable controls, while in column (2) we add student observed characteristics:
race, gender, free/reduced price lunch status and immigrant status. In column (3), we include
8th grade school fixed effects in the model.
    The estimates across columns are extremely similar and indicate that failing a July exam
increases the likelihood of being retained by 68 percentage points. The estimates all are signif-
icant at the 1% level, and the implied first-stage F-statistics are quite large. Figure 2 shows
these results graphically. There is a large, significant jump in the likelihood of being retained
at the cutoff of 68 percentage points. The estimate is not 100 because some students who pass
the test are retained for other reasons, and some students who fail wind up being promoted
after they appeal. This is a fuzzy regression discontinuity setting, and the July test score cutoff
for promotion is a very strong instrument for grade retention.
    Reduced form and second stage estimates are presented in Table 4, using an indicator for
being convicted of a crime by age 25 as the dependent variable. The first three columns present
reduced form effects (equation 1) while the last three show IV estimates of the effect of grade
retention (equation 4). Each set of three results columns is laid out identically to those in Table
3. We examine whether individuals are convicted of any crime and whether they are convicted
of a violent crime, a property crime or a drug-related crime. It is possible to be convicted of
multiple types of crime, so these categories are not mutually exclusive. Note that dependent
variables have been multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation. The estimates in columns
(2) and (5) that include test year fixed effects and observed student characteristics are our
preferred estimates, and we focus on them throughout. Our estimates are robust to excluding
these covariates and to including school fixed effects; the results change little across columns.
    The impact of failing a July exam on any conviction in Panel A is positive but not significant
at conventional levels. In column (2), the point estimate suggests that failing a July exam

                                                16
increases the likelihood of being convicted of any crime by 0.85 of a percentage point. This is a
7.36% increase relative to the baseline mean shown in Table 1. The resulting IV estimates also
are positive, but similar to the reduced form results, they are not significantly different from
zero. Still, they suggest that retention increases the likelihood of an adult criminal conviction
by 1.25 percentage points (10.85% relative to the mean).
    The clearest evidence of an effect of grade retention on crime is obtained from examining
violent crimes. Failing a July exam increases the likelihood of a violent crime conviction as
an adult by 0.71 of a percentage point, which is 39.61% relative to the baseline likelihood of
such a conviction. The IV estimate shows that grade retention leads to a 1.05 percentage point
(58.44%) higher probability of an adult violent crime conviction. Almost all of these convictions
are for assault or robbery; there are very few murder convictions in this sample. There is no
evidence of an effect on the likelihood of being convicted of a property crime: estimates are
negative, close to zero, and are not statistically significant at even the 10% level. Estimates for
drug-related crimes are positive and non-trivial in size, though they are imprecisely estimated
and are not statistically significant. The point estimates suggest that failing a July exam
increases the likelihood of a drug conviction by 0.35 of a percentage point (6.78%) and grade
retention increases the probability of a drug conviction by 0.51 of a percentage point (10.02%).
Figure 3 presents these results graphically. The figure aligns well with the results in Table
4: there is an increase in violent crime at the cutoff, but the other crime categories show less
evidence of an effect.
    Examining an indicator for whether any conviction occurs may miss variation coming from
the number of convictions. People are sometimes convicted of multiple offenses at once even
within a given crime category. For example, someone can be convicted of both battery and
armed robbery, which are both violent crimes. One may reasonably interpret such convictions
as representing more serious crimes than do convictions for one offense. In Table 5, we therefore
present reduced form and IV estimates using the number of convictions (including zeros) when
we observe an individual being convicted of a crime for the first time as an adult up to age 25.19
  19 We also could examine recidivism using the total number of times an individual was convicted of a crime up to age 25. However,

examining re-offending with a sample that imposes an age cutoff of 25 years old will not allow us to measure the full effect of grade
retention on re-offending. This follows from the fact that a subset of convicted individuals would still be in prison by the time they
reach 25, and the likelihood of incarceration is highest among those who are most likely to re-offend. Examining recidivism in our
sample thus may provide misleading estimates.




                                                                 17
This intensive margin arguably better measures the severity of the crime than does a conviction
indicator, however the results are quantitatively and qualitatively similar to those in Table 4.
In column (2), we find that failing a July exam increases the number of crimes committed by
0.017, which is a 12.50% rise relative to the mean. The estimate is not statistically significant,
though. Being retained increases the number of adult convictions by 0.025, or 18.38%, which
also is not significant at even the 10% level.
    In Table 5 we again find a large and statistically significant positive effect of July exam failure
on violent crime convictions, no effect for property crimes, and a positive but not significant
effect for drug convictions. The violent crime effect of failing the July exam is 0.012 additional
crimes, which is 60.00% of the mean. Being retained increases the number of violent crimes
of which one is convicted by 0.017, or 85.00%. We also find suggestive evidence of a sizable
increase in the number of drug convictions: retention increases the number of drug convictions
at first conviction by 0.012 (20.00%), but the estimate is not significant at conventional levels.
    Graphical representations of the regression discontinuity are shown in Figure 4 for the num-
ber of conviction outcomes. They match the estimates in Table 5 closely in showing an increase
in the number of criminal convictions, violent crime convictions, and drug convictions due to
failing a July exam but no effect on property crime convictions.
    The results thus far indicate that grade retention increases the likelihood of being convicted
of a violent crime and increases the number of violent crime convictions. We also find sugges-
tive evidence of a positive effect on drug convictions. It is important to emphasize the large
private costs and externalities associated with these outcomes. The outcomes we examine are
convictions, not arrests, which means that the increased criminal activity is both likely to be
severe and leads to a permanent criminal record.20
    To put the increase in violent crime into perspective, we combine the estimates in Donohue
(2009) of the weighted average cost of an assault and robbery with the discontinuity estimate
from our preferred specification in column (5) of Table 4. Note that retention increases the
probability of being convicted of a violent crime by around 58.44% (1.052/1.800). Taking
the number of convicted adults from violent crimes in the control group as our benchmark,
  20 Online Appendix Table A-6 shows suggestive evidence that retention increases sentence length by 3 months (off of a mean of

79 months) among those convicted, however the estimate is imprecise. This is consistent with the severity of crimes committed
increasing. The average age of first conviction also rises slightly, as shown in column (2) of the table, but the estimate is again
imprecise and thus only suggestive of an effect.


                                                                18
the percent increase implies that 104 more adults are convicted as a result of retention over
our sample period. This increase corresponds to a $2.6 million social cost using Donohue’s
lower bound estimates of assault and robbery and a $18.4 million cost using the upper bound
estimates. Considering that about half of violent incidents are reported to the police and about
half of reported incidents result in an arrest, the actual social cost of retention likely is even
larger than what is reported here (FBI 2012).


5.2     Mechanisms

There are several potential mechanisms that could generate the impact of grade retention on
adult crime. Holding students back a year may affect their accumulation of non-cognitive
skills. Indeed, a core argument for “social promotion” is that it is damaging for students to
be in grades with those who are younger. If retention reduces human capital accumulation
and/or reduces students’ social fit in the school, it could lead to lower academic performance,
more behavioral problems, and to eventual dropout from school for some students. Retaining
students also can alter the educational environment, in particular the set of peers to which a
student is exposed. If retention reduces the quality of schooling inputs, student achievement
may decline. Additionally, it is possible that being retained sends a signal to the student that
they are not well equipped for high school, which could cause them to drop out. Lower levels
of human capital and educational attainment can lead to higher rates of criminal activity by
worsening job prospects. Reductions in non-cognitive skills can increase the likelihood young
adults engage in criminal behavior as well. To the extent that these mechanisms lead students
to commit criminal acts as juveniles, adult crime could increase because juvenile incarceration
has a strong positive effect on adult criminal engagement (Aizer and Doyle 2015).
    Tables 6-8 provide evidence on some of these potential mechanisms. First, in Table 6, we
examine how grade retention affects the composition of students in the high school the student
attends. While retention does lead to an increase in the likelihood that 9th grade data are
missing,21 we observe a reduction in measures of peer quality. Being retained in 8th grade leads
   21 This differential attrition occurs predominantly because we only observe 9th grade outcomes if students enroll in a public high

school in Louisiana. Retention reduces the likelihood that students enroll in high school, which is why the attrition rate in Table 6
is so much larger than in the subsequent tables that do not condition on enrolling in a public high school. Hence, the attrition in
Table 6 provides evidence of reduced educational attainment from retention, which complements the attainment evidence in Tables
8 and A-6.




                                                                 19
students to attend high schools in which the percentage of white students in 9th grade is 2.7
percentage points lower (significant at the 12% level)22 and the mean 9th grade test score is
6.2% of a standard deviation lower (significant at the 5% level). This finding suggests that
retained students subsequently attend high schools that have peer attributes associated with
worse academic outcomes. The change in peer composition we document likely is facilitated by
the large amount of school choice that exists in Louisiana, and resulting adverse peer effects
could be a driver of the increases in crime we document.
   Changes to the peer composition of one’s high school as well as direct effects of retention can
alter educational outcomes. The development of non-cognitive skills is particularly important
to examine, since these skills are highly correlated with the propensity to engage in criminal
activity (Carneiro et al. 2007). We now turn to an analysis of behavioral outcomes in Table 7
that reflect such skills: absenteeism and disciplinary incidents (Lounsbury et al. 2004). First,
we examine whether retention leads to a change in the likelihood of observing information on
these outcomes for students. Failing the July exam leads to a small but statistically significant
increase in the likelihood of a student having missing data on these behavioral outcomes. If
anything, this likely biases our estimates towards zero because those with behavioral problems
are more likely to have missing data due to attrition. In columns (2) to (4) of Table 7, we
estimate effects on students after 1, 2, and 3 years of grade retention to more closely examine
the time pattern of any retention impacts. Students who are retained are absent 0.76 more days
per year and are actually less likely to have a behavior incident in the first year following failure,
although neither estimate is statistically significant. By the third year after retention, however,
there is a statistically significant effect on absences of 1.97 days per year (11.14% relative to
the mean). Students also are 1.12 percentage points more likely to have a disciplinary incident,
though this estimate is not statistically different from zero at conventional levels. The year
3 estimate is statistically different from the year 1 estimate, which suggests grade retention
induces a worsening pattern of behavior over time.
   In addition to reductions in non-cognitive skill acquisition, grade retention can lead to less
education attainment, as shown in Table 8. The first column of Table 8 indicates that students
  22 Cook (2018) shows evidence that attending more segregated schools in which the percentage of African American students is

higher can reduce short- and long-run educational attainment.




                                                             20
who barely missed the promotion cutoff are not more likely to leave the public school system
before their status is determined as a graduating or dropping out student.23 Column (2) of
Table 8 shows that students who are retained in 8th grade due to failing a July exam are 7.17
percentage points more likely to drop out. This is a 15.66% increase relative to the baseline
dropout likelihood of 45.8%.24 Despite the large impact of retention on high school dropout,
we provide suggestive evidence that this effect can explain only a small proportion of the
violent crime increase. In this exercise, we estimate a regression of violent crime on a dropout
indicator using the full set of controls (i.e., student demographics, school and year effects) for
observations in the 30 index point bandwidth around the cutoff. The estimated correlation
between violent crime and dropping out is 0.00017. Multiplying by the dropout estimate of
7.171 yields a predicted violent crime conviction effect of 0.001. Thus, increased prevalence of
high school dropout explains only 12% of the total increase in violent crime stemming from 8th
grade retention.
    The last two columns of Table 8 present estimates of grade retention on juvenile crime and
juvenile felony convictions. These estimates are positive but not significant at even the 10%
level. Furthermore, they are much smaller than the IV estimates in Table 4, suggesting that
increases in juvenile crime can at most explain a small part of the overall adult crime effect.25
Given the evidence that increased adult crime from 8th grade retention is not predominantly
driven by the influence of high school dropout or juvenile convictions, we argue that the effect
most likely comes from a degredation of non-cognitive skills.
    Taken together, the results from Tables 6-8 indicate that grade retention leads to lower peer
quality in high school, increases behavioral problems and absenteeism several years after being
retained, and substantially increases the likelihood of dropout. There is little effect on juvenile
crime, and back-of-the-envelope calculations indicate that an increase in the propensity to drop
  23 The LDOE analyzes enrollment data employing an algorithm coupled with U.S. Department of Education guidelines and flags

an individual as being a drop out using these guidelines. Specifically, LDOE requires the use of three school years (the previous,
current and the following) to identify the dropout status of a student. Therefore, a dropout flag is not complete until after the
dropout correction period of the following year. Certain exit codes available in the administrative records exclude individuals from
being coded as dropouts (e.g., death, out of state or private/home school) (Pastorek 2011). An individual is identified as a dropout
only if he/she is flagged as one in the administrative records.
  24 Online Appendix Table A-6 shows that retention has a positive but not statistically significant effect on being classified as

special education and reduces the number of years of completed education post-July exam by 0.264 years. The latter estimate is
significant at the 1% level.
  25 See Eren et al. (2017) for a more detailed analysis of the effect of the Louisiana accountability system on juvenile crime. They

show that the total effect of summer school and potential grade retention is to lower juvenile crime, but the effect of retention per
se is positive and not significantly different from zero.




                                                                 21
out, triggered by grade retention, does not explain the crime effect in adulthood. These results
suggest that the increase in adult crime is not being driven by earlier engagement in the criminal
justice system. We argue that this evidence is most consistent with students accumulating less
non-cognitive skills, which both lowers their job market prospects and makes it more likely they
will engage in violent criminal behavior.26 Indeed, our results are consistent with the decline
in violent crime from a summer jobs program (Heller 2014), which also was likely driven by
changes in non-cognitive skills.27


5.3     Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

While we do not find much evidence of an effect on juvenile crime, it still is possible that the
impact of retention on adult crime has an age pattern. This is particularly relevant because the
likelihood of committing a crime declines with age after the late teens (Hirschi and Gottfredson
1983). In Table 9, we examine age heterogeneity by redefining convictions as occurring only
at ages 19+ (column (1)) and 20+ (column (2)). The effect of 8th grade retention on adult
violent crime largely carries over to considering convictions that only occur among those who
are between 20 and 25. This finding indicates that much of the adult crime effect occurs among
young adults 20 and older. As with the baseline estimates, there is no significant effect for
either age group for the other crime categories.
    The regression discontinuity estimator identifies the effect of retention at the promotion
cutoff. This local average treatment effect has clear policy relevance for those proximate to
the threshold, but from a policy perspective it is important to understand whether the effects
we find extend to other parts of the test score distribution. If effects are local to the cutoff,
then it would be possible to mitigate or eliminate this adverse effect by moving the passing
threshold. Conversely, if our results generalize to a larger group of lower-performing students,
it means any reasonable test-based retention policy might increase criminal convictions later in
life.28 If students below the threshold who are retained also engage in more crime later in life,
  26 One might expect property crime to increase if changing labor market prospects are an important mechanism underlying our

result. However, there is some evidence that youth employment programs lead to more property crime among those likely to be
employed absent the intervention (Davis and Heller 2017). It hence is not obvious that reduced labor market opportunities will
increase property crime.
  27 Heller et al. (2017) show that several RCTs in Chicago designed to alter the decision-making of youth from disadvantaged

backgrounds reduced crime overall and violent crime in particular. They do not find evidence of an effect on traditional non-cognitive
skills but rather that the interventions caused students to “slow down” and make more measured decisions.
  28 We consider here the set of test-based promotion policies targeted towards lower-performing students. No promotion policy will




                                                                 22
the size of the externality implied by our estimates is much larger than if the effect is localized
to the test score cutoff. In order to examine the extent to which our regression discontinuity
estimates generalize to a broader set of lower-performing student, we use the method proposed
by Angrist and Rokkanen (2015) to estimate treatment effects away from a discontinuity.
    The Angrist and Rokkanen (2015) approach relies on the ability to predict outcomes condi-
tional on the running variable using observed characteristics. Under the “conditional indepen-
dence” assumption that conditional on the observed characteristics the running variable is no
longer related to outcomes, one can use estimated linear relationships between the observables
and outcomes to predict counterfactual outcomes away from the discontinuity that can be used
to estimate treatment effects in a linear reweighting framework (Kline 2011). Our prediction
variables consist of indicators for gender, race, free/reduced lunch status and immigrant status,
composite (ELA and math) seventh grade standardized test scores and school fixed effects. An-
grist and Rokkanen (2015) suggest a simple test for the conditional independence assumption
that entails estimating the relationship between outcomes and the running variable on each
side of the cutoff, conditional on the set of observed characteristics. These tests are shown in
Appendix Table A-5: the estimates are universally small, and none is statistically significantly
different from zero at conventional levels. Thus, the tests strongly support the use of the linear
reweighting method to estimate treatment effects away from the test score discontinuity.
    Table 10 presents the results from implementing the Angrist and Rokkanen (2015) estimator.
The first two columns show the effect of retention among students to the left of the test score
cutoff who are retained as a result of the test, and columns (3) and (4) present estimates for
those to the right of the cutoff who are not retained. Standard errors in the table are block
bootstrapped at the school level using 500 replications. The table shows consistent evidence
of positive effects of crime on the treated and untreated that are similar in magnitude to
one another. For violent crime, retention increases the likelihood of an adult conviction by
1 percentage point and increases the number of convictions by over 0.01. That the effects
are of similar size to each other and to the estimates in Tables 4 and 5 suggests that the
effect of retention on violent crime is more general among low-performing students. Thus, any
set thresholds targeted at the upper end of the test score distribution, so the only feasible set of cutoffs available to policymakers
is within the 30 point bandwidth we examine.




                                                                 23
reasonable test-based cutoff is likely to generate an increase in violent crime later in life.
   For property and drug crimes in Panels B and C of Table 10, we find effects that are larger
than the RD estimates in Tables 4 and 5. These results indicate an effect on property crime
conviction of about 1.4 percentage points and an increase in the number of property crime
convictions of 0.017. For drug convictions, retention increases the likelihood of conviction by
about 1 percentage point and increases the number of convictions by 0.014. Only the property
crime estimates are consistently statistically significant, however. The effect of retention on
property and drug crimes away from the cutoff is larger than our RD estimates shown in Tables
4 and 5.
   Online Appendix Figures A-1 through A-4 show these results graphically and demonstrate
why the RD estimates are much smaller than the estimated effects away from the cutoff for
property and drug crimes. The “extrapolated” counterfactual lines tend to have no slope,
while the actual fitted lines slope upward or downward away from the cutoffs. As a result,
the extrapolated effects grow away from the cutoffs. Thus, the local average treatment effects
estimated with the RD model understate the impact of test-based promotion on drug and
property crime: inframarginal retained students experience large increases in both types of
crime convictions later in life. The same is not the case for violent crime, where neither the
extrapolated nor the fitted lines have nonzero slopes. This causes the RD and extrapolated
effects to be the same size.
   The estimates in Table 10 have two important implications for the interpretation of our
results. First, the RD estimates for property and drug crimes are understated. When extrap-
olated away from the cutoff, grade retention has large effects on all types of crime. Second,
these results suggest that increasing the passing threshold would not mitigate these effects.
In fact, it likely would increase the size of the crime effect as the untreated students would
exhibit similarly-sized or larger treatment effects if they were retained. The results from Table
10 indicate that the effect of grade retention on adult crime is large and ubiquitous among the
low-performing students we examine.




                                                24
5.4     Robustness Checks

The results presented in Section 5.1 point to a large increase in violent criminal convictions
among adults when they are held back because of failing the 8th grade promotion exam. In
this section, we explore the sensitivity of these results to alternative modeling assumptions.
In Online Appendix Tables A-1 and A-2, we alter the bandwidth and the modeling of the
running variable using criminal conviction and the number of convictions as dependent variables,
respectively. Column (1) shows estimates using local linear regression with the Imbens and
Kalyanaraman (2012) optimal smoother. In column (2) we alter the baseline bandwidth of 30
index points to 15, while column (3) increases it to 45. Column (4) presents estimates that
use a quadratic spline in the running variable with a bandwidth of 60, and finally column (5)
employs a global quadratic spline. The estimates for violent crime change very little across
specifications in both tables. The drug crime estimates are somewhat sensitive to specification,
with negative estimates in columns (1) and (2). However, these estimates are very imprecise,
so they are not inconsistent with our baseline results.
   We next examine how estimates are affected by the use of different samples, controls and
clustering assumptions. Online Appendix Tables A-3 and A-4 show results that use all convic-
tions up to age 28 for our analysis sample. We only observe outcomes at age 28 for the 1984
birth cohort, at age 27 for the 1983-1984 birth cohorts, and at age 26 for the 1982-1984 birth
cohorts. Thus, these estimates are based on an unbalanced panel of ages, but they allow us to
examine effects past age 25. The estimates are extremely similar to baseline, which is expected
given the lower likelihood of criminal engagement when individuals age into their mid 20s. The
remaining results shown in Appendix Tables A-3 and A-4 exclude the regions most affected
by Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita in column (2),29 add 7th grade composite test score
controls in column (3), and cluster standard errors at the level of the running variable (i.e., the
index) in column (4). These changes to the baseline model have minimal effects on the results:
the point estimates and standard errors change little across columns. Thus, our main results
and conclusions are not sensitive to these core modeling assumptions.
  29 Hurricane Katrina hit the Gulf Coast in August of 2005 and caused massive flooding and damage in areas of Louisiana around

New Orleans, much of which was due to flooding from breached levees in several New Orleans parishes. Hurricane Rita hit Louisiana
less than a month after Katrina and caused additional flooding and damage in coastal areas and in parishes most impacted by
Katrina.




                                                               25
    Finally, we conduct placebo tests in which we estimate our baseline model using false cut-
offs at each test score over a range of 50 index points on either side of the true cutoff. We
incrementally increase the cutoff from -50 to 50 by one point, and in Figures 5 and 6 we plot
the distribution of point estimates. The vertical red line shows the effects from Tables 4 and 5,
and we report the percentage of placebo estimates that are larger than the baseline effects on
the x-axis of each figure. For any violent crime conviction (Figure 5) as well as for the number
of violent crime and drug crime offenses (Figure 6), the RD estimates are in the tails of the
distribution of point estimates. In Figure 5, the actual point estimate is larger than all but
1% of the placebo estimates for violent crime, and the point estimate for the number of violent
offenses is larger than all but 3% of the placebo estimates in Figure 6. Thus, our violent crime
results are driven by changes in criminal convictions at the retention cutoff and provide larger
estimates than changes at the vast majority of placebo cutoffs.



6    Conclusion

We present the first estimates in the literature of the effect of grade retention on adult criminal
convictions. The data we use come from a merge of administrative education records from the
Louisiana Department of Education with administrative data on adult criminal convictions from
the Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections, Adult Services. To overcome the
endogeneity of student retention, we exploit test score cutoffs imposed by the State of Louisiana
for promotion to 9th grade whereby a student must repeat 8th grade if they fail the math or
ELA state exam in July. We estimate both reduced form effects of failing the exam as well as
the effect of 8th grade retention in an IV framework that imposes the additional assumption
that the only reason test failure in 8th grade is related to crime is because of retention.
    We first show that failing a July exam increases the likelihood of being retained by about
68 percentage points. Reduced form and IV estimates both show a large effect of test failure
and subsequent retention on being convicted of a crime by age 25. Being retained increases
the likelihood of being convicted of any crime by 1.25 percentage points, or 10.85% relative
to the baseline mean, and increases the number of convictions by 0.025 (18.38%). The effects
are largest for violent crime: retention increases the likelihood of a violent crime conviction


                                                26
by 1.05 percentage points (58.44%) and increases the number of violent crime convictions by
0.017 (85.00%). We find no evidence of an effect of retention on property crime and suggestive
evidence of an increase in drug-related crime.
   The rich administrative data we use allow us to examine mechanisms that drive the effects of
retention on adult criminal convictions. We find that retention leads students to subsequently
attend high schools with lower-performing and more disadvantaged peers. Our estimates also
indicate that retention causes higher levels of absence from school three years later, and there
is suggestive evidence of increased disciplinary incidents after 3 years. Retention has a large
effect on dropout, increasing the likelihood by 7.17 percentage points (or 15.66% relative to
the mean). Similar to Eren et al. (2017), we do not find a statistically significant impact on
juvenile crime, though the estimate is positive. Thus, the main mechanism is unlikely to be
increased juvenile criminal proclivity, which then leads to higher criminal activity as an adult.
We argue that the evidence is most consistent with retention lowering the rate of human capital
accumulation, and in particular non-cognitive skills, which results in higher levels of criminal
engagement in early adulthood. Finally, using the method proposed by Angrist and Rokkanen
(2015), we estimate effects away from the test passing threshold and find sizable increases in
all types of crime due to grade retention among a broader set of low-performing students.
   Our results indicate that retaining students in 8th grade due to failing a promotion exam
induces higher criminal activity as an adult among students on the margin of passing as well
as among low-scoring inframarginal students. This evidence is consistent with a sizable effect
of education on crime, and it suggests that the promotion policy, in its current form, harms
at least a subset of students and creates important negative externalities in the form of more
violent felonies being committed in the future. That our estimates generalize to a larger set of
inframarginal students highlights that the effects we report would be detected at any potential
promotion cutoff set by the Louisiana Department of Education and is not driven by the
particular threshold being set for promotion. The policy implications of these findings are
very important, as they suggest any test-based retention in 8th grade among low-performing
students leads to more criminal engagement later in life. Test-based promotion policies are
designed to ensure that students meet basic knowledge levels to advance in school, which may



                                                 27
have benefits to both marginal and inframarginal students. Our results show that there are also
private and social costs, which are substantial in magnitude. Considering only violent crimes,
simple back-of-the-envelope calculations imply a social cost between $2.6 and $18.4 million.
How to structure test-based promotion policies, or promotion policies more broadly, in a way
that retains the benefits from imposing educational standards while minimizing the costs to
students and society is an important question for future work.




                                              28
References
[1] Agan, Amanda and Sonja Starr. 2017. “Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Racial Discrimination: A Field
    Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(1): 191-235.

[2] Aizer, Anna and Joseph J. Doyle Jr. 2015. “Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Future Crime:
    Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(2): 759-803.
[3] Angrist, Joshua D. and Miikka Rokkanen. 2015. “Wanna Get Away? Regression Discontinuity Estimation
    of Exam School Effects Away From the Cutoff.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 110(512):
    1331-1344.

[4] Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan. 1997. “The Endogenous Determination of Time Preference.” Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 112(3): 729-758.
[5] Carneiro, Pedro, Claire Crawford, and Alissa Goodman. 2007. “The Impact of Early Cognitive and Non-
    Cognitive Skills on Later Outcomes.” CEE Discussion Papers 0092, Centre for the Economics of Education,
    LSE.

[6] Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Ming Ching Luoh. 2010. “Male Incarceration, the Marriage Market, and Female
    Outcomes.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92(3): 614-627.
[7] Cook, Jason. 2018. “Race-Blind Admissions, School Segregation, and Student Outcomes: Evidence from
    Race-Blind Magnet School Lotteries.” CESifo Working Paper No. 7335.

[8] Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian A. Jacob and Steven Levitt. 2006. “The Effect of School Choice on Participants:
    Evidence from Randomized Lotteries.” Econometrica 74(5): 1191-1230.
[9] Davis, Jonathan M.V. and Sara B. Heller. 2017. “Rethinking the Benefits of Youth Employment Programs:
    The Heterogeneous Effects of Summer Jobs.” NBER Working Paper No. 23443.

[10] Deming, David J. 2011. “Better Schools, Less Crime?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 2063-
    2115.
[11] Donohue, John J. III. 2009. “Assessing the Relative Benefits of Incarceration: Overall Changes and the
    Benefits on the Margin.” In S. Raphael and M. A. Stoll (Eds.), Do Prisons Make Us Safer? The Benefits
    and Costs of the Prison Boom, pp. 269.342. Russell Sage Foundation.

[12] Eren, Ozkan, Briggs Depew and Stephen Barnes. 2017. “Test-based Promotion Policies, Dropping Out,
    and Juvenile Crime.” Journal of Public Economics 153: 9-31.
[13] Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2012. “Crime in the United States 2012,” Uniform Crime Report-U.S.
    Department of Justice: Washington, DC.

[14] Fruehwirth, Jane Cooley, Salvadore Navarro, and Yuya Takahashi. 2016. “How the Timing of Grade Re-
    tention Affects Outcomes: Identification and Estimation of Time-Varying Treatment Effects.” Journal of
    Labor Economics 34(4): 972-1021.
[15] Fudenberg, Drew and David K. Levine. 2006. “A Dual-self Model of Impulse Control.” American Economic
    Review 96(5): 1449-1476.

[16] Gelman, Andrew and Guido Imbens. 2017. “Why High-order Polynomials Should not be Used in Regression
    Discontinuity Designs.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics.
[17] Greene, Jay P. and Marcus A. Winters. 2007. “Revisiting Grade Retention: An Evaluation of Florida’s
    Test-Based Promotion Policy.” Education Finance and Policy 2(4): 319-340.

[18] Heller, Sara B. 2014. “Summer Jobs Reduce Violence Among Disadvantaged Youth.” Science 346(6214):
    1219-1223.
[19] Heller, Sara B., Anuj K. Shah, Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Harold A. Pol-
    lack 2017. “Thinking, Fast and Slow? Some Field Experiments to Reduce Crime and Dropout in Chicago.”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(1): 1-54.


                                                     29
[20] Hirschi, Travis and Michael Gottfredson. 1983. “Age and the Explanation of Crime.” American Journal of
    Sociology 89(3): 552-584.
[21] Imbens, Guido and Karthik Kalyanaraman. 2015. “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression Discon-
    tinuity Estimator.” The Review of Economic Studies 79(3): 933-959.
[22] Jacob, Brian A. and Lars Lefgren. 2009. “The Effect of Grade Retention on High School Completion.”
    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(3): 33-58.
[23] Johnson, Rucker C. and Steven Raphael. 2009. “The Effects of Male Incarceration Dynamics on Acquired
    Immune Deficiency Syndrome Infection Rates among African American Women and Men.” The Journal of
    Law and Economics 52(2): 251-293.
[24] Kline, Patrick. 2011. “Oaxaca-Blinder as a Reweighting Estimator.” American Economic Review 101(3):
    532-537.
[25] Kolesár, Michal and Christoph Rothe. 2018. “Inference in Regression Discontinuity Designs with a Discrete
    Running Variable.” American Economic Review 108(8): 2277-2304.
[26] Lochner, Lance. 2004. “Education, Work, and Crime: A Human Capital Approach.” International Eco-
    nomic Review 45(3): 811-843.
[27] Lochner, Lance. 2011. “Nonproduction Benefits of Education: Crime, Health, and Good Citizenship.” in
    Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen J. Machin and Ludger Woessman (Eds.) Handbook of the Economics of Education,
    Volume 4. Elsevier: Amsterdam
[28] Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti. 2004. “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from Prison
    Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports.” American Economic Review 94(1): 155-189.
[29] Lounsbury, John W., Robert P. Steel, James M. Loveland, and Lucy W. Gibson. 2004. “An Investigation of
    Personality Traits in Relation to Adolescent School Absenteeism.” Journal of Youth and Adolescence 33(5):
    457-466.
[30] Machin, Stephen, Olivier Marie, and Suncica Vujic. 2011. “The Crime Reducing Effect of Education.”
    Economic Journal 121(552): 463-484.
[31] Manacorda, Marco. 2012. “The Cost of Grade Retention.” Review of Economics and Statistics 94(2): 596-
    606.
[32] Matsudaira, Jordan. 2008. “Mandatory Summer School and Student Achievement.” Journal of Economet-
    rics 142(2): 829-850.
[33] McLaughlin, Michael, Carrie Pettue-Davis, Derek Brown, Chris Veeh, and Tanya Renn. 2016. The Economic
    Burden of Incarceration in the US. Washington University: Seattle.
[34] Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2011. “Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Benefits of Schooling.”
    Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1): 159-184.
[35] Ou, Suh-Ruu and Arthur J. Reynolds. 2010. “Grade Retention, Postsecondary Education, and Public Aid
    Receipt.” Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis 32(1): 118-139.
[36] Pastorek, P. 2010. “LEAP Remediation Programs.” Louisiana Department of Education.
[37] Schwerdt, Guido, Martin R. West and Marcus A. Winters. 2017. “The Effects of Test-based Retention
    on Student Outcomes over Time: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from Florida.” Journal of Public Eco-
    nomics 152: 154-169.
[38] Stephens, Melvin Jr. and Dou-Yan Yang. 2014. “Compulsory Education and the Benefits of Schooling.”
    American Economic Review 104(6):1777-1792.
[39] Wakefield, Sara and Christopher Wildeman. 2011. “Mass Imprisonment and Racial Disparities in Childhood
    Behavioral Problems.” Criminology and Public Policy 10(3): 793-817.
[40] Wildeman, Christopher and Bruce Western. 2010. “Incarceration in Fragile Families.” The Future of Chil-
    dren 20(2): 157-177.


                                                      30
                      Figure 1: Distributions of Students around the July Promotional Cutoff




                      .03
                      .02
          Frequency
                      .01
                      0




                            -30      -20             -10          0            10                       20               30
                                                       Distance to July Cutoff




  The figure shows the distribution of index scores relative to the July promotional cutoff (centered at zero), using the analysis

Figure 1: Distributions of Students around the July
  sample with a bandwidth of 30 as described in the text.




                                                              31
   Figure 2: Probability of Grade Retention and Distance to the July Promotional Cutoff
                          .8
          Probability of Grade Retention
           .2           .40        .6




                                           -30   -20   -10          0            10                    20               30
                                                          Distance to July Cutoff



  The vertical line denotes -0.5 points to the left of the July promotional cutoff (centered at 0). Each circle represents the
  unconditional mean of grade retention in two index point bins, based on the distance to July cutoff. The solid lines are fitted
  values of probability of grade retention from a linear spline over an index bandwidth of 30 points.
Figure 2: Probability of Grade Retention and Distan




                                                              32
                                         Figure 3: Any Criminal Convictions by Distance to the July Promotional Cutoff


    Panel A: Any Crime                                                                        Panel B: Violent Crimes
                        .2




                                                                                                                .2
                                 .15




                                                                                                                          .15
                                                                                                Probability of Violent Crime
          Probability of Any Crime
                      .1




                                                                                                             .1
        .05




                                                                                               .05
                        0




                                                                                                                0
                                         -30   -20   -10          0            10   20   30                                        -30   -20   -10          0            10   20   30
                                                        Distance to July Cutoff                                                                   Distance to July Cutoff




    Panel C: Property Crimes                                                                  Panel D: Drug-Related Crimes
                        .2




                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                               Probability of Drug-Related Crime
        Probability of Property Crime
                                   .15




                                                                                                                           .15
                       .1




                                                                                                                .1
        .05




                                                                                                 .05
                        0




                                                                                                                0




                                         -30   -20   -10          0            10   20   30                                        -30   -20   -10          0            10   20   30
                                                        Distance to July Cutoff                                                                   Distance to July Cutoff




Figure
    The 3:  Probability
        vertical line denotes of
                              -0.5Grade
                                  points toRetention
                                           the left of theand   Adult Crime
                                                           July promotional cutoff         (centered at 0). Each circle represents the
     unconditional mean of adult crime conviction and types in two index point bins, based on the distance to July cutoff. The solid
     lines are fitted values of probability of criminal conviction from a linear spline over an index bandwidth of 30 points.




                                                                                         33
        Figure 4: The Number of Adult Crime Convictions by Distance to the July Test Cutoff


     Panel A: Any Crime                                                                          Panel B: Violent Crimes
                         .25




                                                                                                                     .2
                         .2




                                                                                                  Total Convictions-Violent Crime
                                                                                                                             .15
        Total Convictions
                    .15




                                                                                                                 .1
          .1




                                                                                                   .05
                         .05
                         0




                                                                                                                     0
                                           -30   -20   -10          0            10   20   30                                            -30   -20   -10          0            10   20   30
                                                          Distance to July Cutoff                                                                       Distance to July Cutoff




     Panel C: Property Crimes                                                                    Panel D: Drug-Related Crimes
                         .2




                                                                                                                     .2
                                                                                                  Total Convictions-Drug Related Crime
        Total Convictions-Property Crime
                                   .15




                                                                                                                               .15
                        .1




                                                                                                                    .1
          .05




                                                                                                       .05
                         0




                                                                                                                     0




                                           -30   -20   -10          0            10   20   30                                            -30   -20   -10          0            10   20   30
                                                          Distance to July Cutoff                                                                       Distance to July Cutoff




Figure
    The4: Probability
        vertical line denotesof
                              -0.5Grade
                                   points toRetention
                                             the left of theand
                                                             July Total  Number
                                                                  promotional          of Convictions
                                                                              cutoff (centered at 0). Each circle          represents the
      unconditional mean of the number of adult crime convictions, overall and by type, in two index point bins based on the
      distance to July cutoff. The solid lines are fitted values of the number of criminal convictions from a linear spline over an index
      bandwidth of 30 points.




                                                                                            34
  Figure 5: Placebo Estimates of the Effect of Failing a July Promotional Cutoff on the Probability
            of Adult Criminal Conviction


     Panel A: Violent Crimes                                                           Panel B: Property Crimes




                                                                                                    .6
             1
             .8




                                                                                                    .4
                 .6
         Frequency




                                                                                        Frequency
        .4




                                                                                                    .2
             .2
             0




                                                                                                    0
                      -2                             0                        2                          -4            -2                      0            2
                                Placebo Estimates-Prob(actual<placebo)=0.01                                   Placebo Estimates-Prob(actual<placebo)=0.61




     Panel C: Drug-Related Crimes
             .5
             .4  .3
         Frequency
        .2   .1
             0




                           -4                 -2                   0          2
                                Placebo Estimates-Prob(actual<placebo)=0.34




Figure 5:placebo
    Each   Placebo     Estimates
                 estimate               ofpromotion
                          assigns a false   Failingcutoff
                                                     Julyby Promotional       Cuto¤-Adult
                                                            incrementally adding one scale point toCrime
                                                                                                    the subject-specific cutoffs
      (269 and 296 scale points in ELA and math LEAP tests, respectively) over a range of [-50, 50] scale points. A reduced form
      equation is then employed to estimate the effect of failing to meet the July cutoff on the probability of being convicted of
      different types of adult crime. All estimates are obtained from a linear spline using a bandwidth of 30 index points. The
      vertical lines denote the actual estimates. The fraction of placebo estimates larger than the actual estimate is also reported on
      the x-axis of each graph.




                                                                                  35
  Figure 6: Placebo Estimates of the Effect of Failing a July Promotional Cutoff on the Number
            of Adult Criminal Convictions


    Panel A: Violent Crimes                                                              Panel B: Property Crimes




                                                                                                      60
                   60




                                                                                                      40
                   40
       Frequency




                                                                                          Frequency
                                                                                                      20
                   20
                   0




                                                                                                      0
                        -.02                         0                        .02                          -.1                                    0            .05
                                Placebo Estimates-Prob(actual<placebo)=0.03                                      Placebo Estimates-Prob(actual<placebo)=0.67




    Panel C: Drug-Related Crimes
                   40
                   30
       Frequency
           20      10
                   0




                         -.04                  0                              .06
                                Placebo Estimates-Prob(actual<placebo)=0.24




Figure 6:placebo
    Each   Placebo    Estimates
                 estimate              of promotion
                          assigns a false  Failing cutoff
                                                    JulybyPromotional       Cuto¤-Total
                                                           incrementally adding one scale pointNumber      of Convictions
                                                                                               to the subject-specific cutoffs
      (269 and 296 scale points in ELA and math LEAP tests, respectively) over a range of [-50, 50] scale points. A reduced form
      equation is then employed to estimate the effect of failing to meet the July cutoff on the number of adult criminal convictions
      by type of crime. All estimates are obtained from a linear spline using a bandwidth of 30 index points. The vertical lines denote
      the actual estimates. The fraction of placebo estimates larger than the actual estimate is also reported on the x-axis of each
      graph.




                                                                                    36
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                    Full Sample           Promoted            Retained
                                                    Mean    SD          Mean    SD          Mean     SD
                                                     (1)    (2)          (3)    (4)          (5)     (6)
Panel A: Student Characteristics
Black                                                0.763    0.425     0.661      0.473     0.854     0.352
White                                                0.218    0.413      0.315     0.464     0.131     0.337
Female                                               0.520    0.499      0.504     0.500     0.535     0.499
Free/Reduced Lunch                                   0.454    0.498      0.473     0.499     0.438     0.496
Prior (7th Grade) ITBS Math z-score                 -0.857    0.549     -0.727     0.569    -0.975     0.502
Prior (7th Grade) ITBS ELA z-score                  -0.685    0.659     -0.586     0.695    -0.774     0.610

8th Grade LEAP Test Outcomes
Failed Only ELA (July LEAP Exam)                    0.039     0.194     0.027      0.162     0.050      0.21
Failed Only Math (July LEAP Exam)                   0.452     0.498     0.189      0.391     0.689     0.463
Failed ELA and Math (July LEAP Exam)                0.173     0.379     0.133      0.340     0.209     0.407

Other Outcomes
Drop Out of School                                  0.458     0.498     0.372      0.483     0.535     0.499
Committed a Juvenile Crime                          0.042     0.199     0.039      0.193     0.044     0.206

Panel B: Adult Characteristics/Outcomes
Adult Conviction                     0.115                    0.319     0.110      0.313     0.119     0.324

Adult Crime Type:
Violent                                             0.018     0.131     0.016      0.127     0.019     0.136
Property                                            0.039     0.193     0.038      0.192     0.039     0.195
Drug Related                                        0.051     0.219     0.048      0.213     0.053     0.225
Other                                               0.010     0.102     0.011      0.103     0.010     0.100

Age of Adult Crime                                  20.83      2.81     20.77      2.90      20.88     2.72

Sample Size                                         22,929              10,868              12,061
 The tabulations reflect our research sample as described in the text, which consists of students enrolled in
 regular classes in grade 8 between the 1998-1999 and 2000-2001 academic years. The students in the sample
 took July ELA or math (or both) LEAP exams in eighth grade and did not move out of the state. Prior
 achievement scores are available beginning with the 1999-2000 academic year and are standardized with respect
 to the statewide mean and standard deviation by test year, separately for each subject. The full set of sample
 statistics is available upon request from the authors.




                                                    37
                     Table 2: Regression Discontinuity Validation Tests

                                                                 Dependent Variable:
                                     Moved Out                                               Free/     7th Grade
                                      of State                                              Reduced    Composite
                                     (Attrition)      Female          Black     White        Lunch     Test Score
                                         (1)            (2)            (3)       (4)          (5)          (6)

Failed July Promotion Cutoff             -0.003        0.011         -0.011      0.016        -0.017     0.006
                                        (0.007)       (0.014)       (0.014)     (0.013)      (0.014)    (0.013)

Sample Size                             15,501         14,728       14,728      14,728       14,728      14,378
 Authors’ estimation of equation (1) as described in the text. The sample is restricted to students who scored
 within 30 points of one of the cutoffs on the July promotion exams. All specifications control for linear splines in
 index score as well as test year fixed effects. Column (1) includes students who moved out of state, while the other
 columns exclude these students. The 7th grade composite score is the average of the standardized test scores in
 ELA and math from this grade. These scores are available beginning with the 1999-2000 academic year and are
 standardized against the statewide mean and standard deviation, separately by test year and subject. Standard
 errors shown in parentheses and are clustered at the school level: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, ***
 significant at 1%.




                 Table 3: First Stage Estimates of the Effect of Failing to
                          Meet a July Promotion Cutoff on Grade Reten-
                          tion

                              Dependent Variable: Retained in 8th Grade
                                                     (1)         (2)                       (3)

                  Failed July Promotion Cutoff            0.677***       0.678***     0.676***
                                                           (0.018)        (0.018)      (0.019)

                  First-Stage F-Statistic                 1,352.53       1,357.78     1,274.78

                  Sample Size                                14,728       14,728          14,728

                  Controls:
                  Test Year Fixed Effects                     Yes             Yes          Yes
                  Covariates                                  No              Yes          Yes
                  School Fixed Effects                        No              No           Yes
                     Authors’ estimation of equation (3) as described in the text. The sample
                     is restricted to students who scored within 30 points of one of the cutoffs
                     on the July promotion exams. All specifications control for linear splines
                     in index score. Covariates include indicators for gender, race, free/reduced
                     lunch and immigrant status. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and
                     are clustered at the school level: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%,
                     *** significant at 1%.




                                                        38
Table 4: Reduced Form and IV Estimates of Test Failure and Grade Retention
         on the Likelihood of Adult Crime Conviction (in Percent)

                                     Reduced Form                                            IV
                                (1)      (2)       (3)                          (4)          (5)         (6)
 Panel A: Convicted of Any Crime (x100)
 Failed July Promotion Cutoff  0.687    0.846     0.750
                              (0.875) (0.864) (0.886)
 Grade Retention                                                               1.015       1.248        1.109
                                                                              (1.290)     (1.270)      (1.283)

 Panel B: Convicted of a Violent Crime (x100)
 Failed July Promotion Cutoff 0.668* 0.713** 0.648**
                              (0.352) (0.351) (0.261)
 Grade Retention                                                              0.987*      1.052**     0.959**
                                                                              (0.518)     (0.516)     (0.379)

 Panel C: Convicted of a Property Crime (x100)
 Failed July Promotion Cutoff -0.072   -0.057  -0.025
                              (0.569) (0.573) (0.587)
 Grade Retention                                                               -0.107      -0.084       -0.037
                                                                              (0.841)     (0.845)      (0.851)

 Panel D: Convicted of a Drug-Related Crime (x100)
 Failed July Promotion Cutoff  0.254   0.346   0.254
                              (0.598) (0.586) (0.598)
 Grade Retention                                                               0.375       0.511        0.376
                                                                              (0.883)     (0.862)      (0.867)

 Sample Size                            14,728       14,728       14,728      14,728      14,728       14,728

 Controls:
 Test Year Fixed Effects                  Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
 Covariates                               No           Yes         Yes          No          Yes          Yes
 School Fixed Effects                     No           No          Yes          No          No           Yes
   Authors’ estimation of equations (1) and (4) as described in the text. The sample is restricted to students
   who scored within 30 points of one of the cutoffs on the July promotion exams. All specifications control
   for linear splines in index score as well as test year fixed effects. Covariates include indicators for gender,
   race, free/reduced lunch and immigrant status. Dependent variables take the value of one if the student is
   convicted as an adult at age 25 or younger. All outcome variables are multiplied by 100 to obtain percent
   values. Standard errors clustered at the school level are in parentheses: * significant at 10%, ** significant
   at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                      39
Table 5: Reduced Form and IV Estimates of Test Failure and Grade Retention on
         the Number of First-time Criminal Convictions by Age 25

                                     Reduced Form                                            IV
                                (1)       (2)      (3)                          (4)          (5)         (6)
 Panel A: Any Crime (Mean=0.136)
 Failed July Promotion Cutoff  0.015     0.017    0.018
                              (0.012) (0.012) (0.012)
 Grade Retention                                                               0.022       0.025        0.027
                                                                              (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.018)

 Panel B: Violent Crimes (Mean=0.020)
 Failed July Promotion Cutoff 0.011** 0.012**                    0.011**
                              (0.005) (0.005)                    (0.005)
 Grade Retention                                                             0.016**      0.017**      0.017**
                                                                             (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)

 Panel C: Property Crimes (Mean=0.043)
 Failed July Promotion Cutoff  -0.002  -0.002                     -0.001
                              (0.007) (0.007)                    (0.007)
 Grade Retention                                                               -0.004      -0.003       -0.002
                                                                              (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.010)

 Panel D: Drug Related Crimes (Mean=0.060)
 Failed July Promotion Cutoff  0.007   0.008   0.008
                              (0.008) (0.008) (0.008)
 Grade Retention                                                               0.010       0.012        0.011
                                                                              (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.011)

 Sample Size                            14,728       14,728      14,728       14,728       14,728      14,728

 Controls:
 Test Year Fixed Effects                  Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
 Covariates                               No           Yes         Yes          No          Yes          Yes
 School Fixed Effects                     No           No          Yes          No          No           Yes
   Authors’ estimation of equations (1) and (4) as described in the text. The sample is restricted to students
   who scored within 30 points of one of the cutoffs on the July promotion exams. All specifications control
   for linear splines in index score as well as test year fixed effects. Covariates include indicators for gender,
   race, free/reduced lunch and immigrant status. Dependent variables are the number of convictions up to
   age 25. Standard errors clustered at the school level are in parentheses: * significant at 10%, ** significant
   at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                      40
Table 6: Mechanism - The Effect of Grade Retention on High School Peer Com-
         position

                                                            Percent of        Percent of        Average 9th
                                          Missing          Special Ed           White           Grade Math
                                        High School        Students in       Students in        Standardized
                                           Data            High School       High School         Test Score
                                            (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)
 Failed July Promotion Cutoff            0.210***
                                          (0.015)
 Grade Retention                                               -0.001             -0.027           -0.062**
                                                              (0.004)            (0.017)            (0.027)

 Sample Size                               15,501             11,115             11,115             11,115
  Authors’ estimation of equation (4) as described in the text. Missing high school data occur because
  students do not enroll in a public high school in Louisiana. The sample is restricted to students who
  scored within 30 points of one of the cutoffs on the July promotion exams. All specifications control for
  linear splines in index score as well as test year fixed effects. Covariates include indicators for gender, race,
  free/reduced lunch and immigrant status. Standard errors clustered at the school level are in parentheses:
  * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




        Table 7: Mechanism - Regression Discontinuity Estimates of
                 Grade Retention on Absenteeism and Disciplinary In-
                 cidents

                                                   Missing         Elapsed Time Relative to
                                                   Outcome                July Exam
                                                    Data          Year 1 Year 2     Year 3
                                                     (1)           (2)       (3)      (4)

          Panel A: Missing Data
          Failed July Promotion Cutoff             0.022***
                                                    (0.011)

          Panel B: Total Days Absent from School
          Grade Retention                      0.762                            1.006      1.967***
                                              (0.709)                          (0.923)      (0.750)
          Mean-Total Days Absent              [13.40]                          [17.30]      [17.66]

          Panel C: Any Disciplinary Incident (x100)
          Grade Retention                       -2.338                          0.915        1.124
                                               (2.408)                         (2.356)      (2.114)
          Mean-Disciplinary Incident-%          [35.97]                        [37.13]      [32.67]

          Sample Size                                15,501        12,963      12,963       12,963
            Authors’ estimation of equations (1) and (4) as described in the text. The sample is
            restricted to students who scored within 30 points of one of the cutoffs on the July
            promotion exams. All specifications control for linear splines in index score as well as
            test year fixed effects. Missing Outcome Data indicator takes the value of one if total
            absenteeism/disciplinary involvement information is missing in any of the three years
            following the July exam. Disciplinary incidents include any actions involving in-school
            suspension, out-of-school suspension and expulsion. Covariates include indicators for
            gender, race, free/reduced lunch and immigrant status. The outcome in Panel C is
            multiplied by 100 to obtain percent values. Standard errors clustered at the school
            level are in parentheses: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at
            1%.




                                                      41
Table 8: Mechanism - Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Grade Re-
         tention on Dropping Out of School and Juvenile Crime

                                         HS          Drop Out         Juvenile        Juvenile
                                       Attrition     of School       Conviction        Felony
                                          (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)

 Failed July Promotion Cutoff            0.000
                                        (0.011)
 Grade Retention                                      7.171***          0.528          0.335
                                                       (2.334)         (0.811)        (0.492)

 Sample Size                            15,501         12,963           14,728         14,728
  Authors’ estimation of equations (1) and (4) as described in the text. The sample is restricted
  to students who scored within 30 points of one of the cutoffs on the July promotion exams.
  All specifications control for linear splines in index score as well as test year fixed effects.
  Covariates include indicators for gender, race, free/reduced lunch and immigrant status.
  HS Attrition in Column (1) takes the value of one if student left the public school system
  before dropout status is determined. Standard errors clustered at the school level are in
  parentheses: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




       Table 9: The Effect of Grade Retention on Adult Crim-
                inal Convictions, by Age

                                 Age of Adult                Age of Adult
                                  Crime≥19                    Crime≥20
                                     (1)                         (2)

         Panel A: Any Violent Crime Conviction (x100)
         Grade Retention   0.835*            0.673*
                           (0.477)           (0.402)

         Panel B: Any Property Crime Conviction (x100)
         Grade Retention   -0.327            -0.151
                          (0.736)           (0.684)

         Panel C: Any Drug-Related Crime Conviction (x100)
         Grade Retention   0.306             0.269
                          (0.764)           (0.750)

         Sample Size                 14,728                      14,728
            Authors’ estimation of equation (4) as described in the text. The sample
            is restricted to students who scored within 30 points of one of the cutoffs
            on the July promotion exams. All specifications control for linear splines
            in index score as well as test year fixed effects. Covariates include indi-
            cators for gender, race, free/reduced lunch and immigrant status. The
            dependent variable in Column (1) takes the value of one if the individual
            is 19 years old or older at the time of the offense, while in Column (2)
            the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if the individual is 20
            years old or older at the time of the offense. Both outcome variables are
            multiplied by 100 to obtain percent values. Standard errors clustered at
            the school level are in parentheses: * significant at 10%, ** significant
            at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                              42
Table 10: The Effect of Retention on Adult Criminal Convictions Away from the Cutoff

                          Treatment                  Treatment                Treatment                   Treatment
                           Effect on                 Effect on                 Effect on                  Effect on
                         the Treated                the Treated             the Untreated               the Untreated
                      (Extensive Margin)        (Intensive Margin)        (Extensive Margin)         (Intensive Margin)
                              (1)                       (2)                       (3)                        (4)

Panel A: Violent Crime
Grade Retention     1.055***                          0.013***                   0.920***                  0.010***
                     (0.263)                           (0.003)                    (0.283)                   (0.003)

Panel B: Property Crime
Grade Retention     1.423***                          0.017***                   1.481***                  0.017***
                     (0.448)                           (0.005)                    (0.505)                   (0.006)

Panel C: Drug-Related Crime
Grade Retention      1.010                             0.016*                      0.904                    0.014*
                    (0.700)                            (0.009)                    (0.564)                   (0.007)

Sample Size                  14,378                     14,378                    14,378                     14,378
 Authors’ estimation as described in the text. The sample is restricted to students who scored within 30 points of one of the
 cutoffs on the July promotion exams. Average treatment effect estimates are obtained using a linear reweighting estimator.
 Covariates include indicators for gender, race, free/reduced lunch, immigrant status, composite test scores and school fixed
 effects. Outcome variables in Columns (1) and (3) are multiplied by 100 to obtain percent values, while total number
 of adult convictions up to age 25 are used in Columns (2) and (4). Standard errors computed using a nonparametric
 block bootstrap at the school level with 500 replications are in parentheses: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, ***
 significant at 1%.




                                                            43
Online Appendix: Not for Publication




                 44
  Figure A-1: Linear Reweighting Estimates of the Counterfactual-Treatment Effect on the Treated
   Appendix(Extensive
                Figures:Margin)

    Panel A: Violent Crimes                                                                               Panel B: Property Crimes
                        .2




                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                           Probability of Property Crime
       Probability of Violent Crime
                                .15




                                                                                                                                    .15
                    .1




                                                                                                                          .1
        .05




                                                                                                            .05
                        0




                                                                                                                          0
                                           -30   -20   -10          0            10        20   30                                         -30   -20   -10          0            10        20   30
                                                          Distance to July Cutoff                                                                         Distance to July Cutoff

                                                          Fitted            Extrapolated                                                                  Fitted            Extrapolated




    Panel C: Drug-Related Crimes
                        .2
       Probability of Drug-Related Crime
          .05           .1
                        0         .15




                                           -30   -20   -10          0            10        20   30
                                                          Distance to July Cutoff

                                                          Fitted            Extrapolated




Figure
    TheA1:   Linear
        Fitted          Reweighting
               line is the                  Estimates
                           local linear estimate based on of
                                                          thethe  Counterfactual-Treatment
                                                              actual                                 E¤ect
                                                                     data points shown. The Extrapolated line ison
                                                                                                                 thethe  Treated (Exten
                                                                                                                     estimated
      counterfactual using the Angrist and Rokkanen (2015) method described in the text. The difference between the Fitted and
      the Extrapolated is the estimated effect away from the cutoff.
Margin)




                                                                                                     45
   Figure A-2: Linear Reweighting Estimates of the Counterfactual-Treatment Effect on the Un-
               treated (Extensive Margin)


      Panel A: Violent Crimes                                                                                 Panel B: Property Crimes
                        .2




                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                               Probability of Property Crime
       Probability of Violent Crime
                                .15




                                                                                                                                        .15
                    .1




                                                                                                                              .1
        .05




                                                                                                                .05
                        0




                                                                                                                              0
                                           -30   -20   -10          0            10            20   30                                         -30   -20   -10          0            10            20   30
                                                          Distance to July Cutoff                                                                             Distance to July Cutoff

                                                          Extrapolated                Fitted                                                                  Extrapolated                Fitted




    Panel C: Drug-Related Crimes
                        .2
       Probability of Drug-Related Crime
          .05           .1
                        0         .15




                                           -30   -20   -10          0            10            20   30
                                                          Distance to July Cutoff

                                                          Extrapolated                Fitted




Figure
     TheA2:   Linear
         Fitted          Reweighting
                line is the                  Estimates
                            local linear estimate          of actual
                                                  based on the the Counterfactual-Treatment
                                                                     data points shown. The ExtrapolatedE¤ect     onestimated
                                                                                                         line is the  the Untreated (E
      counterfactual using the Angrist and Rokkanen (2015) method described in the text. The difference between the Fitted and
      the Extrapolated is the estimated effect away from the cutoff.
sive Margin)




                                                                                                         46
  Figure A-3: Linear Reweighting Estimates of the Counterfactual-Treatment Effect on the Treated
              (Intensive Margin)

    Panel A: Violent Crimes                                                                                  Panel B: Property Crimes
                            .2




                                                                                                                               .2
                                                                                                              Total Convictions-Property Crime
       Total Convictions-Violent Crime
                                 .15




                                                                                                                                        .15
                      .1




                                                                                                                              .1
          .05




                                                                                                                  .05
                            0




                                                                                                                               0
                                                  -30   -20   -10          0            10        20   30                                        -30   -20   -10          0            10        20   30
                                                                 Distance to July Cutoff                                                                        Distance to July Cutoff

                                                                 Fitted            Extrapolated                                                                 Fitted            Extrapolated




    Panel C: Drug-Related Crimes
                                            .25
       Total Convictions-Drug-Related Crime
           .05       .1     .15
                            0        .2




                                                  -30   -20   -10          0            10        20   30
                                                                 Distance to July Cutoff

                                                                 Fitted            Extrapolated




Figure
    TheA3:
       FittedLinear     Reweighting
              line is the                   Estimates
                          local linear estimate           of actual
                                                based on the the Counterfactual-Treatment
                                                                    data points shown. The ExtrapolatedE¤ect     onestimated
                                                                                                        line is the  the Treated (Int
     counterfactual using the Angrist and Rokkanen (2015) method described in the text. The difference between the Fitted and
     the Extrapolated is the estimated effect away from the cutoff.
Margin)




                                                                                                        47
 Figure A-4: Linear Reweighting Estimates of the Counterfactual-Treatment Effect on the Un-
             treated (Intensive Margin)


      Panel A: Violent Crimes                                                                                    Panel B: Property Crimes
                            .2




                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                  Total Convictions-Property Crime
       Total Convictions-Violent Crime
                                 .15




                                                                                                                                            .15
                      .1




                                                                                                                                  .1
          .05




                                                                                                                      .05
                            0




                                                                                                                                   0
                                                  -30   -20   -10          0            10            20   30                                        -30   -20   -10          0            10            20   30
                                                                 Distance to July Cutoff                                                                            Distance to July Cutoff

                                                                 Extrapolated                Fitted                                                                 Extrapolated                Fitted




    Panel C: Drug-Related Crimes
                                            .25
       Total Convictions-Drug-Related Crime
           .05       .1     .15
                            0        .2




                                                  -30   -20   -10          0            10            20   30
                                                                 Distance to July Cutoff

                                                                 Extrapolated                Fitted




Figure
    The A4:
        FittedLinear
               line is theReweighting        Estimates
                           local linear estimate           ofactual
                                                 based on the the Counterfactual-Treatment
                                                                    data points shown. The Extrapolated E¤ect     onestimated
                                                                                                        line is the    the Untreated (
     counterfactual using the Angrist and Rokkanen (2015) method described in the text. The difference between the Fitted and
     the Extrapolated is the estimated effect away from the cutoff.
sive Margin)




                                                                                                            48
Table A-1: Robustness Checks of Bandwidth and Running Variable Controls - Regres-
           sion Discontinuity Estimates of Grade Retention on the Likelihood of Being
           Convicted of a Crime

                         Local              Linear               Linear             Quadratic          Quadratic
                         Linear             Spline               Spline               Spline            Spline
                      (Index=IK)        Index=[-15,15]       Index=[-45,45]       Index=[-60,60]       (Global)
                          (1)                (2)                  (3)                  (4)               (5)

 Panel A: Convicted of a Violent            Crime (x100)
 Grade Retention   1.033*                   0.807*       1.047**                       1.033*           1.150***
                   (0.582)                  (0.430)       (0.438)                     (0.607)            (0.419)
                  [11,460]                  [9,118]      [18,151]                     [19,967]          [22,929]

 Panel B: Convicted of a Property Crime (x100)
 Grade Retention    0.400        0.276          0.430                                  -0.151             0.330
                   (1.025)      (1.105)        (0.690)                                (0.987)            (0.695)
                  [10,815]      [9,118]       [18,151]                                [19,967]          [22,929]

 Panel C: Convicted of a Drug-Related Crime (x100)
 Grade Retention    -0.194      -0.583          0.831                                  0.262              0.480
                   (1.085)     (1.125)         (0.791)                                (1.023)            (0.795)
                   [9,741]      [9,118]       [18,151]                                [19,967]          [22,929]
  Authors’ estimation as described in the text. All specifications in columns (2)-(5) control for linear or quadratic
  splines in index score using the listed bandwidth. Optimal bandwidths for local linear regression in the first
  column are obtained using the procedures in Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012). All outcome variables are
  multiplied by 100 to obtain percent values. Covariates include indicators for gender, race, free/reduced lunch,
  and immigration status. Sample sizes underlying each specification are shown in brackets. Standard errors in
  parentheses are clustered at the school level: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                        49
Table A-2: Robustness Checks of Bandwidth and Running Variable Controls - Regres-
           sion Discontinuity Estimates of Grade Retention on the Number of Adult
           Crime Convictions

                         Local              Linear               Linear             Quadratic          Quadratic
                         Linear             Spline               Spline               Spline            Spline
                      (Index=IK)        Index=[-15,15]       Index=[-45,45]       Index=[-60,60]       (Global)
                          (1)                (2)                  (3)                  (4)               (5)

 Panel A: Violent Crime
 Grade Retention   0.015**                  0.017*               0.013**              0.017**           0.015***
                    (0.007)                 (0.009)               (0.006)             (0.008)            (0.006)
                   [14,493]                 [9,118]              [18,151]             [19,967]          [22,929]

 Panel B: Property Crime
 Grade Retention    0.001                    -0.002                0.004               -0.008             0.000
                   (0.013)                  (0.014)               (0.008)             (0.012)            (0.009)
                  [10,263]                  [9,118]              [18,151]             [19,967]          [22,929]

 Panel C: Drug-Related Crime
 Grade Retention   -0.009                    -0.009               0.018*               0.007              0.013
                  (0.014)                   (0.014)               (0.010)             (0.013)            (0.010)
                  [9,345]                   [9,118]              [18,151]             [19,967]          [22,929]
  Authors’ estimation as described in the text. All specifications in columns (2)-(5) control for linear or quadratic
  splines in index score using the listed bandwidth. Optimal bandwidths for local linear regression in the first
  column are obtained using the procedures in Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012). Covariates include indicators for
  gender, race, free/reduced lunch, and immigration status. Sample sizes underlying each specification are shown
  in brackets. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the school level: * significant at 10%, ** significant
  at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                        50
Table A-3: Robustness Checks of Sample Composition and Clustering - Re-
           gression Discontinuity Estimates of Grade Retention on the Like-
           lihood of Being Convicted of a Crime

                      Conviction        Drop Hurricane                           Standard Errors
                      at Any Age         Katrina/Rita         Add Baseline       Clustered at the
                       Up to 28            Regions             Test Scores         Index Level
                          (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)

 Panel A: Convicted of a Violent Crime (x100)
 Grade Retention  1.178**        1.397**      1.080**                                 1.052***
                  (0.528)        (0.612)      (0.526)                                  (0.404)

 Panel B: Convicted of a Property Crime (x100)
 Grade Retention    -0.067        -0.499        0.058                                   -0.084
                   (0.876)       (0.973)       (0.850)                                 (0.658)

 Panel C: Convicted of a Drug-Related Crime (x100)
 Grade Retention    0.374        0.730         0.510                                    0.511
                   (0.937)      (0.947)       (0.860)                                  (0.783)

 Sample Size              14,728             10,199               14,378               14,728
  Authors’ estimation as described in the text. All specifications control for linear splines in index
  score with a bandwidth of 30. The dependent variable takes the value of one if a student is convicted
  as an adult by age 25 in columns (2)-(4). In column (1), the dependent variable takes the value of
  one if a student is convicted of a crime up to age 28. The analysis sample in column (2) excludes
  parishes that are known to be most affected from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Column (3) adds
  7th grade composite scores into the specifications. Covariates include indicators for gender, race,
  free/reduced lunch and immigrant status. All outcome variables are multiplied by 100 to obtain
  percent values. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the school level in columns (1)-(3)
  and at the index (running variable) level in column (4): * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%,
  *** significant at 1%.




                                                 51
Table A-4: Robustness Checks of Sample Composition and Clustering - Re-
           gression Discontinuity Estimates of Grade Retention on the Num-
           ber of Adult Crime Convictions

                        Number of          Drop Hurricane                             Standard Errors
                        Convictions         Katrina/Rita          Add Baseline        Clustered at the
                       Up to Age 28           Regions              Test Scores          Index Level
                            (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)

 Panel A: Number of Violent Crime Convictions
 Grade Retention  0.018**       0.020**       0.018**                                     0.017***
                  (0.007)       (0.008)       (0.007)                                      (0.005)

 Panel B: Number of Property Crime Convictions
 Grade Retention   -0.003        -0.009         -0.000                                      -0.003
                  (0.010)       (0.011)        (0.010)                                     (0.008)

 Panel C: Number of Drug-Related Crime Convictions
 Grade Retention   0.010         0.013         0.012                                        0.012
                  (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)                                      (0.012)

 Sample Size               14,728                10,199               14,378                14,728
  Authors’ estimation as described in the text. All specifications control for linear splines in index score
  with a bandwidth of 30. The dependent variable is the number of adult crime convictions by age 25
  in columns (2)-(4). In column (1), the dependent variable is the number of adult convictions up to
  age 28. The analysis sample in column (2) excludes parishes that are known to be most affected from
  Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Column (3) adds 7th grade composite scores into the specifications.
  Covariates include indicators for gender, race, free/reduced lunch and immigrant status. Standard
  errors in parentheses are clustered at the school level in columns (1)-(3) and at the index (running
  variable) level in column (4): * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                   52
                    Table A-5: Conditional Independence Tests

                                          Failed July Cutoff=1             Failed July Cutoff=0
                                        Likelihood     Number            Likelihood     Number
                                         of Being      of Crime           of Being      of Crime
                                        Convicted Convictions            Convicted Convictions
                                            (1)           (2)                (3)           (4)

Panel A: Violent Crimes
Running Variable (Index Score)             -0.016          0.0001           0.010           0.0001
                                          (0.020)         (0.0003)         (0.018)         (0.0002)

Panel B: Property Crimes
Running Variable (Index Score)             -0.025          -0.0003          -0.027          -0.0004
                                          (0.028)         (0.0003)         (0.027)         (0.0003)


Panel C: Drug Related Crimes
Running Variable (Index Score)  -0.021                     -0.0004          -0.004          0.0003
                               (0.028)                    (0.0004)         (0.035)         (0.0005)


Sample Size                                7,873           7,873            6,505            6,505
 Authors’ estimation as described in the text. All specifications control linearly for index score with
 a bandwidth of 30. Estimates use only observations to the left or right of the cutoff as indicated in
 column headings. Covariates include indicators for gender, race, free/reduced lunch, immigrant status,
 composite baseline test scores and school fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at
 the school level: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                   53
Table A-6: Potential Channels - Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Grade Re-
           tention on Education and Crime Outcomes

                          Classified as                           Sentence                Highest
                           Special Ed                              Length                  Grade
                          in Any Year            Age at           Imposed                Attained
                        (Post-July Exam)        Conviction      (# of Months)        (Post-July Exam)
                               (1)                 (2)                (3)                   (4)

 Grade Retention               0.233               0.262              3.042               -0.264***
                              (1.651)             (0.267)            (8.492)               (0.055)

 Mean of Outcome               20.3%               20.83              79.09                  3.02

 Sample Size                  12,745               10,199            14,728                 14,728
  Authors’ estimation of equation (4) described in the text. The sample is restricted to students who scored
  within 30 points of one of the cutoffs on the July promotion exams. All specifications control for linear
  splines in index score as well as test year fixed effects. Covariates include indicators for gender, race,
  free/reduced lunch and immigrant status. Standard errors clustered at the school level are in parentheses:
  * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                   54
