                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SOCIAL PROXIMITY AND BUREAUCRAT PERFORMANCE:
                            EVIDENCE FROM INDIA

                                            Guo Xu
                                       Marianne Bertrand
                                        Robin Burgess

                                      Working Paper 25389
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25389


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2018




This paper has benefited from comments of seminar participants in Northwestern Kellogg,
Uppsala, Columbia GSB, Barcelona Graduate School of Economics Summer Forum, UC
Berkeley, UCDavis (Pacdev), Chicago Harris, the BPP-GEM workshop, the Stanford Quality of
Governance workshop and the ABCDE World Bank conference. We thank Oriana Bandiera, Tim
Besley, Michael Callen, Ernesto Dal Bo, Fred Finan, Olle Folke, Guido Friebel, Saad Gulzar,
Julien Labonne, David Levine, Jan Pierskalla, Andrea Prat, Johanne Rickne, Daniel Rogger, Raul
Sanchez de la Sierra and Noam Yuchtman for their valuable comments. Fraser Clark, Anton Heil,
Rebecca Rose, Jinling Yang and Jiemin Xu provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Guo Xu, Marianne Bertrand, and Robin Burgess. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Proximity and Bureaucrat Performance: Evidence from India
Guo Xu, Marianne Bertrand, and Robin Burgess
NBER Working Paper No. 25389
December 2018
JEL No. J45,O43

                                         ABSTRACT

Using exogenous variation in social proximity generated by an allocation rule, we find that
bureaucrats assigned to their home states are perceived to be more corrupt and less able to
withstand illegitimate political pressure. Despite this, we observe that home officers are more
likely to be promoted in the later stages of their careers. To understand this dissonance between
performance and promotion we show that incoming Chief Ministers preferentially promote home
officers that come from the same home district. Taken together, our results suggest that social
proximity hampers bureaucrat performance by facilitating political capture and corruption.


Guo Xu                                          Robin Burgess
Haas School of Business                         Department of Economics, 32L.3.03
UC Berkeley                                     London School of Economics
guoxu@haas.berkeley.edu                         Houghton Street London WC2A 2AE
                                                United Kingdom
Marianne Bertrand                               r.burgess@lse.ac.uk
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagobooth.edu
1        Introduction
The rise of nation states necessitated the formation of centralized bureaucracies to imple-
ment policies, coordinate economic activities and drive the development process (Evans
1995, Amsden 1989, Evans and Rauch 2000, Wade 1990). This required bureaucrats to
put the national interest above private and local interests and much emphasis was placed
on inculcating this mission of nation building (Weber 1978). Professional bureaucrats were
expected to serve the state, not particular individuals, to separate their private business
from the business of the state, to abide by clearly defined sets of rules and codes, and to
spend their entire careers in the service of the nation. Across history, there has been a shift
from local rulers executing key functions through kin, personal trustees and court-servants
to permanent, professional bureaucracies running nation states. A central objective of such
bureaucracies was to devise systems and rules that reduced the patronage and corruption
that had plagued earlier systems of government (Northcote and Trevelyan 1854, Xu 2018).
        Bureaucrats, however, originate from particular localities which they will have a partic-
ular knowledge of and affinity with. One question that all centralized bureaucracies face
therefore concerns whether bureaucrats should be allowed to serve in the areas they origi-
nate from. This is the question we take up in this paper. We study whether and how social
proximity between bureaucrats and where they work affects their performance. Given that
bureaucrats constitute a key element of state capacity (Besley and Persson 2009, Finan et
al. 2015), how they are allocated within a nation could have ramifications for the patterns
of growth and development (Evans and Rauch 2000, Dal Bo et al. 2013).
        The central tension in this context lies between delegation and control. The admin-
istration of any large organization requires striking a balance between the lack of local
knowledge and the ability to control subordinates (Aghion and Tirole 1997, Alesina and
Tabellini 2007, Alesina and Reich 2015, Dessein 2002, Moe 2012). On the one hand, as-
signing bureaucrats to socially proximate environments might enable them to leverage their
informational advantage to improve performance. On the other hand, this same advantage
might be exploited for private gain or to put local interests above the national interest.
        This tension between exploiting local knowledge and avoiding local capture has been
present throughout history. Roman rulers, for example, appointed local councils but fre-
quently assigned an outside governor to oversee functions like tax collection (Woolf 2012).
The royal officers who forged France into an early nation state were barred from holding
office in their place of birth using the argument that “a paid official sent out by the govern-
ment, who had no power network in the area to which he had been assigned, and, in the way
of a true bureaucrat, owed his income and social status wholly to the central administra-
tion that he represented” was “fanatically loyal to the king” (Cantor 1993, p. 411-412). In
Imperial China a similar “rule of avoidance” prevented district magistrates to serve in their
home districts (Ebrey and Smith, 2016). Similarly, the British Colonial Office considered
candidates for senior civil service positions with “local connexion with the colony by birth,
family ties, or otherwise” as ineligible.1 These rules foreshadowed similar restrictions in
    1
        Colonial Rules & Regulations 1881, Chapter IV, §1, 75.


                                                       2
modern bureaucracies. However, running against this centralizing tide has been a recent
shift back towards localization of public service delivery (World Bank 2004, Bardhan and
Mookherjee 2006, Mansuri and Rao 2013, Mookherjee 2015, Casey 2018, Bandiera et al.
2018). This literature argues that agents recruited from the communities they serve are
higher performing due to the informational advantages they possess. It therefore remains
an open question whether allocating bureaucrats back to the localities from which they
originate will enhance or hamper their performance.
   To look at this issue we exploit variation in social proximity using plausibly exogenous
variation in the assignment of Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officers to their home
states in India. Social proximity, as captured by geographical distance and shared language,
captures key aspects of local information (Fisman et al. 2018, Huang et al. 2017). Assigning
bureaucrats to an area with shared language, culture or values, for example, may increase
performance by allowing them to harness private information and social incentives (Besley
and Ghatak 2018). Social proximity however may also decrease performance as bureaucrats
abuse local networks, engage in corrupt behavior or are captured by local politicians and
vested interests (Ashraf and Bandiera 2017).
   Studying this issue for the IAS is particularly important as the close to 4,000 centrally
recruited officers from this service effectively run India, heading up all government depart-
ments at both the central and state levels. At the beginning of their careers, IAS officers
are allocated for life to an Indian state. Given their importance, the manner in which they
are allocated across the country and whether or not officers are able to return to their home
state could impact the implementation of state-level policies and country-wide patterns of
growth and development (Asher and Novosad 2015, Bertrand et al. 2018).
   Our empirical strategy leverages detailed institutional knowledge of the home state
assignment rule to isolate a source of variation that (i) predicts the allocation to home state
and (ii) is uncorrelated with observable individual background characteristics of the officers.
In balancing the aims of equalizing the quality of administrators across the states of India
whilst affording officers the chance of serving in their home state, the IAS uses a rule-based
mechanism to deploy newly recruited officers to states. While higher ranked officers are
more likely to be assigned to their home state, we exploit the fact that officers are grouped
according to their caste × home state bracket when being ranked in the allocation process.
This implies that officers who are the only candidate in their bracket in a given year of
intake are allocated to their home state with near certainty. Variation in the bracket size,
however, depends on whether officers from the same caste and state passed the competitive
entry exam in the same year. We argue and provide evidence that officers are, conditional
on the selection bracket, as good as randomly assigned to their home state.
   The main finding is that home state allocated officers perform worse than comparable
officers who are allocated to non-home states. Instrumental variable estimates suggest that
officers allocated to their home states are deemed to be more corrupt and less able to
withstand illegitimate political pressure. This effect is primarily driven by the home states
that score higher on measures of corruption. Consistent with this subjective evidence we



                                               3
find that, in the more corrupt Indian states, home-allocated officers are more likely to be
suspended primarily due to having court cases pending against them. We show that the
performance gap between home- and non-home state IAS officers is particularly pronounced
in the later career stages where, we argue, there is more room for patronage and capture of
the bureaucracy by the local political elite.
        We provide corroborating evidence that home officers, especially more senior ones, are
more susceptible to political capture by the political elite by investigating differential pat-
terns of political interference in the careers of IAS officers based on their proximity to
Chief Ministers, the political heads of Indian states. In a high frequency monthly-level
event study, we find that senior home officers are on average reshuffled more frequently, and
more likely to be promoted in the immediate months following the appointment of a new
Chief Minister. Furthermore, this surge in transfers and promotions is magnified for those
home officers who originate from the same home district in the state as the incoming Chief
Minister. The combined results are consistent with social proximity adversely impacting
bureaucrat performance through political favoritism.
        These findings are important as the question of how to allocate talent is central in
organizations. Focusing on the one-off and life-long deployment of officers to states allows
us to isolate bureaucrat-workplace match effects, thus providing novel evidence in a setting
that hitherto primarily focused on the incentivizing role of frequent transfers (Iyer and Mani
2012, Khan et al. 2015, Jia 2015, Xu 2018, Khan et al. 2018), or its disruptive impact on
service delivery (Akthari et al. 2018). By focusing on how to allocate already selected talent,
we complement the literature on the negative selection effects of discretionary public sector
hiring (Brollo et al. 2017, Colonelli et al. 2018, Weaver 2018). Finally, our results also
resonate well with the historical literature which highlights the tension between the need
for local knowledge and the challenge of capture and clientelism in settings ranging from the
administration of Empire to the allocation of modern day civil servants and ambassadors
(Kirk-Greene 2000, Newbury 2003, Greif 2007).
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present data sources
and institutional background, focusing on the allocation rule we exploit as a source of
exogenous variation. Section 3 describes our empirical strategy. Section 4 reports the main
findings on the relationship between bureaucrat performance and home allocation, as well as
heterogeneity in this relationship across Indian states and career stages. Section 5 provides
evidence on the differential patterns of political interference in the transfers and promotions
of home vs. non-home state IAS officers. We conclude in Section 6.


2        Background and data
The Indian Administrative Service (IAS), the successor of the Indian Civil Service (ICS), is
the elite administrative civil service of the Government of India.2 In 2014 the IAS had an
overall strength of around 3,600 centrally recruited officers. These officers are civil service
    2
        See Iyer and Mani (2012) and Bertrand et al. (2018).



                                                       4
leaders, occupying key positions critical for policy implementation. The most senior civil
service positions - the Cabinet Secretary of India, the Chief Secretary of States, heads of
all state and federal government departments - are occupied by IAS officers.
       The recruitment of officers is based on the performance in the Civil Service Exam, which
is annually organized by the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC). Entry into the IAS
is extremely competitive, with several hundred thousand applicants competing for a small
number of spots. In 2015, for example, 465,882 UPSC exam takers faced only 120 IAS slots.
Those who do not qualify for the IAS may obtain positions in less competitive civil service
streams such as the Indian Police Service (IPS), the Indian Forest Service (IFS), the Indian
Revenue Service (IRS) or the state civil services. The highest performing exam takers are
typically offered slots in the IAS. There are quotas for the reserved castes, namely the Other
Backward Castes (OBC), Scheduled Castes (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST). Once selected,
IAS officers are allocated to a state cadre. The assignment to a state is fixed for life,3 and
officers are attached to their state cadre even when serving in Delhi or abroad. After
selection and allocation to a state cadre, IAS officers undergo training at the Lal Bahadur
Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA) and in the states. The two-year
training consists of one year academic training at the LBSNAA (“course work”) and one
year practical training (“district training”). After training, recruits are initially placed in
the district administration (e.g. as district collectors), and are subsequently promoted to
higher level positions. Finally, retirement occurs at 60 years of age for both male and female
officers (58 years before 1998).

2.1      Data
We leverage several datasets for our study. The main dataset on performance indicators and
background characteristics builds on a data collection effort linking administrative records
to a large-scale performance survey we conducted (Bertrand et al. 2018). We add to this
core dataset newly collected data on the spells and background characteristics of Chief
Ministers between 1980-2012. In the following section, we describe the key data used in
our analysis. Detailed information about the data collection and the methodology of the
performance survey can be found in the Appendix C.1.
       Subjective performance ratings. Bertrand et al. (2018) introduce a new framework
to measure the performance of civil servants based on subjective performance ratings. Per-
formance scores were collected for a cross-section of centrally recruited IAS officers working
in the 14 major states of India4 with at least 8 years of tenure. These scores were provided
by a wide range of stakeholders in each state, ranging from IAS officers, state civil servants,
and politicians (MLA) to representatives of media, business and NGOs. Each officer was
scored on a scale of 1 (low) to 5 (high), covering five dimensions of performance: effective-
ness, probity, the ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure, pro-poor orientedness
   3
     The only exception for transfers across states is in the case of marriage to another IAS officer. These
cases, however, have to be approved on a case-by-case basis and are rare.
   4
     These are: Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharash-
tra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.


                                                     5
and overall performance. Overall, the survey covered 1,472 bureaucrats who were serving
in 2012-13 and with at least 8 years of tenure. This corresponds to a coverage rate of 71%.
   Administrative data. We link the survey data on performance with administrative
data from the descriptive rolls, the inter-se-seniority lists and the executive sheets. The
descriptive rolls contain a rich set of individual background characteristics for 5,635 offi-
cers who entered between 1975-2005. Characteristics range from year of birth, their home
state, caste, family background, educational degrees and work experience. The dataset also
contains information about the permanent address of the officers at time of application,
allowing us to identify the home districts of the IAS officers.
   The inter-se-seniority lists cover 4,107 officers from 1972-2009. This dataset provides
information about the allocation of officers to states as well as their scores on the entry
exam, training course and overall rank. Finally, the executive record sheets cover the
postings of 10,817 IAS officers who entered between 1949-2014. These records contain
detailed information about postings and payscales, allowing us to track the progression of
IAS officers over time. After linking all administrative sources, the dataset covers up to
1,888 IAS officers who entered between 1976-2005.
   Chief Minister data. We obtain information on the Chief Minister terms for all states
in the period between 1980-2010. For each of the 132 Chief Ministers, we collect information
about their birth location, district and, if available, caste. To collect this information, we
consulted printed biographies and searched through newspaper articles. Given the seniority
of these politicians, the information is readily available.
   Table 1 reports the mean and standard deviation of the performance scores. The sample
sizes range from N = 15, 153 for the probity measure to N = 17, 753 for the effectiveness
measure. The number of complete assessments across all dimensions is N = 14, 037. We
were able to elicit scores for about 71% of all IAS officers in our sample. All dimensions are
correlated, with the highest correlation being between pro-poor orientation and the ability
to withstand illegitimate political pressure.
   Table 2 compares the average individual characteristics of officers who are allocated to
their home state vs. those who are not. The sample comprises all IAS officers who entered
between 1975-2005. The table compares both the raw average (Column 3) and the average
difference within each year of intake (Column 4). In accordance with the merit-based home
state allocation (see next section for a detailed description), home state-allocated officers
tend to rank, on average, higher. Within a given intake, officers who receive their home state
rank on average 15 positions higher than those who do not. The non-random allocation
for home state-officers also translates into significant differences on other margins: home
state-allocated officers are, on average, less likely to be from the Other Backward Castes and
more likely from Scheduled Castes. More generally, a joint hypothesis test rejects the null
that home state-allocated officers are, on average, comparable to non-home state officers.




                                                6
2.2    Allocation rule
We describe the rule governing the allocation of IAS officers to state cadres in detail as this
will generate the critical source of variation for our analysis.5 We focus on the allocation
rule that has been in place throughout the cohorts 1984-2005.6 The allocation follows a
strict rule-based procedure. After entering the IAS following the nation-wide entry exams
administered by the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC), the centrally recruited
officers are allocated to 24 cadres. These cadres typically map directly into the Indian
states.7 The allocation process can be divided into three steps. In the first step, IAS
applicants are asked to declare their preference to remain in their home state (referred
to as insider preference). In the second step, the overall number of vacancies and the
corresponding quotas for castes and insiders are determined. In the final step, vacancies
and officers are matched in the actual allocation process.
    Step 1. IAS officers declare their preference to remain in their state of residence. Since
the allocation to a cadre is life-long and the home preference the only margin of cadre
choice, nearly all IAS officers exercise the option to remain in their home state.8 For the
2006 intake, for example, 87 out of the 89 recruited officers declared a home state preference.
The declared preference however does not guarantee the actual allocation as the assignment
depends on the availability of vacancies.
    Step 2. The total number of vacancies is determined by the state government in
conjunction with the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT). Typically, the overall
number of vacancies in a given year depend on the shortfall from the total number of
IAS officers designated to a state - the cadre strength.9 This cadre strength is defined by
the “cadre strength fixation rules”, which reserves more IAS officers for the larger states.
These rules are seldom revised so the designated state cadre strength is fixed over longer
periods. The vacancies are then broken down by quotas on two dimensions: caste and home
preference. There are three categories for castes: General (unreserved) caste, Scheduled
Caste/Tribes (SC/ST) and Other Backward Castes (OBC). The designation of vacancies to
these caste categories are made based on predefined national quotas. The actual assignment
of each vacancy to a caste is randomized using a rotating roster. In terms of preferences,
vacancies are broken down into “insider” and “outsider” vacancies. Insider vacancies are to
be filled by IAS officers from the same state who declared their home state preference at
   5
     The exact documentation can be found in the IAS guidelines. Refer to the original official notifications:
13013/2/2010-AIS-I, 29062/1/2011-AIS-I and 13011/22/2005-AIS-I published in the Department of Person-
nel and Training, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Government of India. Note that
we describe the dominant allocation rule in our study period 1976-2005. The rule was reformed in 2008.
   6
     Between 1978-1984, officers were allowed to also declare preferred “zones” (i.e. groups of states) for
the outsider allocation (the “Limited Zonal Preference System”). After 2008 (and thus beyond our study
period), officers were allowed to declare their preferences beyond a home state allocation by ranking the
states in their preferred order (the “Merit-cum-preference system”).
   7
     Smaller states, however, are grouped into three joint cadres, which are Assam-Meghalaya, Manipur-
Tripura and AGMUT (Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Mizoram and Union Territories (Delhi). We did not survey
states with pooled cadres due to logistical constraints.
   8
     Not declaring home preference opens the possibility to be allocated to any other state (See Step 3).
   9
     We find no evidence for selective sorting in response to variation in vacancies (Appendix Table B1).
Given the competitiveness of the entry into the IAS, strategic concerns of exam participation are negligible.



                                                      7
time of application. The ratio of insider to outsider vacancies is 1:2, with the assignment of
vacancies to “insider” or “outsider” category following the repeating sequence O-I-O. The
determination of vacancies is shown in Appendix Figure A1. The result of this procedure
is a list denoting the number of vacancies for each state and the corresponding quotas by
caste (GEN/SC/ST/OBC) and home state (Appendix Figure A2).
         Step 3. The final allocation process is based on merit as determined by the ranking in
the UPSC entry exam, the vacancies available and the home preference declared. Before
the officers are allocated, the candidates are ranked and assigned a serial number in the
order of merit, as determined by the UPSC entry exam. Appendix Figure A3 shows this
ranking along with the officers’ caste and home preference. The highest scoring candidate
for the 2006 intake, for example, belongs to the OBC category and indicated a preference
to be assigned to the home state of Andhra Pradesh.
         Home state assignment. The insider vacancies are allocated as far as exact matches
along caste and home state preference (the allocation “bracket”) permit. If the number of
matches exceed the vacancies, the higher ranking IAS officer is given preference. Since the
exact match along caste and home state is required for slotting, however, many insider va-
cancies typically remain unfilled. In this case, the caste requirement is successively relaxed,
eventually opening to outsiders.10
         Non-home state assignment. The allocation of the “outsiders” and those who failed
to be allocated to their preferred home state (and are consequently converted to outsiders)
is done according to a rotating roster system. In a nutshell, the rotating roster is designed
to ensure that each state receives, on average, candidates of similar quality across years.11
         The critical feature for our empirical strategy is that home state officers are grouped and
ranked within caste × home state brackets in each year of intake. The size of the bracket
will vary across years depending on how many candidates from the same home state and
caste pass the entry exam. This is the identifying source of variation we exploit. While
the allocation rule for outsiders saw minor adjustments over time, this feature of the home
state allocation has remained constant throughout the cohorts we study.


3         Empirical strategy
The key empirical challenge to estimating the causal effect of home state allocations is
that the assignment of IAS candidates to home cadres is, unlike the overall assignment
rule, non-random. Indeed, under the allocation rule outlined above, higher ranked IAS
officers are given priority in their declared preference to be allocated to their home state.
As higher ranked officers are prioritized for their home state allocation (Bhavnani and Lee
2018), a simple comparison between home state vs. non-home state officers is likely to yield
upwardly biased estimates of the effect of home allocation on bureaucratic performance.
We therefore need an instrument that predicts the likelihood of an officer receiving a home
state allocation, but that is otherwise not correlated with the outcomes of interest.
    10
         The details are not directly relevant to the identification strategy and thus discussed in Appendix B.2.
    11
         The exact details are not directly relevant for our identification strategy and we refer to Appendix B.3.


                                                          8
       Our empirical strategy exploits knowledge of the rule-based home state allocation: we
argue that home state allocation is, conditional on the allocation rule, as good as randomly
assigned. Specifically, we predict home state allocation using the fact that the ranking of
IAS officers for home state allocation occurs within pre-defined brackets. Instead of giving
officers priority in their home state preference in descending order of their overall rank,
officers are ranked within “brackets” based on their year of intake, home state and caste
(e.g. 2015-Gujarat-OBC). Depending on corresponding vacancies, officers are then slotted
in descending order of rank within their bracket.
       One key implication of this rule is that there will be variation in the number of officers
who are competing for home state allocations in the same bracket over time. To illustrate
this, Figure 1 plots the number of home state allocations and the number of candidates
for the Uttar Pradesh-Scheduled Caste/Tribe bracket for different years of intake. As the
figure first shows, of course, home state allocations never occur in years when there is no
Scheduled Caste/Tribe candidate from Uttar Pradesh. More importantly, it is apparent
from the figure that whether or not an IAS officer gets assigned to his or her home state is
(mechanically) negatively correlated to the total number of officers in the same bracket.
       More generally, Figure 2 plots the probability of a home state allocation for a given
officer as a function of the number of candidates in the same bracket relative to being a
single candidate. Compared to a single candidate, having another candidate in the same
bracket decreases the probability of a home state allocation by 16% points. The probability
is 54% points lower when facing more than 8 other candidates. As the histogram shows,
however, most of the variation in the number of candidates occurs between a single and
two candidates. 42% of the allocation brackets comprise only a single candidate, and 21%
contain two candidates. Only 9.6% of the brackets contain more than 8 candidates.12
       In light of this, we propose to predict home state allocation using a dummy that equals 1
if the officer is the only candidate in his or her year of intake-home state and caste bracket,
0 otherwise. This captures not only the most relevant margin of variation but is also the
cleanest case: provided a vacancy is available, a single candidate IAS officer who indicated
a home preference will surely be allocated to the home state. The main results, however,
also hold up using the total number of candidates in the bracket as an instrument.
       It is important to stress that whether or not a given officer is the single candidate in
their bracket is exogenous: it depends solely on whether someone else from the same caste
and the same home state in the very same year qualified for the IAS, which itself depends
solely on the results of the Civil Service Exam. To formally test this, Table 3 compares
individual characteristics of IAS officers who are single candidates vs. those who face
multiple candidates for the intake years 1975-2005. While there remain average differences
in the raw comparison, these differences vanish once we compare within the year of intake
and within the same home state-caste bracket (Column 4). Once we control for the exact
allocation rule, officers who are single candidate vs. multiple candidates are by and large
on average comparable on observables. The only statistically significant difference is on
  12
    These brackets are located in large states such as Uttar Pradesh. The overall share of only candidates
does not vary significantly across state population, development or corruption levels (Appendix Table B2).


                                                    9
gender. Our results, however, also hold when confining the sample to only male IAS officers
(which comprise 86% of the officers in our sample). We cannot reject the joint equality of
means along the rich set of individual characteristics.
    More formally, we predict the home allocation for individual i as follows:


                         homei = β × onlyK(i)T (i) + δ 0 xi + νK(i) + δ T (i) + εi                             (1)

where homei = 1 if the officer i is allocated to the home state. The dummy onlyK(i)T (i) = 1
if the officer was the only candidate in the caste-home state cell k = K(i) in the intake year
t = T (i). νK(i) are fixed effects for the allocation "bracket" (caste (GEN, OBC, SC/ST) ×
home state) and δT (i) are intake year fixed effects (1975-2005). xi are additional controls
for individual characteristics: they include the UPSC entry exam rank FEs, gender, as well
as educational and career backgrounds. These are a dummy that is 1 if the officer studied
a STEM or Economics degree, a dummy if the officer received an academic distinction,
and dummies for the previous types of jobs the officer held before entering the IAS (edu-
cation/research, finance/banking, private/SOE, public, public AIS). εi , the error term, is
clustered at the home state-caste-intake level - the level at which the instrument varies.
    Table 4 reports the estimates for equation (1). Controlling for intake year fixed effects
and caste-home state fixed effects, officers who are the single candidate in their home state-
caste bracket are 22.8% points more likely to be allocated to the home state (Column 1).
The coefficient remains stable when holding constant the overall rank of the candidate
(Column 2) and controlling for a rich set of individual characteristics (Column 3). The first
stage is strong: compared to the mean of the dependent variable (0.277), being an only
candidate increases the probability of a home state allocation by 90%. Finally, Column 4
conducts a placebo exercise by using variation in the officer’s corresponding home state-caste
bracket size in the two previous and future intake years. This exercise is also summarized
in Figure 3, which plots the estimated coefficients for the impact of being an only candidate
for two periods around an officer’s year of intake. As the figure shows, it is only the
contemporaneous bracket size that determines the propensity of a home state allocation.
The estimates for the leads and lags are close to zero and statistically insignificant. Given
the exogenous nature of the variation in being a single candidate, the inclusion of a rich set
of individual-level controls leaves the point estimates nearly unchanged. Overall, the results
in Tables 3, 4 and Figure 3 lend support to the validity of the instrument, providing evidence
for both a first-stage and balance across a rich set of observable individual characteristics.
    Having established the first-stage, Table 5 shows that home state assignments indeed
increase social proximity. As expected, home state allocated officers are more likely to
serve closer to their home district, as measured by the distance (in miles) between the
allocated state’s administrative capital and the officer’s home district headquarter.13 The
instrumental variable estimate, for example, suggests that the home district of officers
  13
     In India, each district’s administrative capital is referred to as the district headquarter. This is typically
the city with the largest population after which the district is named. We use the vincenty distance when
computing the distance between two locations.




                                                        10
allocated to their home states lie, on average, 495 miles closer to the state’s administrative
capital (Column 1, Panel B). This is an important metric as officers serve a majority of
their later career assignments in the state capital. Geographic proximity is also highly
correlated with social proximity (Huang et al. 2017). Indeed, as shown in Table 5, Panel B,
Column 2, officers allocated to their home states are also 83% points more likely to speak
the allocated state’s first language as their native language. Boasting 23 official languages,
there is substantial variation in the first languages spoken across India. Linguistic proximity
is thus an important measure of social proximity. Finally, Column 3 computes the distance
between the home district of IAS officers and serving Chief Ministers in 2012. Since nearly
all Chief Ministers originate from the state they serve, home state allocated officers are also
significantly more likely to be closer to the Chief Ministers’ home district. The results thus
consistently confirm the role of home allocations in increasing social proximity.


4     Home state allocation and performance
4.1   Main results
We estimate the effect of home state allocation by comparing officers who enter the IAS as
the single candidate in their home state × caste bracket to officers who enter with multiple
peers from the same state and caste. We estimate for officer i rated by respondent j,

                                                   0
                yij = β × home
                           d i (only
                                    K(i)T (i) ) + δ xi + θj + νK(i) + δT (i) + εij           (2)

where yij is the performance score of the officer by survey respondent j in 2012-13. We
instrument home state allocation using a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer is the only
candidate in the home state-caste bracket in that intake year, and 0 otherwise. As before,
xi is the rich set of individual-level controls as discussed in Section 3. θj is a respondent
fixed effect, νK(i) is the fixed effect for the allocation “bracket” (caste × home state), δT (i)
are intake year fixed effects and εij is the error term which we cluster at the intake year-
home state-caste level - the level at which the instrument varies - and the individual-level
i - as a single officer is rated by several respondents.
    The key parameter of interest is β, which captures the performance difference between
a home state vs. non-home state officer. Equation (2) makes precise where the identifying
variation is coming from. Intuitively, we compare the perceived performance of officers who
are single candidates in their allocation bracket to those who are not, conditional on the
selection rule, as implemented using the νK(i) fixed effects. Holding the caste × home state
bracket constant, the identifying assumption is that variation in being a single candidate
(or not) in the allocation bracket at entry into IAS across different years of intake does not
directly affect performance other than through the home state allocation rule.
    Table 6 presents the performance results. Panel A reports the OLS estimates while Panel
B reports the IV estimates. All columns use the same specification, except that we vary
the dependent variable to span the five dimensions of bureaucrat performance collected in
our subjective performance survey. While OLS estimates suggest that home state-allocated

                                               11
officers perform, if anything, better than non-home state officers, the IV estimates yield
consistently negative effects. This pattern can be rationalized in light of our discussion
of the home state allocation rule and the evidence in Table 2, which led us to expect
that the OLS estimates would be upward-biased. In terms of point estimates, home state
allocated officers are perceived to perform worse on all margins. Most importantly, home
state-allocated officers are perceived to be statistically significantly less able to withstand
illegitimate political pressure and more likely to be corrupt. The magnitudes are large.
For the inability to withstand illegitimate political pressure, the effect represents an 11%
decline when evaluated against the mean of the dependent variable. Finally, Figure 4
provides visual evidence for this effect. Mirroring the visual evidence in Figure 3, we
find that leads and lags in being the only candidate does not affect the perceived ability
to withstand illegitimate political pressure.14 The contemporaneous impact of being an
only candidate, coinciding with the higher propensity of home state allocation in Figure
3, however, is negative. As before, given the plausibly exogenous variation in entering
as the only candidate in a selection bracket, the inclusion of a rich set of individual-level
controls does not substantially affect the point estimates. These results suggest that social
proximity, as measured by home allocation, negatively impacts bureaucratic performance.
       These results are robust to changes in specification and subsamples. To ensure that
the results are not only driven by the local variation in moving from single to multiple
candidate brackets, we also confirm the robustness of the results when using the total
number of candidates in a selection bracket to instrument for the likelihood of a home state
allocation (Appendix Table B4). The results are also robust when dropping the pre-1984
intakes, where the allocation rule for “outsiders” differed slightly from the 1984-2008 rule.
In addition, a potential concern with subjective measures is that these may not reflect
objective performance. If respondents perceive home state officers to be more corrupt or
have a higher “bar” in assessing their performance, the results may merely reflect bias
and not actual performance differences. We assessed the possibility of bias by conducting
the following robustness check: if the results reflect biased perceptions, we may expect
the negative effects to be primarily driven by those who did not directly interact with the
officer. The results in Appendix Table B5, however, suggest that the negative gap is driven
by those who have directly interacted with the given IAS officer. When breaking down the
result by stakeholder, we find that the negative gap is driven by reports from colleagues of
home state officers. That said, we find notable differences across stakeholder groups: while
IAS officers and their colleagues in the state civil service perceive home state officers to be
unable to withstand illegitimate political pressure, politicians (MLA) themselves disagree,
reporting a higher score on the ability to withstand pressure (Appendix Table B6). We find
no evidence that the perceptions of home state officers are less noisy, as measured by the
standard deviation of the subjective performance scores provided for a given officer across
different respondents (Appendix Table B7).15
  14
    Appendix Figure A5 shows the same results for all performance dimensions.
  15
    The sample size declines as we require the same respondent to be rated by two different respondents in
order to compute the standard deviation.



                                                   12
4.2      State-level heterogeneity and suspensions
Our results so far suggest that officers allocated to their home states are deemed to be more
corrupt and less able to withstand illegitimate political pressure than officers who are allo-
cated to other states. As we discussed earlier, there are competing views about the possible
effects of social proximity on bureaucratic performance. Greater social proximity means
that bureaucrats have more information about the local context, and find it easier to com-
municate with the citizens they are serving. Better information and lower communication
costs may thus improve bureaucratic performance. Moreover, local bureaucrats may simply
care more about helping the communities they are representing due to the personal ties they
have to these communities. On the other hand, local officers may be more susceptible to
capture by the political elite. Their deeper personal networks in the community they serve
may also provide more opportunities for bribe taking as well as a more efficient technology
for bribe extraction. We therefore explore several sources of heterogeneity to shed light on
the mechanisms underlying the effects.
      If a home state allocation increases bureaucratic corruption and reduces the ability of
bureaucrats to withstand illegitimate political pressure, we may expect these effects to be
larger in states with weaker institutions, e.g. states where bureaucrats and politicians may
have more discretion to bend the rules for their private benefits. To test this, Figure 5 breaks
down the effect for the ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure by state to study
the heterogeneity across India.16 We focus on reduced forms as the corresponding first-
stages are weaker due to the finer bins arising from having to estimate state-specific home
state effects. We observe substantial heterogeneity across states: the negative home state
effect is largest in Karnataka, Bihar, and Gujarat. Karnataka and Bihar are consistently
ranked among the most corrupt regions of India. In contrast, this negative effect is close to
zero or even reverted in Punjab, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh. To understand whether
the observed state-level heterogeneity is systematically related to measures of corruption
and development, Table 7 allows the impact to vary by the average state-level corruption,
as measured by the Transparency International Index used in Fisman et al. (2014), and the
Human Development Index in 2007. Table 7 confirms the visual evidence. The negative
effect on the ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure is driven by the states
that score higher on the TI corruption index (Column 1). We also include the interaction
with the human development index to assess whether the corruption measure is picking
up cross-state differences in economic development. While we cannot rule out unobservable
correlates, the role of corruption in magnifying the negative impact of home state allocations
is strikingly persistent even after holding constant differences in development (Column 3).
These results are consistent across all subjective performance measures (Appendix Table
B8). For succinctness, we summarize this in Column 4 by presenting the results using an
index derived from averaging across all performance dimensions.
      Finally, we revisit the concern that subjective performance measures may not adequately
capture actual performance. For example, respondents in corrupt states may be biased
 16
      For completeness, Appendix Figure A6 shows the results for all dimensions of performance.


                                                    13
towards expecting home officers to be more corrupt. To ensure that the results indeed reflect
tangible performance differences, we turn our attention to direct evidence. In the remaining
Columns 5-6 of Table 7, we leverage the executive record sheets to extend the cross-section
into an individual-year panel 1980-2011. We focus on suspensions as the key measure of
corrupt behavior and non-performance. As described in Bertrand et al. (2018), suspensions
are rare and extreme outcomes, with the unconditional suspension rate only 0.8%. Most
suspensions involve corruption scandals, with court cases pending against the officers. As
Appendix Table B3 also shows, both contemporaneous and past suspensions are negatively
correlated with our subjective measures of performance. While home state officers are not
differentially likely to be suspended on average (the TI corruption index is centered around
the sample mean), their suspension probability increases significantly in states that score
higher on the corruption index. An increase in the state-level corruption index by 1 SD
increases the differential suspension rate for home state officers by 0.4% points (Column 5).
Finally, Column 6 interacts the instrument with the state-level HDI. The results remain
robust using suspensions as a direct measure of performance, thus alleviating concerns that
the main results are driven by subjective biases.

4.3      Individual-level heterogeneity and career dynamics
We move from state-level heterogeneity to exploring individual-level heterogeneity. We are
interested in how the career dynamics between home vs. non-home officers unfolds. As
Figure 6 shows, during the first part of the career (up to 16 years), promotions (and hence
payscales) in the IAS are primarily mechanically determined by the years of service. In the
later part of their careers, however, delays in promotions are more frequent, with senior
positions becoming increasingly thinner. At the same time, a merit based component is
introduced through review committees. The combination of promotion delays and subjec-
tivity in assessment thus opens room for greater discretion in the selection process.
       To study individual-level heterogeneity across career stages, we flexibly estimate the re-
duced form home state effect (comparing only vs. multiple candidate brackets) by seniority.
We do so by binning the years of tenure into the seniority groups associated with each of the
seven payscales. Specifically, we split the overall tenure period into seven bins that mirror
the time-based payscale progression: 1-3 years (Payscale 1), 4-8 years (Payscale 2), 9-12
years (Payscale 3), 13-15 years (Payscale 4), 16-24 years (Payscale 5), 25-29 years (Payscale
6), and more than 30 years (Payscale 7).
       The resulting estimates are shown in Figure 7, Panel A. The figure shows the cross-
sectional relationship between the ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure and
the years into the IAS.17 The estimates are derived from an augmented specification of
(2) where we allow the reduced form effect of home allocations to vary by the payscale
bins. The negative performance difference between home-allocated officers vs. non-home
officers increases with seniority. The performance difference is negative through most of the
  17
    These results are also reported in Appendix Table B9 in regression form. Appendix Figure A7 shows
the results by seniority for all subjective performance measures.



                                                 14
payscales and drops markedly after a brief uptick in the fifth payscale, which corresponds
to 16-25 years of tenure. The negative effect is largest towards the end of the career, where
IAS officers compete over promotions to the highest payscale.18
    Of course, a limitation in the cross-sectional setting is that we cannot separately iden-
tify seniority from cohort effects. We can address such concerns by leveraging panel data
from the personnel records and revisiting suspensions as an alternative measure of (non)-
performance. Figure 7, Panel B shows the differential suspension probability between home
vs. non-home officers (in reduced form) by seniority. Despite the small number of suspen-
sion events, the observed pattern is consistent with the cross-sectional result: while there
is almost no difference in suspension rates for the bulk of the career, home officers are sub-
stantially more likely to be suspended than non-home officers in the highest payscale (after
more than 30 years of tenure). Given the low number of overall suspensions, however, the
estimate is noisy and statistically insignificant.
    We complement our subjective performance and suspension measures with another mea-
sure of career performance: serving in Delhi. IAS officers can be empaneled to serve in Delhi
at the additional secretary, joint secretary and secretary-level. Allowing IAS officers to serve
in Delhi is meant to create national cohesion and maintain the connection between the fed-
eral and state-level administration. Since the assignment of officers to states is fixed for life,
moving to Delhi is one of the few channels through which officers can leave their assigned
state.19 Delhi postings require a performance review, are prestigious and therefore viewed
as gauges of how well an officer is doing within the service (Iyer and Mani 2012, Ferguson
and Hasan 2013). Since all officers go through the review process but officers can choose to
take up a Delhi posting if selected, the “in Delhi” is a combined measure of performance
and attachment to the allocated state. As Figure 7, Panel C shows, home state officers are
less likely to serve in Delhi throughout their career. As for the case of performance in the
prior two panels, the gap opens up over time and is largest in the highest payscale.
    Finally, in Panel D of Figure 7, we plot the gap in the payscales of home vs. non-home
officers throughout the different payscale bins. Remarkably, despite their lower performance,
as measured by the subjective performance scores, the higher suspension rate and the lower
likelihood of empanelment to Delhi, home state officers tend to be promoted at a higher
rate than non-home officers in the same stage of their career. The gap opens up as the time-
based promotion becomes less binding due to the delays at higher levels, and is largest for
those who served more than 30 years. This negative correlation between the performance
and promotion differences across payscales is striking: the promotion gap between home vs.
non-home officers is highest in career stages where the negative performance difference is
largest. The correlation between the promotion and performance gap, for example, is -0.86;
the correlation between promotions and suspensions is 0.87.
    The sharp contrast between Panels A, B, C and Panel D of Figure 7 is remarkable.
  18
     The negative main effects in Table 6 are not driven by the last payscale. There remains a large and
statistically significant negative difference when dropping the 285 officers with more than 30 years of tenure.
  19
     IAS officers can also request to serve on temporary deputations in other states. Permanent moves are
only possible for marriages to another IAS officer. These cases are rare and approved on a case-by-case basis.



                                                      15
One way to interpret this contrast is by considering two paths for IAS officers. One path
emphasizes performance, probity and national service while the second path emphasizes
local embeddedness, personal gain and state service. The combined evidence in Figure 7
would then suggest that home officers are more likely to go down the latter path. Indeed,
home officers perform worse on the subjective and objective performance metrics but are
nonetheless favored with earlier promotion. These home officers also are more likely to
remain in their home state rather than move to the central government, either because of
(negative) performance or due to the greater benefits in remaining in their home state.
    It is striking that these gaps between home and non-home officers are particularly large
in those later career stages where one expects the role of discretion in the promotion of
IAS officers to be more pronounced. This added discretion in the later career stages may
open room for patronage and capture by the local political elite. The combined patterns
in Figure 7 could hence be viewed as a reflection of home officers being more susceptible to
this capture. We conclude the paper by providing corroborating evidence that supports this
interpretation. In particular, we focus on the interaction between IAS officers and Chief
Ministers to investigate differential patterns of political interference.


5    Home state allocation and political turnover
At independence, India adopted the Whitehall model of bureaucracy, which emphasizes the
need for the separation between the polity and the bureaucracy, particularly as regards to
non-interference of politicians in the postings of bureaucrats. In this model, “civil servants
would not be moved or replaced after a change of government, and new ministers would
nearly always be expected to work with the officials inherited from their predecessor - even
if he or she was from a different political party.” “Politicians would be allowed almost no
appointments or patronage” with “decisions on professional advancement being made by
other civil servants, not by politicians” (Wilson and Barker 1995, p. 131). However, as Iyer
and Mani (2012) already demonstrated, there is evidence of de facto political interference
in the Indian bureaucracy, with political turnover in a state coinciding with increased re-
allocation of IAS officers across job postings.
    We extend these earlier results and assess if these patterns of political interference are
more pronounced for home versus non-home officers, and if within-state proximity between
an incoming or outgoing Chief Minister and an IAS officer - as measured by both individuals
coming from the same home district - affects the probability of officers being transferred,
promoted or demoted. To study this, we exploit the frequent turnovers of Chief Ministers
following state elections, which are asynchronous and occur in five-year intervals in India.
We move beyond the yearly panel used in Section 4.2 to construct a high frequency monthly
balanced panel of IAS officers whom we observe for a six-month window around the month
of a Chief Minister appointment. The resulting dataset contains 192 turnovers for 1,785
officers. These correspond to 11,410 IAS officer-turnover events.




                                               16
5.1   Chief Minister turnover, transfers and promotions by seniority
We first use a simple event study design to see how transfer and promotion rates change
in the months around the Chief Minister transition. We estimate for the IAS officer i, the
Chief Minister transition j and the month around the transition t,


                         yijt = Σ6k=−6 βk 1[t = k] + θij + τm(t) + εijt                  (3)

where t = 0 denotes the month of the Chief Minister transition and t = {−6, −5, ...5, 6} de-
notes the months around the turnover event. Since six-month windows might overlap when
a state experiences several Chief Minister turnovers in short succession, we create balanced
individual-month panels for each Chief Minister transition by “stacking” the individual-
turnover events. Since the stacking implies that there might be “duplicate” individuals for
overlapping turnover windows, we only exploit within individual officer × turnover event
window variation, as implemented using the θij fixed effects. τM (j,t) is the year-month
fixed effect, where m = M (j, t) returns the year-month of the transition event j at time t.
The βk dummies estimate averages for each of the months around the promotion window
k = {−6, −5...5, 6}. The reference month is the month before the actual turnover, t − 1.
   The result is summarized in Figure 8 for transfers and promotions. The transfer rate
surges in the immediate months of the Chief Minister transition. This also coincides with
a surge in the promotion rate. To assess the magnitude of the overall transfer surge more
precisely, we code a dummy that is 1 in the month of and month after the Chief Minister
is appointed (the dummy is 1 for t = {0, 1}). The results are reported in Table 8. In the
first two months of a Chief Minister appointment, the transfer probability is 2.5% points
higher than in other months (Column 1). Relative to the mean transfer rate of 12.6%, this
corresponds to an increase of 20%. This surge is consistent with political interference: in
Column 2, we allow the impact of a new Chief Minister appointment to vary by whether the
turnover coincided with a change in the political party or a change in the Chief Minister.
The result suggests that the surge in transfers is driven by political party turnover (Column
2). In Column 3, we include senior as a dummy that is 1 if the officer has served for
at least 16 years in the IAS. Officers who have served for at least 16 years belong to
the “supertime scale” and occupy executive positions at the top of the bureaucracy; this
experience threshold also roughly coincides with the median years of experience among
active officers. As Column 3 shows, the increase in transfer after political turnover is more
pronounced among senior officers.
   In the remaining columns of Table 8, we assess how these patterns differ between home
and non-home officers. For these more demanding triple interactions, we replace the θij
fixed effects with the same rich set of controls as in specification (2). As Table 8, Column
4 shows, the higher transfer rate among senior officers is even more pronounced when these
officers are from the state, as captured using the instrument in reduced form. Senior home
officers are on average reshuffled more frequently, but even more so when the Chief Minister
turns over. Junior home state officers, in contrast, are reshuffled less when a new Chief
Minister arrives. These patterns are further shown in Figure 9, where we flexibly estimate

                                              17
the differential transfer rate at the time of a new Chief Minister appointment by the years
in the IAS. While home state officers see slightly lower transfer rates during a political
transition in the junior career stages, the pattern reverses significantly in the senior stages.
       Most importantly, the higher transfers also coincide with greater promotions for senior
home state officers (Table 8, Column 5). Senior home state officers are more likely to be
promoted in the immediate months of a Chief Minister appointment. These senior levels
correspond to the career stages where promotions become less time-based (Figure 6) and
delays in promotions become more prevalent. As shown in Column 5, these also appear to
be the career stages when home state officers have an edge as a new political leader comes
in. Finally, Column 6 of Table 8 shows that the patterns in Column 5 are not mechanically
related to the higher odds for home state officers to still be in the state (rather than Delhi
- see Panel C of Figure 7) in those later career stages.

5.2      Within-state analysis: home district proximity and promotions
Our analysis so far has been confined to the comparison between home state and non-home
state officers. Since most Chief Ministers hail from the state they serve, the implicit premise
of the event study has been that home state-allocated officers are more likely to be connected
to the Chief Minister than non-home officers. Given the sheer size of many Indian states,
however, such a broad measure of social proximity might mask substantial heterogeneity.
       We thus conclude our analysis by exploiting within-home state variation in social prox-
imity. Indeed, existing work has demonstrated that home district favoritism is an important
determinant for resource allocation (Do et al. 2017, Fisman et al. 2017). We leverage our
descriptive rolls, which allow us to identify the home districts of all IAS officers. We also
read through biographies and public records to identify the home districts of all 132 Chief
Ministers in our study period 1980-2011. Combining both data sources allows us to derive
a measure of home district proximity between the bureaucrat and the politician that varies
both among bureaucrats from the home state and across time depending on which Chief
Minister is in power. The key identifying variation stems from the fact that the same home
state-allocated officer will face different Chief Ministers throughout his or her career: some
Chief Ministers will originate from the same home district within the state while others
will come from further away home districts. Since geographical distance is correlated with
a host of socioeconomic distances, we use the physical distance between the home district
of the Chief Minister and the home district of the home state-allocated IAS officer as a
within state measure of social proximity.20 Intuitively, we ask whether promotion patterns
differ among home officers who originate from the same home district as the incoming Chief
Minister versus home officers who do not gain a home district tie with the incoming Chief
Minister. We implement this test by augmenting the event study (3), allowing the main
  20
    We geocode district locations using the Google Maps API based on each district’s headquarter. Of
course, home state officers are mechanically more likely to originate from closer to the Chief Minister’s home
district throughout their career than non-home officers. On average, the distance between a Chief Minister’s
home district and the home district of a home-allocated IAS officer is 390 miles lower than vis-a-vis a
non-home state officer (Table 5, Column 3).



                                                     18
effects to vary by an IAS officer and Chief Minister turnover-specific measure of social
proximity, same_homeij . Conditional on the sample of home state officers, we estimate:


             yijt = Σ6k=−6 (βk 1[t = k] + γk 1[t = k] × same_homeij ) + θij + τt + εijt                  (4)

where the specification follows (4) except that we allow the monthly impacts around the
turnover event γk to vary by whether the home state officer i becomes home connected in
the turnover event j. Specifically, same_homeij is a dummy that is 1 if the officer i did not
share the same home district with the outgoing Chief Minister but subsequently became
home connected with the incoming Chief Minister. The dummy is 0 if the officer did not
experience a switching in connection.
       We use a conservative cut-off and define a Chief Minister and bureaucrat to originate
from the same home district if their home districts are less than 25 miles apart.21 In
the context of India with its sizeable states and districts and sprawling agglomerations of
connected towns this definition is close enough to capture actual social proximity as regional
elites are well connected at this level of geographical proximity. With the 25 miles cut-off,
127 of the 507 home officers ever become home district connected to a Chief Minister
throughout their career. With officers often experiencing multiple switches throughout
their life-long service, we obtain 212 officer-turnover specific switches. As the Appendix
B12 shows, our results do not critically hinge on the 25 miles cut-off but are robust to
both more restrictive and more generous definitions of home connectedness, such as using
15 miles, 50 miles, 75 miles or 100 miles cut-offs.
       Table 9 reports the results and confirms that home connections are key for promotions.
The surge in transfers following a Chief Minister appointment is magnified for those home
officers who experience a switch into sharing the same home district as the incoming Chief
Minister (Table 9, Column 1). While the point estimate is large, the interaction term how-
ever is insignificant. In Columns 2-4, we break down the overall transfers by differentiating
between promotions and demotions. Consistent with Chief Ministers exercising favoritism,
promotions following a Chief Minister turnover are disproportionately concentrated among
those officers who share the same home district (Column 2). While the promotion prob-
ability increases by 0.7% points for those who do not experience a switch in their home
ties, that probability increases by an additional 2.6% points for those who gain a home tie
to their Chief Minister. Figure 10 shows this differential promotion probability visually by
plotting the monthly averages around the Chief Minister transition for the officers who be-
come home connected and those who do not. While there is no difference in the promotion
probability between both groups before the arrival of the new Chief Minister, there is an
immediate surge in the promotion probability for those who gain a home connection.
  21
     Since the identification relies on switches in home connectedness, there is an empirical trade-off when
deciding how to define home district connectedness. If the cut-off distance for home district connectedness
is too close, there will be too few cases where Chief Ministers and officers actually become home connected.
The chances of coming from the exact same narrowly defined home district and experiencing a switch is low.
In contrast, if the cut-off distance is too far, we may not be capturing any relevant effects as the physical
measure of proximity no longer approximates social proximity.




                                                     19
    The effects are asymmetric: Column 3 includes an additional dummy that is 1 if the
home state officer was home district-connected to the outgoing Chief Minister but subse-
quently lost the home tie as a new Chief Minister turned in. If the effect of home ties
were symmetric, losing the home tie would lead to a lower promotion rate or even demotion
after the home tie is severed. Switching out, however, has no impact on promotion rates
(Column 3). Column 4 studies the impacts of the turnover on demotion rates. While de-
motions increase overall after a Chief Minister transition, the demotion probability is lower
for officers who become home connected. Once again, the effect is asymmetric. If anything,
losing the home connection further decreases the chances of being demoted. This asym-
metry - where gaining connections increases the promotion prospects and shields an officer
from demotions, whereas losing connections does not have the opposite impact - provides
a channel via which cumulative preferment by Chief Ministers from the same home district
can lead to the observed divergence in the promotion paths between home and non-home
state officers (Figure 7). It also helps to explain the dissonance between performance and
promotion observed for home officers. Despite being perceived as being both more corrupt
and less able to withstand illegitimate political pressure, home officers are nonetheless being
favored in promotion decisions by incoming politicians. Favoritism in promotion decisions
as revealed by the monthly CM turnover panel thus goes hand in hand with the lower
performance measures of the IAS officer survey.
    There might still be a concern that physical proximity - even if narrowly defined as is
in this context - need not indicate social proximity. To alleviate this concern, Column 5
repeats the exercise using caste proximity as an alternative measure of social proximity.
Caste politics is a salient feature in India (Iyer and Mani 2012), and belonging to the
same caste as the incoming Chief Minister might likewise increase one’s promotion odds.
Given that 71% of the officers are classified as unreserved caste (GEN), the group is too
large and heterogeneous. Our analysis thus focuses on the reserved castes, which we can
divide into OBC, SC, and ST, reflecting the classification used in the IAS. We conducted
additional biographical research to classify Chief Ministers and then create dummies that
denote whether an IAS officer gains or loses a same caste connection around a Chief Minister
transition. The result is reported in Column 5 and is consistent with the home district
result: officers who gain a caste connection to the incoming Chief Minister are more likely
to be promoted than those who do not become caste connected. Once again, the impact is
asymmetric, with switching out not leading to a slowdown in progression.


6    Conclusion
Bureaucrats are an important determinant of state capacity. The question of how to recruit
and motivate them has thus sparked a vibrant literature on the selection and incentives of
public servants (Ashraf and Bandiera 2017, Dal Bo et al. 2013, Dal Bo et al. 2017, Khan et
al. 2015). Yet, how to allocate already selected talent has remained an understudied margin
for improving public sector performance. In this paper, we ask if allocating bureaucrats to
the places they originate from would enhance or depress their performance. All centralized

                                              20
bureaucracies face the question of whether to allow officers to serve their home localities.
   We make progress by combining detailed institutional knowledge with unique data to
study the Indian Administrative Service - the senior-most civil service and “steel frame”
of India. We isolate a rare, rule-based source of variation that governs the assignment
of officers across India. Linking this variation in home assignment to a large survey on
the performance of IAS officers, as well as to rich administrative data from their training
academy, allows us to study the performance effects on the allocation margin.
   We exploit two layers of social proximity to answer the question of whether or not
home allocations affect performance. Our first layer of evidence reveals that home-allocated
officers are perceived to be more corrupt and less able to withstand illegitimate political
pressure. This average effect masks substantial heterogeneity: when we study state-level
heterogeneity in the home allocation effects, we find that the negative effects are primarily
driven by the more corrupt states. In these states the pressure for native officers to bend to
the politicians may be greater, as might be the opportunities for private gain. Furthermore,
we find that the negative effects are most pronounced in the later career stages, the same
career stages where we also show that home officers enjoy greater promotion prospects.
   The second layer of evidence exploits the Chief Minister turnover to help understand a
mechanism through which home state officers might become captured by local politicians.
We find that officers that share the same home district as the incoming Chief Minister
receive a preferential treatment in promotions. This deeper layer of social proximity is thus
predictive of being favored by the incoming politician even within the set of home-allocated
officers. Taken together, our results from these two layers of analysis suggest that social
proximity hampers bureaucrat performance by facilitating political capture and corruption.
   If we consider two career paths for IAS officers - one path that emphasizes performance,
probity and national service, while the second path emphasizes local embeddedness, personal
gain and state service - the combined evidence would suggest that home officers, especially
in weakly institutionalized environments, are more likely at risk to go down the latter path.
   These findings complement the growing literature that studies how social proximity
affects the performance of individuals in private organizations (Fisman et al. 2017, Fisman
et al. 2018, Bandiera et al. 2009). By combining variation in the life-long deployment of
officers to states with the exposure to different politicians over time, we bridge the literature
on the determinants of bureaucrat performance (Bertrand et al. 2018, Rasul and Rogger
2017) with the literature exploiting political turnover to identify favoritism and patronage
(Xu 2018, Jia 2017, Brollo et al. 2017, Colonelli et al. 2018, Akthari et al. 2017).
   The results also have resonance for a whole host of less developed countries that are in the
process of building state capacity (Besley and Persson 2009). In these contexts, assigning
officers back to environments which they are most socially proximate with may actually
limit their ability to effectively serve the nation. This is an interesting result, as we know
that such home avoidance rules run counter to the preferences of the officers themselves.
While related research has suggested that rewarding performance with individually preferred
postings may be an effective incentive mechanism (Khan et al. 2018), our results suggest



                                               21
that a principal may nonetheless seek to deliberately mismatch officers’ preferences and
location assignments if their private gains are misaligned with public gains - in this case
due to greater likelihood of local capture.
   The paper opens up a new direction of research on how to allocate already-recruited
talent across a national geography which is separate from the literature on selection and
incentives that has dominated the modern literature on bureaucracy. What is exciting
about this research is that it suggests that considerable gains in bureaucrat performance
(and hence economic performance) may be had from avoiding home allocations without the
need for any additional fiscal cost. Indeed, our results indicate that deliberately wrenching
bureaucrats away from their preferred home environments is instrumental in ensuring that
they place national interests above local and private interests. This points to how central
a consideration social proximity should be in attempts to build effective nation states. Not
constraining home preferences may prevent an effective and impartial centralized bureau-
cracy from emerging. History tells us that countries bereft of a coherent and motivated set
of bureaucrats who can implement national policies in a coordinated fashion are unlikely to
make the transition to industrialized states. More research will be required to identify dif-
ferent pathways to developing effective national bureaucracies - but what is incontrovertible
is that there are few issues in the study of state capacity that are more important.


References
Administrative Reform Commission (2008) “Refurbishing of Personnel Administration -
Scaling New Heights”, Tenth Report, Second Administrative Reforms Commission


Aghion, P. and J. Tirole (1997): “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations” Journal
of Political Economy, 105, 1-29


Akthari, M., D. Moreira, D and L. Trucco (2018): “Political Turnover, Bureaucratic Turnover,
and the Quality of Public Services”, mimeo


Alesina, A. and Reich, B. (2015): “Nation Building”, NBER Working Paper 18839.


Alesina, A. and G. Tabellini (2007): “Bureaucrats or Politicians? Part I: A Single Pol-
icy Task”, American Economic Review, vol. 97, 169-179.


Amsden, A. (1989): “Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization”, Ox-
ford University Press.


Asher, S. and P. Novosad (2017): “Politics and Local Economic Growth: Evidence from
India”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, vol. 9, 229-273.


Ashraf, N. and O. Bandiera (2017): “Social Incentives in Organizations”, Annual Review

                                              22
of Economics, vol. 10, 439-463.


Ashraf, N. and O. Bandiera, and Lee S. (2018): “Losing Prosociality in the Quest for
Talent? Sorting, Selection, and Productivity”, mimeo


Bandiera, O. and Barankay, I. and Rasul, I. (2009): “Social Connections and Incentives
in the Workplace: Evidence from Personnel Data”, Econometrica, vol. 77 (4), 1047-1094.


Bandiera, O. and Burgess, R., and Deserranno, E., Rasul, I. and Sulaiman, M. (2018):
“Social Ties and the Delivery of Development Programs”, mimeo


Banks, J. S. and B. R. Weingast (1992): “The Political Control of Bureaucracies under
Asymmetric Information”, American Journal of Political Science, vol. 36, 509-524.


Bardhan, P. and D. Mookherjee (2006): “Decentralization and Accountability in Infras-
tructure Delivery in Developing Countries”, Economic Journal, vol. 116, 101-127.


Bertrand, M., R. Burgess, A. Chawla, and G. Xu (2018): “The Glittering Prizes: Ca-
reer Incentives and Bureaucrat Performance”, mimeo.


Besley, T. and T. Persson (2009) “The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights, Taxation
and Politics”, American Economic Review, vol. 99 (4), 1218-44.


Bhavnani, R. and A. Lee (2018): “Local Embeddedness and Bureaucratic Performance:
Evidence from India”, Journal of Politics, vol. 80 (1), 71-87.


Cantor, N. (1993): “Civilization of the Middle Ages: A completely revised and expanded
edition of medieval history”, Harper Collins.


Casey, K. (2018): “Radical Decentralization: Does community driven development work?”,
Annual Review of Economics, vol. 10, 139-165.


Colonelli, E. and M. Prem, and E. Teso (2018): “Patronage and Selection in Public Sector
Organizations”, mimeo


Dal Bo, E. and F. Finan and M.A. Rossi (2013) “Strengthening State Capabilities: The Role
of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
128 (3), 1169-1218.


Dessein, W. (2002) “Authority and Communication in Organizations”, Review of Economic
Studies, vol. 69, 811-838.



                                             23
Do, Q.-A., and K.-T. Nguyen, and A. N. Tran (2017): “One Mandarin Benefits the Whole
Clan: Hometown Favoritism in an Authoritarian Regime”, American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, vol. 9 (4), 1-29.


Ebrey, P. and Smith, P. (2016): “State Power in China, 900-1325”. University of Washing-
ton Press.


Evans, P. (1995): “Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation”, Prince-
ton University Press.


Finan, F., and B. A. Olken, and R. Pande (2015): “The Personnel Economics of the State”,
NBER Working Paper 21825.


Fisman, R. and F. Schulz, and V. Vig (2014): “The Private Returns to Public Office”,
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 122 (4), 806-862.


Fisman, R. and J. Shi and Y. Wang and R. Xu (2018): “Social Ties and Favoritism in
Chinese Science”, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 126 (3), 1134-1171.


Fisman, R. and D. Paravisini, and V. Vig (2017): “Cultural Proximity and Loan Out-
comes”, American Economic Review, vol. 107, 457-92.


Greif, A. (2007): “The Impact of Administrative Power on Political and Economic De-
velopment: Toward Political Economy of Implementation”, mimeo


Huang, Z. L. Li, G. Ma, and L. C. Xu (2017): “Hayek, Local Information, and Com-
manding Heights: Decentralizing State-Owned Enterprises in China”, American Economic
Review, vol. 107, 2455-78.


Iyer, L. and A. Mani (2012): “Travelling Agents: Political Change and Bureaucratic Turnover
in India”, Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 94, 723-739.


Jia, R. M. Kudamatsu, and D. Seim (2015): “Political Selection in China: The Com-
plementary Roles of Connections and Performance”, Journal of the European Economic
Association, vol. 13, 631-668.


Kirk-Greene, A. (2000): “Britain’s Imperial Administrators, 1858-1966”, Palgrave Macmil-
lan.


Mansuri, G. and Rao, V. (2013): “Localizing Development: Does Participation Work?”,



                                            24
World Bank Policy Research Report.


Moe, T. (2012) “Delegation, Control, and the Study of Public Bureaucracy”, In Robert
Gibbons and John Roberts, eds. Handbook of Organizational Economics. Princeton Uni-
versity Press.


Mookherjee, D. (2015): “Political Decentralization”, Annual Reviews of Economics, 7, 231-
249.


Newbury, C. (2003): “Patrons, Clients, and Empire: Chieftaincy and Over-rule in Asia,
Africa, and the Pacific”, Oxford University Press.


Northcote, S. and Trevelyan C. E. (1854) “Report on the Organization of the Permanent
Civil Service”, House of Commons, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office


Rauch, J. E. and Evans, P. B. (2000) “Bureaucratic Structure and Bureaucratic Perfor-
mance in Less Developed Countries”, Journal of Public Economics, vol. 75(1), 49-71.


Ujheyli, G. (2014): “Civil Service Rules and Policy Choices: Evidence from U.S. State
Governments”, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, vol. 6 (2), 338-380.


Wade, R. (1990): “Governing the Market: Economic Theory and the Role of Governments
in East Asian Industrialization”, Princeton University Press.


Weaver, J. (2018): “Jobs for Sale: Bribery and Misallocation in Hiring”, mimeo


Weber, M. (1922) “Economy and Society”, 4th Edition (republished 1956). Tübingen.


Wilson, G. K. and Barker, A. (1995): “The end of the Whitehall model?”, West Euro-
pean Politics, vol. 18 (4), 130-149.


Woolf, G. (2012): “Rome: An Empire’s Story”, Oxford University Press.


World Bank (2004): “World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor
People”, World Bank.


Xu, G. (2018): “The Costs of Patronage: Evidence from the British Empire”, American
Economic Review, vol. 108 (11), 3170-98.




                                            25
              Figure 1: Home state allocation and allocation bracket size




                       3                  5
                                          4
                 Number
                2                         1
                                          0




                                                                         1975          1980          1985          1990     1995         2000        2005
                                                                                                                   Year

                                                                                                      Home allocations       # candidates
                                                                         Uttar Pradesh - Scheduled Caste/Tribe (SC/ST)


Notes: Bar chart shows the number of home state allocations among Scheduled Castes/Tribes in Uttar
Pradesh 1975-2015. Scatter plot shows the number of potential candidates in the home state allocation
bracket Uttar Pradesh-Scheduled Castes/Tribes (SC/ST) in a given year of intake.


       Figure 2: Predicting home state allocation using allocation bracket size
                                                                     0
                Diff prob of home state (relative to only candidate)




                                                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                                                                  Share of home state x caste brackets
                                                                                                                                                                              .3
                                                   -.2




                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                                 -.4




                                                                                                                                                      .1
                -.6




                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                              1         2          3        4      5        6        7      >=8
                                                                                            # candidates in home state-caste bracket


Notes: Relating home state allocation to the number of candidates in the same intake year-home state-
caste bracket. Estimates are based on regressing home state allocation on dummies for the number of
candidates in the same intake year-home state-caste bracket, intake year FEs and home state × caste
FEs. Estimates show differences relative to being the only candidate. 90% confidence intervals, with
standard errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake year level.




                                                                                                                26
        Figure 3: Home state allocation and only candidate around intake year




                 Allocated to home state: only vs. multiple candidates
                          -.1     0       .1       .2      .3      .4




                                                                           -2   -1              0                  1             2
                                                                                         Intake period t

                                                                                     Controls              No controls



 Notes: Relating home state allocation to being the only candidate in the same intake year-home state-
 caste bracket and the two period leads and lags. The estimates are based on the specification of Table 4,
 Column 4. The results with no individual-level controls are shown using the dashed line. 90% confidence
 intervals based on standard errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake year level.


Figure 4: Home state allocation and ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure
                      Withstanding pressure only vs. multiple candidates
                            -.2         -.1           0              .1




                                                                           -2   -1              0                  1             2
                                                                                         Intake period t

                                                                                     Controls              No controls



 Notes: Relating the perceived ability to withstand illegitimate                                                   political pressure to being the only
 candidate in the same intake year-home state-caste bracket and                                                    the two period leads and lags. The
 estimates are based on the specification of Table 6. The results                                                  with no individual-level controls are
 reported using the dashed line. 90% confidence intervals based                                                    on standard errors clustered at the
 caste-home state-intake year and individual IAS officer-level.




                                                                                           27
    Figure 5: Withstanding pressure and only candidate effect by allocated state




                  Impact of only candidate on withstanding pressure




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Andhra Pradesh
                                                                .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          West Bengal
                                                                                                                                                                                       Uttar Pradesh




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Punjab
                                                                                                                                                                          Tamil Nadu




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Kerala
                                                     0




                                                                                                        Madhya Pradesh




                                                                                                                                          Rajasthan


                                                                                                                                                       Haryana
                                                                                                                         Maharashtra




                                                                                                                                                                 Orissa
                                                                                              Gujarat
                                         -.5



                                                                                  Bihar
                                                                      Karnataka
                 -1.5        -1




                                                                      1           2           3         4                5               6            7    8              9            10               11       12       13            14
                                                                                                                                                       Rank


Notes: Reduced form effect of only candidate on the perceived ability to withstand illegitimate political
pressure, separately estimated for each major state of India by interacting only candidate × state
dummies. Only candidate is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was the only candidate in the same
intake year-home state-caste bracket. 90% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the
caste-home state-intake year and individual IAS officer-level.


     Figure 6: Seniority based promotion: Average payscale and years of tenure
                                         8
                                         6
                 Payscale
                    4                    2
                                         0




                                                                      0                   5                10                           15       20         25                                         30           35                  40
                                                                                                                                       Years served in the IAS


Notes: Average payscale of IAS officers as a function of the years served in the IAS (solid line) for the
cross-section of all centrally recruited IAS officers active in 2012. The dashed line marks the payscale
as predicted using the IAS promotion guidelines.




                                                                                                                                                      28
                                                                               Figure 7: Performance and promotion over the career

                                                             Panel A: Withstanding illegitimate political pressure                                                                                Panel B: Suspended


 Withstanding pressure: only vs. multiple candidates




                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                         Suspended: only vs. multiple candidates
                                           .2




                                                                                                                                                                       .15
                                  0




                                                                                                                                                              .1
                       -.2




                                                                                                                                                     .05
              -.4




                                                                                                                                               0
     -.6




                                                                                                                                      -.05
                                                       4-8           9-12            13-15          16-24       25-29         >=30                                                   4-8   9-12      13-15          16-24       25-29   >=30
                                                                                         Years in IAS                                                                                                    Years in IAS

                                                                            Diff: Withstanding pressure              90% CI                                                                       Diff: Suspended            90% CI



                                                                                   Panel C: In Delhi                                                                                              Panel D: Payscale
                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                                             .3
                                                                                                                                      Payscale: only vs. multiple candidates
 In Delhi: only vs. multiple candidates
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                    -.2




                                                                                                                                                       .1
        -.4




                                                                                                                                             0
                          -.6




                                                                                                                                                           -.1


                                                       4-8           9-12            13-15          16-24       25-29         >=30                                                   4-8   9-12      13-15          16-24       25-29   >=30
                                                                                         Years in IAS                                                                                                    Years in IAS

                                                                                   Diff: In Delhi           90% CI                                                                                 Payscale gap             90% CI



Notes: Differences in performance-related measures (Panels A-C) and promotions (Panel D) between
candidates vs. multiple candidates (the reduced form for home vs. non-home candidates) throughout
the career, conditional on caste × home state, year of intake FEs, entry exam rank FEs and background
controls. See Appendix Table B9 for the regression tables corresponding to the figures. The dependent
variables for each panel are as follows: In Panel A, the dependent variable is the cross-sectional sub-
jective performance measure for the ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure. Panels B-D
show career events from an individual-year panel. In Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy that
is 1 if the IAS officer was suspended in a given year (scaled by 100 for readability). In Panel C, the
dependent variable is 1 if the IAS officer was serving in Delhi. In Panel D, the dependent variable
shows the payscale of an IAS officer, where the payscales range from 1 (lowest) to 7 (highest). The years
in IAS are binned to reflect the progression by payscales. 90% confidence intervals based on standard
errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake year and individual IAS officer-level.




                                                                                                                                 29
       Figure 8: Transfers of IAS officers around Chief Minister appointments




                                      .08
                 Probability of transfer/promotion
                    .02          .04  0     .06




                                                                -6    -4          -2          0          2          4        6
                                                                                    Months around new CM

                                                                               Transfer rate           Promotion rate



Notes: Transfers and promotions in the months around the appointment of a Chief Minister (centered at
0). Balanced sample of IAS officer-Chief Minister transitions around six months windows. All estimates
are relative to the month before the Chief Minister transition (-1). 90% confidence intervals on standard
errors clustered at the individual-level. Coefficients reported in Appendix Table B10.


      Figure 9: Transfer elasticity for Chief Minister appointments by payscale
                                                           .3
                   Transfer rate CM turnover vs. no turnover
                 -.1         0        .1         .2




                                                                1-3    4-8           9-12          13-15        16-24       >=25
                                                                                        Years in IAS

                                                                             Only candidate           Multiple candidates



Notes: Balanced sample of IAS officer-Chief Minister transitions around six months windows (see Table
8). Showing the difference in transfer rates in the two months of the Chief Minister appointment [t, t − 1]
vs. the the other months around the six months window, by seniority. The years into IAS are binned
to reflect the progression by payscales. 90% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at
the individual-level. Appendix Table B11 reports the coefficients.




                                                                                          30
Figure 10: Promotions and home district connectedness to incoming Chief Minister




                  .08      .06
       Promotion probability
       .02      .04
                  0




                                 -6   -4            -2          0          2      4           6
                                                      Months around new CM

                                           Same home district: Switch in       No switch in



Notes: Balanced sample of IAS officer-Chief Minister transitions around six months windows. Promotion
probability for IAS officers who become home district connected to the incoming Chief Minister vs. IAS
officers who do not become home district connected. An IAS officer and CM are from the same home
district when their home districts are less than 25 miles apart. The event study is based on a balanced
panel around the month of the new Chief Minister appointment (marked 0). 90% confidence intervals
based on standard errors are clustered at the individual-level.




                                                             31
         Table 1: Descriptive statistics for the subjective performance scores

                                             (1)      (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)
                                            Mean      SD      Ratings     Officers    Coverage
Withstanding illegitimate pressure          3.523    1.094    16,728       1,471       71.96%
Probity of IAS officer                      3.670    1.105    15,153       1,451       70.98%
Effectiveness on the job                    3.730    1.077    17,753       1,472       72.01%
Sensitive towards poorer                    3.527    1.141    17,047       1,471       71.96%
Overall rating                              3.646    1.057    17,698       1,472       72.01%
Notes: Subjective performance scores for the cross-section of rated IAS officers in 2012-13. Reporting
the descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) for the subjective measures, where the scores
range from 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest). Column 3 and 4 report the total number of ratings and the total
number of rated officers. Column 5 reports the coverage rate for the sample population of all active,
centrally recruited IAS officers with at least 8 years of tenure in 2012/13.




                                               32
               Table 2: IAS officer characteristics by home state allocation

                                             (1)        (2)             (3)           (4)
                                                Allocation             Diff Home-Non-home
      Means                                 Home Non-Home              Raw      Within intake
      Entry (UPSC) exam rank                44.483    56.091       -11.607***    -14.959***
                                                                     (1.732)       (1.791)
      Female                                 0.107       0.134        -0.027        -0.020
                                                                     (0.017)       (0.017)
      Urban background                       0.728       0.722         0.006        -0.002
                                                                     (0.022)       (0.023)
      Age at entry                          25.443       25.704      0.261**        -0.022
                                                                     (0.112)       (0.108)
      Distinction                            0.326       0.322         0.004         0.006
                                                                     (0.024)       (0.024)
      STEM or Economics                      0.590       0.616        -0.025        -0.004
                                                                     (0.025)       (0.025)
      Other Backward Caste (OBC)             0.059       0.119      -0.059***      -0.024*
                                                                     (0.015)       (0.012)
      Scheduled Caste (SC)                   0.168       0.116      0.052***      0.061***
                                                                     (0.017)       (0.019)
      Scheduled Tribe (ST)                   0.078       0.059         0.019         0.022
                                                                     (0.012)       (0.014)
      Previous job: Education/Research       0.173       0.147         0.026        -0.007
                                                                     (0.018)       (0.019)
      Previous job: Finance/Banking          0.055       0.049         0.006        -0.002
                                                                     (0.011)       (0.012)
      Previous job: None                     0.294       0.299         0.005         0.010
                                                                     (0.023)       (0.023)
      Previous job: Private/SOE              0.114       0.118        -0.003         0.008
                                                                     (0.016)       (0.017)
      Previous job: Public                   0.326       0.345        -0.018         0.003
                                                                     (0.024)       (0.025)
      Previous job: Public - AIS             0.034       0.039        -0.005        -0.012
                                                                     (0.009)       (0.009)
      Cohort size                            7.685       6.306      1.379***      1.003***
                                                                     (0.200)       (0.388)
      Caste fractionalization                0.326       0.344        -0.017       0.025**
                                                                     (0.011)       (0.011)
      Intake year FEs                          -           -             -             Y
      Diff jointly zero: p-value                                    0.000***      0.000***
      Observations                            542        1,326         1,888         1,888
Notes: Unit of observation is the IAS officer. Columns 1-2 show the mean characteristics for those who
received the home allocation and those who did not. Column 3 is the raw difference in means between
home and non-home allocated officers. Column 4 shows the mean difference among officers of the same
intake year. UPSC Rank is the entry exam (UPSC) rank in the intake year. Female is a dummy that
is 1 if the IAS officer is female. Urban background is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer is from an
urban background. Age at entry is the entry age of the officer. Distinction is a dummy that is 1 if the
IAS officer received an academic distinction. STEM is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer studied a
STEM or Economics degree. Previous job: are categories for the previous positions the IAS officer held
before entering IAS. Cohort size is the total number of officers allocated to same state in same year.
Caste fractionalization is the fractionalization index for the cohort based on the caste categories. Robust
standard errors. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    33
Table 3: IAS officer characteristics by allocation bracket size (one vs. many candidates)

                                             (1)         (2)                (3)             (4)
                                           Candidates in bracket               Diff Only-Many
   Means                                   Only (1) Many (>1)              Raw       Within bracket
   Entry (UPSC) exam rank                   61.39       51.82           9.569***          -1.741
                                                                         (2.584)         (1.990)
   Female                                    0.178         0.121         0.056**         0.067*
                                                                         (0.024)         (0.035)
   Urban background                          0.695         0.727           0.032          0.007
                                                                         (0.032)         (0.039)
   Age at entry                             26.507        25.524        0.982***           0.061
                                                                         (0.159)         (0.205)
   Distinction                               0.352         0.320          -0.032          0.044
                                                                         (0.034)         (0.043)
   STEM or Economics                         0.594         0.610          -0.016           0.006
                                                                         (0.035)         (0.045)
   Previous job: Education/Research          0.111         0.160         -0.049*           0.013
                                                                         (0.026)         (0.028)
   Previous job: Finance/Banking             0.043         0.051          -0.008          -0.005
                                                                         (0.016)         (0.020)
   Previous job: None                        0.294         0.298          -0.003          -0.016
                                                                         (0.039)         (0.041)
   Previous job: Private/SOE                 0.111         0.118           0.007           0.004
                                                                         (0.023)         (0.032)
   Previous job: Public                      0.415         0.330         0.084**          -0.011
                                                                         (0.034)         (0.046)
   Previous job: Public - AIS                0.024         0.039          -0.015           0.014
                                                                         (0.014)         (0.015)
   Cohort size                               5.115         7.093       -1.977***          0.149
                                                                         (0.293)         (0.264)
   Caste fractionalization                   0.425         0.330       0.094***           0.004
                                                                         (0.015)         (0.017)
   Intake year FEs                             -             -               -               Y
   Home state-Caste FEs                        -             -               -               Y
   Diff jointly zero: p-value                                          0.000***           0.831
   Observations                               207          1,681           1,888           1,882
 Notes: Unit of observation is the IAS officer. Columns 1-2 show the mean characteristics for those who
 are the only candidate in the intake year-home state-caste bracket. Column 3 is the raw difference in
 means between those who are only candidates and those with many candidates in the intake year-home
 state-caste bracket. Column 4 shows the mean difference among officers of the same intake year and
 within the same home state-caste bracket. UPSC Rank is the entry exam (UPSC) rank in the intake
 year. Female is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer is female. Urban background is a dummy that is 1
 if the IAS officer is from an urban background. Age at entry is the entry age of the officer. Distinction
 is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer received an academic distinction. STEM is a dummy that is 1
 if the IAS officer studied a STEM or Economics degree. Previous job: are categories for the previous
 positions the IAS officer held before entering IAS. Cohort size is the total number of officers allocated
 to same state in same year. Caste fractionalization is the fractionalization index for the cohort based on
 the caste categories. Standard errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake year level. * p < 0.1, **
 p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    34
             Table 4: Predicting home state assignment with allocation rule

                                              (1)             (2)        (3)         (4)
                                                         Allocated to home state
            Mean of dep. var                 0.277           0.277      0.277         0.285
            Only candidate t + 2                                                      0.033
                                                                                    (0.041)
            Only candidate t + 1                                                     -0.036
                                                                                    (0.039)
            Only candidate                 0.228***       0.241***   0.250***      0.285***
                                            (0.042)        (0.046)    (0.046)       (0.050)
            Only candidate t − 1                                                      0.017
                                                                                    (0.047)
            Only candidate t − 2                                                     -0.054
                                                                                    (0.046)
            Intake year FEs                    Y              Y          Y              Y
            Home state × Caste FEs             Y              Y          Y              Y
            Rank FEs                           -              Y          Y              Y
            Individual controls                -              -          Y              Y
            Observations                     1,880          1,868      1,868          1,700
Notes: Unit of observation is the IAS officer. Relating home state allocation to the instrument. The
instrument only candidate is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was the only candidate in the intake year-
home state-caste bracket. Individual controls are: entry exam score, entry exam rank fixed effects for each
rank in the entry exam, age at entry, female dummy, a dummy for coming from an urban background,
having received an academic distinction, a STEM or Economics degree, dummies for previous job type.
Standard errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake year level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    35
                   Table 5: Social proximity and home state allocation

                                                   (1)             (2)           (3)
                                                Distance          Same       Dist. home
                                              home district     language      CM 2012
            Mean of dep. var                     455.5            0.388         494.4
            Panel A: OLS
            Home state                         -482.150***      0.692***     -438.06***
                                                 (16.116)        (0.022)      (18.549)
            Panel B: IV
            Home state                         -495.720***      0.829***     -389.27***
                                                 (87.548)        (0.130)      (105.60)
            Kleibergen-Paap F -statistic          34.000         29.836        27.854
            Intake year FEs                          Y              Y             Y
            Home state × Caste FEs                   Y              Y             Y
            Rank FEs                                 Y              Y             Y
            Individual controls                      Y              Y             Y
            Observations                           1,625          1,868         1,497
Notes: Unit of observation is the IAS officer. Relating measures of social proximity to home state
allocation. Home state is a dummy that is 1 if the officer was allocated to his or her state of permanent
domicile. The instrument only candidate is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was the only candidate
in the intake year-home state-caste bracket. Panel A presents the OLS estimates. Panel B presents
the IV results. Distance to home district is the distance (in miles) between the allocated state’s state
capital and the officer’s home district. Same language is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer’s mother
tongue is the first official language in the state. Distance between the IAS officer’s home district and
the home district of Chief Ministers serving in 2012 is measured by the distance (in miles) between the
district headquarters. Individual controls are: entry exam score, entry exam rank fixed effects for each
rank in the entry exam, age at entry, female dummy, a dummy for coming from an urban background,
having received an academic distinction, a STEM or Economics degree, dummies for previous job type.
Standard errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake year level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                 36
          Table 6: Subjective performance ratings and home state allocation

                                       (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)
                                     Pressure     Probity     Effective   Pro-poor      Overall
      Mean of dep. var                3.524        3.671       3.730       3.528         3.647
      Panel A: OLS
      Home state                       -0.001       0.005       0.007        0.020      0.050*
                                      (0.026)      (0.030)     (0.026)      (0.027)     (0.029)
      Panel B: IV
      Home state                     -0.381***     -0.202*      -0.034       -0.112      -0.103
                                      (0.121)      (0.119)     (0.107)      (0.113)     (0.127)
      Kleibergen-Paap F -stat          46.495      56.885      46.470       45.626      46.168
      Home state × Caste FEs             Y            Y           Y            Y           Y
      Intake year FEs                    Y            Y           Y            Y           Y
      Respondent FEs                     Y            Y           Y            Y           Y
      State × Tenure FEs                 Y            Y           Y            Y           Y
      Individual controls                Y            Y           Y            Y           Y
      Observations                     16,712      15,128      17,744       17,037      17,689
Notes: Unit of observation is the score for a given IAS officer in 2012-13 with at least 8 years of tenure.
Relating five measures of perceived performance (ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure,
probity, effectiveness, pro-poor orientedness and overall rating) to home state allocation. Home state is
a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer is allocated to his or her state of origin. Only candidate is a dummy
that is 1 if the IAS officer was the only candidate in the intake year-home state-caste bracket. Panel A
presents the OLS estimates. Panel B presents the IV results. Individual controls are: entry exam score,
entry exam rank fixed effects for each rank in the entry exam, age at entry, female dummy, a dummy
for coming from an urban background, having received an academic distinction, a STEM or Economics
degree, dummies for previous job type. Standard errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake year
and individual IAS officer level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                  37
  Table 7: Withstanding illegitimate pressure, suspensions and state-level corruption

                                       (1)         (2)        (3)               (4)         (5)        (6)
                                         Withstanding pressure                Index           Suspended
Mean of dep. var                     3.523       3.496       3.496             0.000       0.833      0.833
Only candidate                     -0.136*** -0.142*** -0.142***           -0.119***      -0.263     -0.250
                                    (0.038)     (0.041)    (0.041)           (0.035)     (0.286) (0.285)
× TI corruption index                          -0.105*** -0.112**           -0.096**     0.405** 0.681**
                                                (0.035)    (0.052)           (0.048)     (0.185) (0.280)
× Human Development Index                                   -0.009            -0.000                 0.385
                                                           (0.048)           (0.044)                (0.279)
Home state × Caste FEs                  Y           Y          Y                 Y           Y          Y
State × Tenure FEs                      Y           Y          Y                 Y           Y          Y
Controls                                Y           Y          Y                 Y           Y          Y
Year FEs                                                                                     Y          Y
Sample                                               Cross-section                              Panel
Observations                        16,712        15,644      15,644         12,958       31,712    31,712
 Notes: Unit of observation is the score for a given IAS officer in 2012-13 with at least 8 years of tenure
 (Columns 1-4) and the IAS officer-year for the time period 1980-2011 (Columns 5-6). Relating the
 standardized ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure and suspensions to home state allocation.
 Suspended is a dummy that is 1 (scaled by 100) if the IAS officer was suspended in a given year. Home
 state is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer is allocated to his or her state of origin. The instrument
 only candidate is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was the only candidate in the intake year-home
 state-caste bracket. TI corruption index is the state-level Transparency International corruption index
 from 2005 as used by Fisman et al. (2014). The HDI is the state-level Human Development Index in
 2007. Caste FEs are dummies for OBC, SC, ST. Rank FEs are fixed effects for each rank in the entry
 exam. Individual controls are: entry exam score, age at entry, female dummy, a dummy for coming from
 an urban background, having received an academic distinction, a STEM or Economics degree, dummies
 for previous job type. Standard errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake year and individual IAS
 officer level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                   38
Table 8: Transfers, promotions and Chief Minister turnover by home state allocation

                                        (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
                                               IAS officer was transferred                 Promoted
Mean of dep. var                        0.126        0.126      0.126       0.126     0.0231     0.0243
Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1]   0.025***      -0.004    0.020*** 0.025***      0.008***   0.009***
                                       (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.002)    (0.002)
× Party switch                                    0.059***
                                                   (0.005)
× CM switch                                          0.007
                                                   (0.006)
× Senior                                                      0.017***      0.004    -0.010***   -0.008***
                                                               (0.005)     (0.006)    (0.003)     (0.003)
× Only candidate                                                          -0.020**     -0.007     -0.008*
                                                                           (0.009)    (0.004)     (0.005)
× Senior × Only candidate                                                  0.042**    0.020**      0.023*
                                                                           (0.020)    (0.010)     (0.012)
Senior × Only candidate                                                    0.047**     -0.001       0.002
                                                                           (0.022)    (0.007)     (0.009)
Year × Month FEs                          Y            Y          Y           Y          Y            Y
IAS officer × Turnover event FEs          Y            Y          Y
Controls                                                                      Y         Y           Y
Sample                                                       Full sample                         No Delhi
Observations                           148,330    148,330      148,330     148,330   148,330     127,934
Notes: Unit of observation is the IAS officer-month. Balanced sample of IAS officer-Chief Minister
transitions around six months windows of Chief Minister appointments. Relating transfers and career
progression to Chief Minister appointments. Transfer is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was
transferred in a given month. Promoted, demoted, lateral are dummies that denote whether a transfer
was upward, downwards or in the same payscale. Chief Minister appointed is a dummy that is 1 in the
month the Chief Minister is appointed as well as the month after ([t, t + 1]). Party switch is a dummy
that is 1 if the turnover involved a switch in the political party. CM switch is a dummy that is 1 if the
turnover involved a change in the Chief Minister. Senior is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer is at
least 16 years in service. Only candidate is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was the only candidate
in the intake year-home state-caste bracket. The controls are : Home state × Caste FEs (Caste FEs
are dummies for OBC, SC, ST); year of intake FEs; only candidate, senior dummy, entry exam score,
entry exam rank fixed effects for each rank in the entry exam, age at entry, female dummy, a dummy
for coming from an urban background, having received an academic distinction, a STEM or Economics
degree, dummies for previous job type. Column 6 restricts the sample to only officers who are not in
Delhi. Standard errors clustered at the individual IAS officer level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    39
      Table 9: Turnover and home district connectedness to the Chief Minister

                                         (1)          (2)       (3)             (4)          (5)
                                      Transfer          Promoted            Demoted       Promoted
Mean of dep. var                        0.129       0.0235    0.0235         0.00409       0.0236
Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1]   0.025***     0.007*** 0.007***        0.002***        0.004
                                       (0.004)      (0.002)  (0.002)         (0.001)       (0.003)
× Home connected: Switch in             0.034      0.026**   0.026**         -0.005*
                                       (0.023)      (0.012)  (0.012)         (0.003)
× Home connected: Switch out                                  -0.000        -0.003***
                                                             (0.010)         (0.001)
× Same caste: Switch in                                                                   0.023**
                                                                                          (0.011)
× Same caste: Switch out                                                                   -0.009
                                                                                          (0.011)
Year × Month FEs                          Y             Y          Y            Y            Y
IAS officer × Turnover event              Y             Y          Y            Y            Y
Sample                                                Home state officers               Lower caste
Observations                            46,947        46,947    46,947       46,947        32,573
Notes: Unit of observation is the IAS officer-month. Balanced sample of IAS officer-Chief Minister
transitions around six months windows of Chief Minister appointments. Relating transfers, promotions,
demotions and lateral moves to social connections with the incoming Chief Minister. Chief Minister
appointed is a dummy that is 1 in the month the Chief Minister is appointed as well as the month after
([t, t + 1]). An IAS officer and Chief Minister are defined as home connected if their home districts are
less than 25 miles apart. Home connected: Switch in is a dummy that is 1 if the officer moved from
not being home connected to home connected. Home connected: Switch out is a dummy that is 1 if the
officer moved from home connected to not being home connected. An IAS officer and Chief Minister
are defined as being from the same caste if their caste status is both OBC, both SC, or both ST. Same
caste: Switch in is a dummy that is 1 if the officer moved from not being caste connected to being caste
connected. Same caste: Switch out is a dummy that is 1 if the officer moved from being caste connected
to caste unconnected. For Columns 1-4, the sample is restricted to home state officers only. For Column
5, the sample is restricted to reserved caste (OBC/SC/ST) officers only. Standard errors clustered at
the individual IAS officer level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                 40
A     Appendix - For Online Publication

                    Figure A1: Determination of vacancies: Example 2006




    Illustrating the assignment of categories (caste and home preference) to vacancies through the roster
    randomization for the year 2006. Vacancies are earmarked by caste status (O.B.C. denotes other back-
    ward castes, S.C./S.T. scheduled castes/tribes and unreserved the general castes) and home state (“I”
    denotes insider vacancies reserved for applicants from the same state; “O” denotes outsider vacancies
    reserved for applicants from other states). The assignment occurs through a number line.




                                                   41
Figure A2: Assignment of categories (caste and home preference) to vacancies through
roster randomization




   The final distribution of vacancies by state and caste/home quota for the year 2006. Vacancies are
   earmarked by caste status (O.B.C. denotes other backward castes, S.C./S.T. scheduled castes/tribes
   and unreserved the general castes) and home state (insider vacancies are reserved for applicants from
   the same state; outsider vacancies are reserved for applicants from other states).




                                                  42
Figure A3: Merit-based (UPSC rank) allocation based on caste and home preference match




   Illustrating the ranking of candidates using the intake year of 2006. The names have been removed
   in this figure but the full list is publicly available through the Union Public Service Commission. The
   successful applicants in a given year of intake are ranked in descending order based on the UPSC entry
   exam score. Home state denotes the state from which the candidate applied from. Category denotes
   the caste of the candidate, where O.B.C. denotes other backward castes, S.C. scheduled castes, S.T.
   scheduled tribes and General the unreserved castes. Whether home state opted denotes if the applicant
   indicated a preference to be allocated to the home state.




                                                   43
                      Figure A4: Rotation of state groups over years




Division of state cadres into four groups and the rotation of groups in the order of IAS officer allocation
over time, as illustrated by the group order in 2006. The groups of states rotate each year. In 2007, for
example, the order changes to Group II, Group III, Group IV, Group I.




                                                 44
Figure A5: Subjective performance measures and leads/lags in being the only candidate




                                             .15
    Effectiveness only vs. multiple candidates




                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                                                   Probity only vs. multiple candidates
                                      .1




                                                                                                                                               .05
                            .05




                                                                                                                               -.05     0
            -.05     0




                                                                                                               -.15    -.1
    -.1




                                                        -2   -1              0                  1     2                                                        -2   -1              0                  1     2
                                                                      Intake period t                                                                                        Intake period t

                                                                  Controls              No controls                                                                      Controls              No controls
   Withstanding pressure only vs. multiple candidates
                                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                  .1
                                                                                                               Pro-poor only vs. multiple candidates
                                                                                                                                           .05
                                   0




                                                                                                                         -.05     0
                     -.1




                                                                                                                   -.1               -.15
         -.2




                                                        -2   -1              0                  1     2                                                        -2   -1              0                  1     2
                                                                      Intake period t                                                                                        Intake period t

                                                                  Controls              No controls                                                                      Controls              No controls
                                                                                                               Avg. performance only vs. multiple candidates
                            .2




                                                                                                                                                        .1
    Overall only vs. multiple candidates




                                                                                                                                                .05
                                .1




                                                                                                                                        0
                      0




                                                                                                                              -.05
         -.1




                                                                                                               -.15     -.1
                            -.2




                                                        -2   -1              0                  1     2                                                        -2   -1              0                  1     2
                                                                      Intake period t                                                                                        Intake period t

                                                                  Controls              No controls                                                                      Controls              No controls




  Notes: Relating the subjective performance scores to being the only candidate in the same intake-year-
  home state-caste bracket and the two period leads and lags. The estimates are based on the specification
  of Table 6. The results with no individual-level controls are reported in the dashed line. Showing 90%
  confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake year level.




                                                                                                          45
                                                                                                                                 Impact of only candidate on overall rating                         Impact of only candidate on withstanding pressure                          Impact of only candidate on effectiveness
                                                                                                                         -1.5          -1         -.5         0           .5                       -1.5        -1          -.5         0          .5                    -1.5       -1        -.5        0          .5                1




     level.
                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                  Karnataka                                                                Karnataka                                                              Karnataka




                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                              Rajasthan                                                                 Bihar                                                               Bihar




                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                 Bihar                                                                  Gujarat                                                            Rajasthan




                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                         Gujarat                                                        Madhya Pradesh                                                          Haryana




                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                     Madhya Pradesh                                                        Maharashtra                                                                 Gujarat




                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                             Haryana                                                            Rajasthan                                                           West Bengal




                                                                                                               7
                                                                                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                                                                                 Maharashtra                                                     Haryana                       7                                    Andhra Pradesh




                                                                                                                Rank
                                                                                                                                                                                           Rank
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rank




                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8

                                                                                                                                                                     Punjab                                                        Orissa                                                           Madhya Pradesh




                                                                                                                 9
                                                                                                                                                                                            9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9




                                                                                                                                                                      Orissa                                                      Tamil Nadu                                                             Maharashtra




                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                                                    Tamil Nadu                                                    Uttar Pradesh                                                                Punjab




                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11




                                                                                                                                                                     West Bengal                                                      Kerala                                                                     Orissa




                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12




                                                                                                                                                                      Uttar Pradesh                                                    Punjab                                                                    Uttar Pradesh




                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13




                                                                                                                                                                               Kerala                                                     West Bengal                                                               Tamil Nadu




                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14




                                                                                                                                                                        Andhra Pradesh                                                        Andhra Pradesh                                                                Kerala




46
                                                                                                                               Impact of only candidate on avg. performance                        Impact of only candidate on pro-poor orientedness                              Impact of only candidate on probity
                                                                                                                        -1.5            -1          -.5           0         .5                      -1.5        -1         -.5         0          .5                       -1.5      -1        -.5       0        .5                 1




                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                     Karnataka                                                          Karnataka                                                              Karnataka




                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                         Bihar                                                            Rajasthan                                                            Bihar




                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3




                                                                                                                                                     Rajasthan                                                                  Gujarat                                                        Rajasthan




                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                              Gujarat                                                      Andhra Pradesh                                                            Haryana




                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5




                                                                                                                                                                 Haryana                                                        Maharashtra                                                     Andhra Pradesh




                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6




                                                                                                                                                              Madhya Pradesh                                                        Bihar                                                           West Bengal




                                                                                                               7
                                                                                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7




                                                                                                                                                                   Maharashtra                                                     West Bengal                                                            Gujarat




                                                                                                                Rank
                                                                                                                                                                                           Rank
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rank




                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8




                                                                                                                                                                   West Bengal                                                         Orissa                                                           Madhya Pradesh




                                                                                                                 9
                                                                                                                                                                                            9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9




                                                                                                                                                                   Andhra Pradesh                                                 Madhya Pradesh                                                           Maharashtra




                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                                                        Orissa                                                        Haryana                                                                      Orissa




                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11




                                                                                                                                                                           Punjab                                                           Uttar Pradesh                                                      Tamil Nadu




                                                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12




                                                                                                                                                                           Tamil Nadu                                                           Kerala                                                              Punjab




                                                                                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13




                                                                                                                                                                        Uttar Pradesh                                                           Punjab                                                            Uttar Pradesh

                                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14




                                                                                                                                                                                 Kerala                                                           Tamil Nadu                                                              Kerala
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure A6: Subjective performance measures and being the only candidate by state




     Showing 90% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake year
     home state-caste bracket by allocated state. The estimates are based on the specification of Table 6.
     Notes: Relating the subjective performance scores to being the only candidate in the same intake-year-
                                                              Figure A7: Subjective performance measures over the career




                                             .4




                                                                                                                                              .5
 Effectiveness: only vs. multiple candidates




                                                                                                                        Probity: only vs. multiple candidates
                      0           .2




                                                                                                                                          0
          -.2             -.4




                                                                                                                                              -.5
                                                       4-8   9-12            13-15          16-24     25-29     >=30                                                     4-8   9-12         13-15          16-24       25-29    >=30
                                                                                 Years in IAS                                                                                                   Years in IAS

                                                                        Diff: Effectiveness         90% CI                                                                                 Diff: Probity           90% CI
 Withstanding pressure: only vs. multiple candidates




                                                                                                                                              .6
                                             .2




                                                                                                                        Pro-poor: only vs. multiple candidates
                                                                                                                                                        .4
                                  0




                                                                                                                                               .2
                       -.2




                                                                                                                                      0
             -.4




                                                                                                                            -.2
    -.6




                                                                                                                                              -.4


                                                       4-8   9-12            13-15          16-24     25-29     >=30                                                     4-8   9-12         13-15          16-24       25-29    >=30
                                                                                 Years in IAS                                                                                                   Years in IAS

                                                                    Diff: Withstanding pressure        90% CI                                                                             Diff: Pro-poor           90% CI
                                                                                                                        Avg. Performance: only vs. multiple candidates
                                                                                                                                                                  .2
                                       .2
 Overall: only vs. multiple candidates
                             0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                 -.2




                                                                                                                                      -.2
     -.4




                                                                                                                         -.4
                          -.6




                                                       4-8   9-12            13-15          16-24     25-29     >=30                                                     4-8   9-12         13-15          16-24       25-29    >=30
                                                                                 Years in IAS                                                                                                   Years in IAS

                                                                        Diff: Overall rating        90% CI                                                                            Diff: Avg. Performance           90% CI



Notes: Difference in the subjective performance scores between only candidates vs. multiple candidates
(the reduced form for home vs. non-home candidates) throughout the career, conditional on caste ×
home state, year of intake FEs, entry exam rank FEs and background controls. The years in IAS
are binned to reflect the progression by payscales. 90% confidence intervals based on standard errors
clustered at the caste-home state-intake year level.




                                                                                                                   47
                           Table B1: Testing for selective sorting

                                                           (1)    (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                        Number of recruited officers      Top 10
   Mean of dep. var                                       2.005  2.005       2.005         0.128
   Total number of vacancies                             -0.049  0.044
                                                        (0.072) (0.046)
   Vacancies reserved for home officers (insider)                           -0.025         -0.001
                                                                           (0.091)        (0.023)
   Vacancies reserved for outsiders                                          0.089          0.013
                                                                           (0.105)        (0.014)
   Intake year FEs                                          Y      Y           Y              Y
   Home state FEs                                           Y       -          -              -
   Caste FEs                                                Y       -          -              -
   Home state × Caste FEs                                   -      Y           Y              Y
   Observations                                            873    873         873            873
Notes: Unit of observation is the intake year - home state - caste bracket. Relating the number of
recruited officer and their rank by selection bracket. In Columns 1-3, the dependent variable is the total
number of recruited officer from a given intake year - home state - caste bracket. In Column 4, the
dependent variable is the number of recruited officers from a given selection bracket who rank within
the top 10. The sample covers all IAS entrants between 2005-2016. Total number of vacancies denotes
the total number of slots approved in a given intake year for a state and reserved for a caste bracket
(General, OBC, SC/ST). Caste FEs are dummies for OBC, SC, ST. Standard errors clustered at the
intake year level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                 48
        Table B2: State-level correlates of the share of single bracket entrants

                                                 (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)
                                               Share of only candidates 1975-2005
              Mean of dep. var                  0.214     0.214    0.214     0.214
              log(State level population)      -0.159                       -0.188
                                              (0.137)                      (0.136)
              TI corruption index                        -0.034             -0.089
                                                        (0.042)            (0.081)
              Human Development Index                             -0.380    -1.204
                                                                 (0.591) (1.047)
              Observations                       14        14       14        14
Notes: Unit of observation is the state. Sample comprises the 14 main states of India for which we have
collected performance scores. Relating the overall share of single bracket entrants (only candidates) to
state-level characteristics. Population count is from the 2011 Census, the TI corruption index is the
state-level Transparency International corruption index from 2005 as used by Fisman et al. (2014), and
the HDI is the Human Development Index in 2007. Robust standard errors. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                49
      Table B3: Subjective performance measures and present/past suspensions

                                (1)                 (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)
                             Effective            Probity      Pressure     Pro-Poor       Overall
    Mean of dep. var           3.730               3.671        3.524        3.528          3.647
    Panel A: Current suspension
    Suspended                -0.388**           -0.506***     -0.558***     -0.386**      -0.571***
                              (0.152)            (0.183)       (0.156)       (0.159)       (0.185)
    State × Intake year FEs      Y                   Y             Y            Y              Y
    Respondent FEs               Y                   Y             Y            Y              Y
    Observations              17,749              15,133        16,717       17,042         17,694
                                (1)                 (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)
                             Effective           Probity       Pressure     Pro-Poor       Overall
    Mean of dep. var           3.730               3.671         3.524        3.528          3.647
    Panel B: Past suspensions
    Mean past suspensions    -0.842**            -1.195**     -0.849***        -0.213      -0.768*
                              (0.418)             (0.589)      (0.326)        (0.337)      (0.413)
    Respondent FEs               Y                   Y            Y              Y            Y
    State × Intake year FEs      Y                   Y            Y              Y            Y
    Observations              17,750              15,138        16,719        17,043        17,695
Unit of observation is the score for a given IAS officer in 2012-13 with at least 8 years of tenure. Suspended
is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer is suspended in 2012-13. Mean past suspension is the cumulative
number of suspensions up to the year before the survey (2011) divided by the total years in service.
Respondent FEs are fixed effects for each survey respondent. State × Intake year FEs are dummies for
the state-specific cadre the IAS officer entered with. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the
individual and the respondent level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1




                                                   50
        Table B4: Subjective performance and home state allocation - linear IV

                                   (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
                                                          Allocated to home state
Mean of dep. var                 0.359        0.365          0.353       0.359        0.362       0.360
Panel A: First-stage
Number of candidates           -0.021***    -0.020***      -0.021***   -0.021***    -0.021***   -0.020***
                                (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.004)
Panel B: IV
                                Pressure     Probity       Effective   Pro-poor      Overall     Index.
Mean of dep. var                  3.524        3.671         3.730        3.528        3.647       3.620
Home state                      -0.285**     -0.366**        0.026       -0.157       -0.058      -0.145
                                 (0.134)      (0.155)       (0.117)     (0.132)      (0.132)     (0.119)
Kleibergen-Paap F -statistic     33.430       29.771        32.896      33.076       32.709      30.163
Home state × Caste FEs              Y            Y             Y            Y            Y           Y
Intake year FEs                     Y            Y             Y            Y            Y           Y
Respondent FEs                      Y            Y             Y            Y            Y           Y
State × Tenure FEs                  Y            Y             Y            Y            Y           Y
Individual controls                 Y            Y             Y            Y            Y           Y
Observations                     16,712       15,128        17,744      17,037       17,689      14,003
Notes: Unit of observation is the score for a given IAS officer in 2012-13 with at least 8 years of tenure.
Relating five measures of performance (ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure, probity, ef-
fectiveness, pro-poor orientedness and overall rating) to home state allocation. Home state is a dummy
that is 1 if the IAS officer is allocated to his or her state of origin. The instrument is the total number of
candidates in a given intake year-home state-caste bracket. Caste FEs are dummies for OBC, SC, ST.
Rank FEs are fixed effects for each rank in the entry exam. Individual controls are: age at entry, female
dummy, a dummy for coming from an urban background, having received an academic distinction, a
STEM or Economics degree, a dummy for entering directly after completing education. Standard errors
clustered at the caste-home state-intake year level and individual-level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                     51
     Table B5: Subjective performance and home state allocation by info source

                                      (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
                                   Pressure       Probity      Effective     Pro-poor        Overall
Mean of dep. var                     3.524          3.671         3.730         3.528          3.647
Only candidate                     -0.171**        -0.068         0.015        -0.043         -0.027
                                    (0.072)       (0.076)       (0.053)       (0.073)        (0.066)
× Network                            0.042         -0.047        -0.055        -0.013         -0.046
                                    (0.082)       (0.087)       (0.065)       (0.090)        (0.072)
× Media                              0.039          0.002        -0.025         0.009         -0.002
                                    (0.073)       (0.082)       (0.054)       (0.074)        (0.066)
Home state × Caste FEs                 Y              Y             Y             Y              Y
Intake year FEs                        Y              Y             Y             Y              Y
Respondent FEs                         Y              Y             Y             Y              Y
State × Tenure FEs                     Y              Y             Y             Y              Y
Individual controls                    Y              Y             Y             Y              Y
Observations                        16,712        15,128        17,744        17,037         17,689
Notes: Unit of observation is the score for a given IAS officer in 2012-13 with at least 8 years of tenure.
Relating five measures of performance (ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure, probity, ef-
fectiveness, pro-poor orientedness and overall rating) to home state allocation. Home state is a dummy
that is 1 if the IAS officer is allocated to his or her state of origin. The instrument only candidate is a
dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was the only candidate in the intake year-home state-caste bracket.
Estimates are relative to assessments based on personally knowing the IAS officer. Network (Media) is
a dummy that is 1 if the respondent knows the given officer through his/her social network (media).
Caste FEs are dummies for OBC, SC, ST. Rank FEs are fixed effects for each rank in the entry exam.
Individual controls are: age at entry, female dummy, a dummy for coming from an urban background,
having received an academic distinction, a STEM or Economics degree, a dummy for entering directly
after completing education. Standard errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake year level and
individual-level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                  52
     Table B6: Subjective performance and home state allocation by stakeholder

                                      (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)
                                   Pressure      Probity      Effective     Pro-poor        Overall
Mean of dep. var                     3.524         3.671        3.730          3.528          3.647
Only candidate                    -0.207***       -0.098      -0.118*         -0.056       -0.172***
                                   (0.056)       (0.069)       (0.066)       (0.064)        (0.066)
× State civil service                0.069        0.034         0.098         -0.099         0.135
                                   (0.094)       (0.088)       (0.080)       (0.080)        (0.102)
× Politicians (MLA)               0.245***        -0.033       0.163*          0.059         0.172*
                                   (0.075)       (0.116)       (0.093)       (0.116)        (0.097)
× Large firms                        0.064        0.056       0.168**         0.062        0.220***
                                   (0.070)       (0.078)       (0.078)       (0.074)        (0.070)
× Media                              0.029        0.037       0.159**         0.046          0.167*
                                   (0.094)       (0.091)       (0.074)       (0.097)        (0.089)
× NGO                                0.090        0.044         0.108         0.025         0.220**
                                   (0.095)       (0.111)       (0.085)       (0.113)        (0.098)
Home state × Caste FEs                 Y             Y            Y              Y              Y
Intake year FEs                        Y             Y            Y              Y              Y
Respondent FEs                         Y             Y            Y              Y              Y
State × Tenure FEs                     Y             Y            Y              Y              Y
Individual controls                    Y             Y            Y              Y              Y
Observations                        16,712       15,128        17,744        17,037          17,689
Notes: Unit of observation is the score for a given IAS officer in 2012-13 with at least 8 years of tenure.
Relating five measures of performance (ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure, probity, effec-
tiveness, pro-poor orientedness and overall rating) to home state allocation. Home state is a dummy that
is 1 if the IAS officer is allocated to his or her state of origin. The instrument only candidate is a dummy
that is 1 if the IAS officer was the only candidate in the intake year-home state-caste bracket. Estimates
are relative to assessments provided by IAS officers. Caste FEs are dummies for OBC, SC, ST. Rank FEs
are fixed effects for each rank in the entry exam. Individual controls are: age at entry, female dummy,
a dummy for coming from an urban background, having received an academic distinction, a STEM or
Economics degree, a dummy for entering directly after completing education. Standard errors clustered
at the caste-home state-intake year level and individual-level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                  53
  Table B7: Standard deviation of performance ratings and home state allocation

      Panel A:                          (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)
                                             Standard deviation in residual scores
                                     Pressure Probity Effective Pro-poor Overall
      Mean of dep. var                 0.764       0.833     0.685       0.782      0.806
      Only candidate                  -0.037      -0.014    -0.048      -0.050      0.010
                                     (0.052)     (0.058)   (0.045)     (0.057)     (0.053)
      Home state × Caste FEs             Y           Y         Y           Y          Y
      Intake year FEs                    Y           Y         Y           Y          Y
      State × Tenure FEs                 Y           Y         Y           Y          Y
      Individual controls                Y           Y         Y           Y          Y
      Observations                    1,161        1,116    1,165       1,164       1,169
Notes: Unit of observation is the SD for scores given to an IAS officer in 2012-13 with at least 8 years
of tenure. Relating the SD of all five measures of performance (ability to withstand illegitimate political
pressure, probity, effectiveness, pro-poor orientedness and overall rating) to home state allocation. The
standard deviation is calculated based on the performance scores after partialing out respondent fixed
effects. Home state is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer is allocated to his or her state of origin. The
instrument only candidate is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was the only candidate in the intake
year-home state-caste bracket. Estimates are relative to assessments based on personally knowing the
IAS officer. Network (Media) is a dummy that is 1 if the respondent knows the given officer through
his/her social network (media). Caste FEs are dummies for OBC, SC, ST. Rank FEs are fixed effects for
each rank in the entry exam. Individual controls are: age at entry, female dummy, a dummy for coming
from an urban background, having received an academic distinction, a STEM or Economics degree, a
dummy for entering directly after completing education. Standard errors clustered at the caste-home
state-intake year level and individual-level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                  54
Table B8: Subjective performance and home state allocation by state-level corruption

                                       (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)
                                   Effective     Probity       Pressure    Pro-poor       Overall
    Mean of dep. var                  3.703         3.658         3.497      3.506          3.618
    Only candidate                   -0.054     -0.146***     -0.157***    -0.094**       -0.094*
                                    (0.039)       (0.047)       (0.041)     (0.042)       (0.048)
    × TI corruption index          -0.129**      -0.134**      -0.107**      0.011       -0.169***
                                    (0.055)       (0.063)       (0.049)     (0.059)       (0.058)
    × HDI                            0.006         -0.021        -0.020      0.084         -0.031
                                    (0.048)       (0.057)       (0.047)     (0.056)       (0.052)
    Home state × Caste FEs              Y             Y             Y          Y              Y
    Intake year FEs                     Y             Y             Y          Y              Y
    Respondent FEs                      Y             Y             Y          Y              Y
    State × Tenure FEs                  Y             Y             Y          Y              Y
    Individual controls                 Y             Y             Y          Y              Y
    Observations                    16,676        14,083        15,644      15,969         16,621
Notes: Unit of observation is the score for a given IAS officer in 2012-13 with at least 8 years of tenure.
Relating five measures of performance (ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure, probity, effec-
tiveness, pro-poor orientedness and overall rating) to home state allocation. Home state is a dummy that
is 1 if the IAS officer is allocated to his or her state of origin. The instrument only candidate is a dummy
that is 1 if the IAS officer was the only candidate in the intake year-home state-caste bracket. Estimates
are relative to assessments provided by IAS officers. Caste FEs are dummies for OBC, SC, ST. Rank FEs
are fixed effects for each rank in the entry exam. Individual controls are: age at entry, female dummy,
a dummy for coming from an urban background, having received an academic distinction, a STEM or
Economics degree, a dummy for entering directly after completing education. Standard errors clustered
at the caste-home state-intake year level and individual-level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                  55
                Table B9: Career performance and home state allocation

      By tenure                              (1)               (2)          (3)            (4)
                                           Pressure       Suspended In Delhi           Payscale
      Mean of dep. var                      3.524             0.771        0.178          3.275
      Only candidate × 1-3 years              -              0.141      0.061***         -0.028
                                                            (0.188)      (0.011)        (0.018)
      × 4-8 years                           0.012          -0.178**       -0.012          0.007
                                           (0.161)          (0.080)      (0.007)        (0.022)
      × 9-12 years                          -0.108          -0.394*    -0.069***          0.021
                                           (0.093)          (0.230)      (0.021)        (0.025)
      × 13-15 years                       -0.202**           0.686     -0.132***       0.129***
                                           (0.097)          (1.074)      (0.031)        (0.040)
      × 16-24 years                       -0.107**           -0.684     -0.074**       0.079**
                                           (0.050)          (0.473)      (0.032)        (0.032)
      × 25-29 years                         0.042             0.258    -0.152***          0.055
                                           (0.082)          (1.201)      (0.052)        (0.074)
      × ≥ 30 years                       -0.409***            7.537    -0.435***        0.167*
                                           (0.132)          (7.154)      (0.090)        (0.090)
      Year FEs                                 -                Y            Y              Y
      State × Tenure FEs                      Y                 Y            Y              Y
      Home state × Caste FEs                  Y                 Y            Y              Y
      Intake year FEs                         Y                 Y            Y              Y
      Rank FEs                                Y                 Y            Y              Y
      Individual controls                     Y                 Y            Y              Y
      Sample                            Cross-section               IAS-Year panel
      Observations                         16,712            42,682      42,682          42,681
Notes: Unit of observation is the IAS posting. Relating career outcomes to home state allocation, broken
down by tenure. In Column 1, the dependent variable is the cross-sectional performance score for the
ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure. In Column 2, suspended is a dummy that is 1 if the
IAS officer is suspended (scaled × 100). In Column 3, In Delhi is a dummy that is 1 if the officer is serving
in the Central Government. In Column 5, Payscale denotes the payscale of the IAS officer (1 lowest, 7
highest) in a given year. The instrument only candidate is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was the
only candidate in the intake year-home state-caste bracket. State × Tenure FEs are state-specific fixed
effects for each year of experience in the IAS. Standard errors clustered at the caste-home state-intake
year and individual IAS officer level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                   56
         Table B10: Transfers and promotions around Chief Minister turnover

                                                               (1)           (2)
                                                            Transfer     Promoted
                   Mean of dep. var                           0.126        0.0231
                   Month around transition t = −6           0.012***      0.004**
                                                             (0.003)      (0.001)
                   Month around transition t = −5           0.017***     0.008***
                                                             (0.003)      (0.002)
                   Month around transition t = −4           0.014***     0.009***
                                                             (0.003)      (0.002)
                   Month around transition t = −3           0.019***     0.005***
                                                             (0.003)      (0.001)
                   Month around transition t = −2           0.012***     0.007***
                                                             (0.003)      (0.001)
                   Month around transition t = 0            0.038***     0.009***
                                                             (0.003)      (0.001)
                   Month around transition t = 1            0.063***     0.016***
                                                             (0.003)      (0.002)
                   Month around transition t = 2            0.028***     0.010***
                                                             (0.003)      (0.002)
                   Month around transition t = 3            0.028***     0.008***
                                                             (0.003)      (0.002)
                   Month around transition t = 4            0.027***     0.010***
                                                             (0.003)      (0.002)
                   Month around transition t = 5            0.024***     0.009***
                                                             (0.003)      (0.002)
                   Month around transition t = 6            0.026***     0.006***
                                                             (0.003)      (0.002)
                   IAS officer × Turnover event FEs             Y             Y
                   Observations                              148,330      148,330
Notes: Unit of observation is the IAS officer-month. Balanced sample of IAS officer-Chief Minister tran-
sitions around six months windows of Chief Minister appointments. Relating transfers and promotions
to Chief Minister appointments. Transfer is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was transferred in a
given month. Promoted is a dummy that is 1 if the officer was promoted to a higher payscale. Months
around transition are dummies for each month in the six month window around which the new Chief
Minister is appointed, with t = 0 denoting the month of appointment. The omitted category is the
month before the Chief Minister appointment (t = −1). IAS officer × Turnover event FEs are Chief
minister turnover-specific individual officer fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the individual IAS
officer level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                  57
       Table B11: Transfer probability by seniority and home state allocation

                                                                                           (1)
                                                                                       Transfer
   Mean of dep. var                                                                       0.126
   Years in IAS: 1-3 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1]                               -0.008
                                                                                        (0.006)
   Years in IAS: 4-8 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1]                             0.022***
                                                                                        (0.004)
   Years in IAS: 9-12 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1]                            0.044***
                                                                                        (0.005)
   Years in IAS: 13-15 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1]                           0.032***
                                                                                        (0.007)
   Years in IAS: 16-24 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1]                           0.043***
                                                                                        (0.004)
   Years in IAS: ≥ 25 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1]                            0.034***
                                                                                        (0.008)
   Years in IAS: 1-3 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1] × Only candidate              -0.006
                                                                                        (0.018)
   Years in IAS: 4-8 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1] × Only candidate              -0.022
                                                                                        (0.014)
   Years in IAS: 9-12 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1] × Only candidate             -0.031
                                                                                        (0.019)
   Years in IAS: 13-15 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1] × Only candidate            -0.015
                                                                                        (0.027)
   Years in IAS: 16-24 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1] × Only candidate           0.041*
                                                                                        (0.025)
   Years in IAS: ≥ 25 × Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1] × Only candidate            0.102*
                                                                                        (0.058)
   Controls                                                                                 Y
   Years in IAS bin FEs                                                                     Y
   IAS officer × Turnover event FEs                                                         Y
   Observations                                                                         148,330
Notes: Unit of observation is the IAS officer-month. Balanced sample of IAS officer-Chief Minister
transitions around six months windows of Chief Minister appointments. Relating transfers to Chief
Minister appointments. Transfer is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was transferred in a given
month. Only candidate is a dummy that is 1 if the IAS officer was the only candidate in the intake year-
home state-caste bracket. The controls are : Home state × Caste FEs (Caste FEs are dummies for OBC,
SC, ST); year of intake FEs; only candidate, entry exam score, entry exam rank fixed effects for each
rank in the entry exam, age at entry, female dummy, a dummy for coming from an urban background,
having received an academic distinction, a STEM or Economics degree, dummies for previous job type.
Years in IAS FEs are fixed effects for bins of years served in the IAS, with bins corresponding to those
reported in the table (1-3, 4-8, 9-12, 13-15, 16-24, ≥ 25). Standard errors clustered at the individual
IAS officer level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                58
     Table B12: Robustness: Home district connectedness with different cut-offs

                                           (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)
                                                           IAS officer is promoted
Mean of dep. var                          0.0235       0.0235       0.0235     0.0235       0.0236
Chief Minister appointed [t, t − 1]     0.007***      0.007*** 0.006***         0.003        0.003
                                         (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.025)      (0.002)
× Home connected: Switch in              0.025**      0.026**      0.024** 0.026***        0.025***
                                         (0.012)       (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.008)      (0.007)
× Home connected: Switch out              0.001         -0.000      0.001       0.008        0.004
                                         (0.014)       (0.010)     (0.008)     (0.006)      (0.006)
Year × Month FEs                            Y              Y           Y          Y            Y
IAS officer × Turnover event FEs            Y              Y           Y          Y            Y
Sample                                                        Home state officers
Cut-off for home connectedness          15 miles      25 miles 50 miles 75 miles           100 miles
Number of switching in                    167            206         357         566          727
Number of switching out                   169            202          377        499          665
Observations                             46,947        46,947       46,947     46,947       46,947
Notes: Unit of observation is the IAS officer-month. Balanced sample of IAS officer-Chief Minister
transitions around six months windows of Chief Minister appointments. Relating transfers, promotions,
demotions and lateral moves to social connections with the incoming Chief Minister. Chief Minister
appointed is a dummy that is 1 in the month the Chief Minister is appointed as well as the month after
([t, t + 1]). An IAS officer and Chief Minister are defined as home connected if their home districts are
less than 15, 25, 50, 75 and 100 miles apart (Columns 1-5). Home connected: Switch in is a dummy that
is 1 if the officer moved from not being home connected to home connected. Home connected: Switch
out is a dummy that is 1 if the officer moved from home connected to not being home connected. The
sample is restricted to home state officers only. Standard errors clustered at the individual IAS officer
level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                 59
B        Appendix Documentation
B.1       Data description: Performance survey
We collected cross-sectional data on the subjective assessments of IAS officers in the 14 main
states of India22 for 2012-13. IAS officers were assessed on five dimensions: (i) effectiveness
on the job, (ii) probity23 (iii) ability to withstand illegitimate political pressure, (iv) pro-
poor orientation, and (v) overall rating.24 All dimensions are scored on a 5 point integer
scale, where 1 is the lowest and 5 the highest performance.
       To obtain assessments from a wide range of stakeholders, we elicited these subjective as-
sessments from respondents of six societal groups in each state: (i) a random sample of IAS
officers, (ii) a random sample of state civil servants, (iii) politicians, drawn from a random
sample of members of the legislative assembly (MLA), (iv) industry, business and profes-
sional associations, comprised of the highest representatives for the major associations,25 (v)
print and TV media, comprised of key journalists covering politics for the largest newspa-
pers and TV stations by circulation and viewership respectively, and finally (vi) civil society,
comprised of the highest representatives of major NGOs, trade unions26 and think-tanks.
For each state, we sampled about 10 respondents from each of the groups.27
       We compiled a list of all centrally recruited IAS officers for each state. In each state,
interviewers then systematically worked through the list, asking respondents to provide
assessments for each known candidate. We excluded junior officers with less than 8 years’
tenure as they are often in district postings and less visible. Finally, we recorded the source
of information to account for reporting biases, differentiating between information obtained
through personal exposure, friends or social networks, or the media.
       Table 1 provides summary statistics of the 360 degrees28 measures. The sample sizes
range from N = 15, 153 for the probity measure to N = 17, 753 for the effectiveness measure.
The number of complete assessments across all dimensions is N = 14, 037. We were able to
elicit scores for about 70% of all IAS officers in our sample. All dimensions are correlated,
with the highest correlation being between pro-poor orientation and the ability to withstand
illegitimate political pressure.
  22
      These states are: Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. We excluded joint
cadres (Union Territories, Assam - Meghalaya, Manipur - Tripura), as well as the smaller states (Jammu
& Kashmir, Nagaland) and the new cadres resulting from state splits in 2000 (Jharkhand, Uttarakhand,
Chhattisgarh) from the sample.
   23
      Note that a higher value on the scale corresponds to less corruption.
   24
      The exact questions are: (i) “How would you rate his/her effectiveness in his/her assignment?” (ii)
“How much do you feel this officer uses his/her official position for making money?” (iii) “How much do you
feel this officer can withstand illegitimate political pressure?” (iv) “How sensitive is this officer to the needs
of the poor and weaker sections in society?” (v) “What is your overall rating of this officer?”.
   25
      Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry
(FICCI), the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ACCI).
   26
      All India Trade Union, Secretariat Employees Union.
   27
      For logistical reasons, we were unable to survey state civil servants in Gujarat and IAS officers in Punjab.
   28
      The term “360 degree” feedback refers to multi-source feedback used by organizations to elicit informa-
tion about employees’ work-related performance.




                                                       60
B.2        Converting unmatched insider allocations
In presence of open unreserved insider vacancies, the unreserved insider vacancy can be
allocated to insider IAS officers from SC/ST and OBC (following the exact order) if there is
an SC/ST (or OBC) outsider vacancy to allow for the exchange: For example, if Gujarat has
received two unreserved insider vacancies but only one Gujarati general caste to fill the first
slot, the second slot is opened to Gujarati SC/ST insiders, and if those are not available, to
OBC insiders. The reallocation, however, is only permitted when there is a corresponding
outsider vacancy that can be converted to an unreserved outsider vacancy to maintain the
quota among the caste vacancies. A Gujarati insider SC/ST then can only fill the unreserved
insider vacancy if a SC/ST outsider vacancy is available for exchange. Similar rules apply
for unfilled SC/ST or OBC insider vacancies. Open SC/ST insider vacancies that could
not be filled are first relaxed to allow for OBC insider candidates and then to general
candidates. Open OBC vacancies, similarly, can first be filled by SC/ST insider candidates
and then by general candidates (in both cases provided there is a corresponding outsider
slot for exchange). Any remaining open insider vacancies that could not be filled despite
the relaxation of the quotas are converted to outsider vacancies to ensure all vacancies are
filled.

B.3        Outsider allocation
The allocation of the outsiders and those who failed to be allocated to their preferred home
state (and are consequently converted to outsiders) is done according to a rotating roster
system. The roster is created by arranging all 24 cadres in alphabetical order and dividing
them into four groups. These groups are devised on the basis of an average intake by each
group, which over a period of time is roughly equal:

   1. Group I: Andhra Pradesh, Assam-Meghalaya, Bihar, Chhattisgarh and Gujarat

   2. Group II: Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
          Kerala and Madhya Pradesh

   3. Group III: Maharashtra, Manipur-Tripura, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan and
          Sikkim

   4. Group IV: Tamil Nadu, AGMUT (UT Cadre), Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh and West
          Bengal

    The outsider candidates are allocated in the order of merit across the four groups for
the outsider available vacancies (including those that have been converted from insider
vacancies). In the first cycle, all candidates are allocated to their matching caste vacancy
in the four states of Group I, starting with Andhra Pradesh. In the second cycle, the
remaining candidates are allocated to their matching caste vacancies in Group II and so on.
Since states who receive officers earlier in the allocation process will receive higher ranked
recruits, the order of the groups shuffles each year to ensure that all states receive officers

                                              61
of comparable quality. In Appendix Figure A4, for example, Group III is the first group in
2006, followed by Group IV, Group I and Group II. In the subsequent year, the groups will
rotate and the allocation of outsiders will commence with Group II first, followed by Group
III, Group IV and Group I.




                                            62
