NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE ENERGY EXECUTIVES REWARDED FOR LUCK?
Lucas W. Davis
Catherine Hausman
Working Paper 25391
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25391

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018, Revised March 2020

We are grateful to Severin Borenstein, Thom Covert, Todd Gerarden, Matthew Kahn, Ryan
Kellogg, Daniel Raimi, Martin Schmalz, and seminar participants at Cornell, UC Berkeley, UC
Davis, and Wharton for helpful comments. We have not received any financial compensation for
this project, nor do we have any financial relationships that relate to this research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Lucas W. Davis and Catherine Hausman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Are Energy Executives Rewarded For Luck?
Lucas W. Davis and Catherine Hausman
NBER Working Paper No. 25391
December 2018, Revised March 2020
JEL No. J33,M12,M52,G34,Q40
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we examine executive compensation data from 78 major U.S. oil and gas
companies over a 24-year period. Perhaps in no other industry are the fortunes of so many
executives so dependent on a single global commodity price. We find that a 10% increase in oil
prices is associated with a 2%increase in executive compensation. This oil price effect holds for
both CEOs and non-CEOs and separately for several different individual components of
compensation, including bonuses. We find that the oil price effect is larger in companies with
more insiders on the board, and asymmetric, with executive compensation rising with increasing
oil prices more than it falls with decreasing oil prices. We then discuss potential mechanisms
drawn from the broader existing literature on executive compensation.

Lucas W. Davis
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu
Catherine Hausman
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
chausman@umich.edu

1

Introduction

From January 2014 to January 2016, oil prices fell from nearly $100 per barrel to just over
$30 per barrel. In those same two years, the CEOs of 30 large U.S. oil and gas exploration
companies lost an average of over half a million dollars each in annual compensation. Perhaps
in no other industry are the fortunes of so many executives so dependent on a single global
commodity price.
In this paper, we analyze executive compensation data from 78 U.S. oil and gas companies
over a 24-year period. We document a strong correlation between crude oil prices, company
value, and executive compensation. In our preferred instrumental variables specification,
a 10% increase in company value driven by oil prices leads to a 2% increase in executive
compensation.
We then perform a series of additional analyses to better understand the mechanisms. First,
we show that this oil-price effect is robust to including time-varying controls for capital
expenditures and labor. Second, we show that the oil price effect holds for both CEOs
and non-CEOs. Third, we show that the oil price effect is widespread across the different
individual components of executive compensation, including not only total compensation,
but also bonuses and long-term cash incentives. Fourth, we show that the oil price effect
is smaller at better-governed companies. Results are similar with two measures of firm
governance, both related to the presence of more insiders on the board. Finally, we show
that the oil price effect is asymmetric, with executive compensation increasing more with
rising oil prices than it decreases with falling oil prices.
We then discuss potential interpretions, drawing from the existing literature on executive
compensation. Much of the broader literature on executive compensation is aimed at reconciling the “rent extraction” and “shareholder value” views.1 Under the rent extraction view,
executives have co-opted the pay-setting process, and are increasing compensation as much
as possible. In contrast, under the shareholder value model, pay is set within a competitive
executive market, structured in such a way that executives are properly incentivized to exert
effort on behalf of the firm.
An influential analysis by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) (hereafter B&M) interprets
regression results similar to ours as evidence of rent extraction. B&M test whether CEOs
are rewarded for shocks to firm performance beyond their control. Their paper uses several
1

Surveys of this literature include Abowd and Kaplan (1999), Murphy (1999), Bebchuk and Fried (2003),
Bertrand (2009), Edmans and Gabaix (2009), Murphy (2013), Edmans and Gabaix (2016), and Edmans et
al. (2017).

1

different measures of such shocks, but some of the most compelling evidence comes from a
case study of the oil industry. They find that CEO compensation responds just as much to
changes driven by oil prices as it does to generic changes in company value, an effect which
they term “pay-for-luck.” As first pointed out by Holmstrom (1979), companies that are
maximizing shareholder value should “filter out” oil prices and other forms of observable
luck. Executives are risk averse, so the optimal pay-for-performance contract focuses purely
on factors under control of the executive. To include luck only makes the contract riskier
without providing better incentives. Indeed, it is difficult to reconcile this oil price effect
with the predictions of this standard simple contracting model.
Still, there are ways to reconcile the oil price effect with shareholder value maximization. For
example, under a simple model of profit maximization, firms buy more inputs when output
prices go up. One could imagine that when oil prices are high, additional executive effort
is needed, and so compensation rises to induce that effort. This could explain our main
oil price effect, but would not in its simplest form explain our additional results relating to
governance and asymmetry. As in much of the rest of the literature, we are unable to sharply
distinguish shareholder value and rent extraction interpretations.2 Part of the challenge, as
explained by Murphy (2013), is that these two views are not mutually exclusive, with both
forces impacting compensation to varying degrees across firms and over time.
In addition to providing an advantageous case study, the U.S. energy industry is of significant
intrinsic interest. The United States is the world’s largest producer of oil and natural gas.
The annual value of U.S. oil and natural gas production exceeds $200 billion, and the firms
in our sample had a total market value of almost half a trillion dollars in 2016. Reflecting
the size of this industry, the dollar value at stake in executive pay is substantial: total
compensation of all oil and gas executives in the latter part of our sample is almost $1
billion per year. That said, using oil price variation means that we must identify our main
effects of interest using a single national time series.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on the related literature and
on the oil and gas industry. Section 3 describes our data. Sections 4 and 5 present empirical
results. Section 6 discusses the results in the context of the existing competing theories
about executive compensation, and Section 7 concludes.
2

See Himmelberg and Hubbard (2000); Oyer (2004); Bolton et al. (2006); Axelson and Baliga (2009);
Gopalan et al. (2010); Hoffmann and Pfeil (2010); Noe and Rebello (2012); Danthine and Donaldson (2015);
Chaigneau and Sahuguet (2018).

2

2

Background

2.1

Related Literature

There is an immense existing literature on executive compensation. However, other than
B&M, we are not aware of any other study focused on the effect of oil prices on executive
compensation. While there is a substantial literature since B&M on the question of whether
executives are “paid-for-luck,” these studies have instead focused on relative performance,
i.e., how an executive’s own company’s performance compares to that of other companies in
the same industry, and how this “relative performance” affects the executive’s compensation.
In these studies, “luck” is measured using within-industry average performance. Just as a
contract could filter out the effect of oil prices, so could a contract filter out within-industry
average performance. Filtering out the exogenous industry-wide ebbs and flows decreases
the variance of compensation, without reducing incentives for executives to take actions to
benefit the firm.
The literature testing for relative performance evaluation has found mixed evidence (Antle and Smith, 1986; Aggarwal and Samwick, 1999b; Gibbons and Murphy, 1990; Garen,
1994; Garvey and Milbourn, 2003). Typically these studies take the form of testing whether
executive compensation is tied to absolute firm performance, which depends in part on
industry-wide lucky breaks, or is tied to relative firm performance, which filters out observable industry-wide shocks. However, conclusions in that literature depend in large part on
how the researcher defines the peer group, and for some peer comparison groups there is
evidence of relative performance evaluation (Gong et al., 2011; Lewellen, 2015).3
A significant advantage of using relative performance is that this measure is available for all
industries, facilitating larger-scale analyses and cross-industry comparisons. Oil prices have
certain advantages too, however. Oil prices are both exogenous and highly volatile, driven
by world-wide shocks.4 In contrast, with relative performance studies there is ambiguity
3

Also related is the literature on benchmarking, which investigates how pay levels depend on peer
comparisons, rather than on how pay varies with peer performance; see, e.g., Albuquerque et al. (2013);
Cremers and Grinstein (2014). Other related work has focused on executive hiring and firing decisions: Jenter
and Kanaan (2015) documents that industry movements (i.e. bad luck) are predictive of CEO dismissals,
and Kaplan and Minton (2012) documents that both firm-specific movements and overall stock market
movements predict CEO turnover.
4
Outside of the executive compensation literature, these features of oil prices have been widely noted.
For example, Kline (2008) writes that oil prices “provide ample exogenous variation” and “are well measured,
volatile, and difficult to forecast” (p 3). He also notes other advantages of studying the oil industry, including
the importance of oil shocks to the economy as a whole. Kline (2008) uses variation in crude oil prices to
study labor market dynamics. Using data from the Current Employment Survey, he finds that employment
and wages in the U.S. oil and gas field services industry increase with crude oil prices.

3

about how the “peer group” is defined, which introduces measurement error and potential
endogeneity, since compensation boards have some flexibility in these choices. Moreover, in
industries that are not perfectly competitive, executives may be able to directly influence
competitor market value (Aggarwal and Samwick, 1999a).
One of our additional analyses is motivated by several studies in the relative performance
literature that test for asymmetry. Garvey and Milbourn (2006) document that executives
are rewarded more for good luck than they are punished for bad, which the authors argue
is consistent with rent extraction. This argument is bolstered by their finding that both
“pay-for-luck” and the asymmetry are stronger at firms with worse governance.5 In contrast, Bizjak et al. (2008) argue that asymmetry in “pay-for-luck” could be the result of
compensation boards using benchmarking to set wages at market reservation levels, motivated by their finding that the asymmetry appears for firms paying their CEOs below the
peer group median. They also argue more generally that other observed empirical facts
are consistent with executive compensation being set in a competitive environment rather
than as a result of rent-seeking. Campbell and Thompson (2015) also argue that retention
concerns are better able to explain asymmetric “pay-for-luck” than are explanations relating
to rent extraction. Finally, Bell and Van Reenen (2016) examine both asymmetry and the
impacts of firm governance, finding evidence of “pay-for-luck” in UK firms.
Another paper in the relative performance evaluation literature is Cremers and Grinstein
(2014). They ask whether retention concerns can explain observed “pay-for-luck,” arguing
that compensation practices depend on whether the pool of executives comes from within
the industry or from outside industries. They write that, “in an industry with many outsider
CEOs and where the overall supply of CEOs will be relatively inelastic, boards may be forced
to raise their CEOs’ compensation if there is a positive industry-wide shock... However, in
industries with few outsider CEOs, such a competitive labor market argument would be less
compelling because CEOs and top executives are beholden to the firm” (p 947). Interestingly,
Cremers and Grinstein (2014) find that the oil and gas industry is one of the sectors with few
outside hires. According to their logic, observed “pay-for-luck” in a sector like oil and gas
would be difficult to explain by retention concerns in a competitive labor market. We view
our paper as complementary to this existing literature on asymmetry and retention concerns,
in an industry context in which luck is particularly important and easy to measure.
5

Asymmetry and governance are further explored in Harford and Li (2007), which examines compensation following acquisitions; and in Bebchuk et al. (2010), which investigates governance and director
compensation. Bebchuk and Fried (2003) summarizes additional related work on governance.

4

2.2

U.S. Oil and Gas Sector

Our results provide a window into executive compensation in a dynamic, multi-billion dollar
sector. As mentioned in the introduction, the U.S. oil and gas exploration companies in
our sample had a total market value of almost half a trillion dollars in 2016. The sector
is composed of both large, old firms like ConocoPhillips (which began extracting oil over
one hundred years ago), and newer firms such as Anadarko Petroleum Corp (established in
1959) and Chesapeake Energy Corp (founded in 1989). While those three companies are
quite large – with over $10 billion in market value each in our sample – dozens of smaller
companies are also publicly traded.
The oil and gas sector has changed dramatically since the period examined by B&M. Most
importantly, the rise of hydraulic fracturing and associated innovations has substantially
increased total U.S. oil and gas production. Hydraulic fracturing has been called “the biggest
energy innovation since the start of the new century” (Yergin, 2011) and has had a large
positive impact on the U.S. economy (Hausman and Kellogg, 2015). U.S. oil and natural
gas production has increased more than 50 percent since 2008, making the United States
the world’s largest petroleum and natural gas producer (Energy Information Administration,
2018). Along with this growth in production, there have been dozens of new entrants into the
oil and gas industry. While the new entrants tend to be smaller firms, some of the entrants
have rapidly become major producers. Concho Resources, for instance, was founded in the
mid-2000s but by 2016 was among the top ten publicly-traded U.S. oil and gas firms by
market value.
Reflecting the size of the industry, executive compensation is substantial, with average executive compensation over the last decade at $4 million per year, and average CEO compensation
over the last decade at $8 million. For CEOs, this is more than three times the average CEO
compensation in the B&M sample, equal to $2.4 million in 2016 dollars. Total compensation
for the five highest-paid executives at the top 30 companies in our data totaled over $650
million in 2016. This high level of compensation also reflects rising compensation of executives in the U.S. in all industries. From 1992 to 2016, CEO compensation at the 100 largest
firms in the U.S. nearly tripled in real terms, and CEO compensation at large oil and gas
exploration firms more than tripled.
Several top oil and gas executives have been publicly criticized for their pay. Ray Irani of
Occidental Petroleum Corp was forced out after investors criticized his pay package.6 In 2013,
6

Krauss, Clifford. 3 May 2013. “Occidental Chairman Agrees to Step Down Ahead of Schedule.” New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/04/business/occidental-chairman-irani-agrees-

5

the shareholders of Apache rejected proposed executive compensation plans in a non-binding
say-on-pay vote. Perhaps most vivid is the professional story of the late Aubrey McClendon,
cofounder of one of the largest companies in our sample, Chesapeake Energy. Through
McClendon’s leadership, Chesapeake rose to become a leading producer of natural gas, and
McClendon was in the late 2000s one of the highest-paid CEOs in the United States. The
company was, however, also plagued by questions about governance and conflict-of-interest,
and McClendon was eventually forced out of the company (Gold, 2014).
Our analysis is complementary to descriptive studies of executive compensation in the oil
and gas industry. We have reviewed, for example, industry reports on how oil and gas firms
structure their pay packages.7 These reports draw on proxy statements, in which firms are
required to provide summaries of their executive pay-setting practices, and the summary
reports provide a valuable complement to our regression-based analysis. One recent report
(Alvarez & Marsal, 2018) notes a couple of useful facts, which together highlight the value
of empirically estimating the reponsiveness of pay to market value versus to oil prices.
First, firms use a wide variety of performance metrics when setting pay. Common metrics
include total production, health/safety/environmental metrics, the value of reserves, and
total shareholder return (both relative and absolute). Some of these measures are correlated
with oil prices while others are not. Second, most oil and gas companies use some discretion,
rather than solely formulaic plans, when determining annual pay. This use of discretion
is relevant because it suggests that, even if relative performance evaluation is named as a
strategy in proxy statements, it is possible that the use of discretion undoes some of the
relative comparison.8 Indeed, a blog post by a compensation consultant describes just such
a mechanism following the oil price crash at the end of 2015.9
These facts indicate that examining realized pay structures can provide a useful summary
to-leave-company.html
7
Pearl Meyer’s “2016 Oil & Gas Market Review: CEO Pay and Practice Trends,” available at https://www.pearlmeyer.com/2016-oil-and-gas-market-review-ceo-pay-and-practice-trends.pdf; Alvarez & Marsal’s 2018 “Oil and Gas Exploration & Production (E&P) Incentive Compensation Report: Analysis of Compensation Arrangements Among the Largest U.S. E&P Companies,” available at https://www.alvarezandmarsal.com/sites/default/files/article/pdf/62276 03274 tax oilgas ep incentive comp report v15 pages.pdf; and similar Alvarez & Marsal reports from earlier years.
8
This is related to the findings of Wade et al. (1997) regarding how compensation committee justify
compensation decisions.
9
The author writes “across a sample of 32 publicly-traded large E&P companies, we found that 50%
applied negative discretion or subjective assessment (e.g., through an ‘individual performance’ component)
to reduce annual incentive payouts from the formulaic outcome... This all reinforces the importance of
compensation committees maintaining some degree of subjectivity or discretion in determining bonus payouts, especially during volatile commodity cycles.” Source: Szabo, Jon. “Post #41: Effective Use of
Discretion in Annual Incentives.” Available at http://www.meridiancp.com/wp-content/uploads/EffectiveUse-of-Discretion-in-Annual-Incentives.pdf

6

of pay structures that vary (perhaps endogenously) across firms and across time. Moreover,
while the mention of relative total shareholder return as one metric points to the possibility
that we might observe the filtering of industry-wide luck from executive pay, the use of
multiple other performance metrics, and the possibility that the choice of metrics is itself
endogenous to compensation committee goals, suggests that we may not empirically observe
much filtering. Indeed, in related work, Bell and Van Reenen (2016) argues that a potential
explanation for pay-for-luck is “that CEO remuneration plans are sufficiently complex that
shareholders have difficulty effectively monitoring the contracts.” The less able shareholders
and boards of directors are able to monitor contracts, the more likely we are to see rent
extraction.

3

Data

Our primary dataset describes executive compensation and firm performance for 78 U.S. oil
and gas companies over the period 1992-2016. We assemble these data from Compustat,
which collects data from firms’ annual proxy statements. The entire Compustat dataset
covers 3,664 publicly-traded firms, including all of the S&P 1500. The panel is unbalanced
because of mergers, acquisitions, entry, and exit. For our 78 companies we have examined
new entrants into the sample and exits from the sample. New entrants tended to coincide
with initial public offerings, spin-offs, and S&P 1500 listings; exits tended to coincide with
acquisitions by other firms.
We focus on oil and gas exploration and production companies, of which there are 78 in
the Compustat data. Names of each company, along with mean compensation and mean
market value, are provided in the Appendix (Table A2). These firms, defined by NAICS code
211111, are engaged in “the exploration, development and/or the production of petroleum or
natural gas.” Oil and gas exploration is delineated separately from firms engaged primarily in
other oil and gas activities, such as support activities for oil and gas (drilling on a contract
basis) and petroleum refining.10 Whereas crude oil prices have a clear and direct impact
on production companies, the relationship is less clear for these other types of oil and gas
companies. Refinery mark-ups, for example, can either increase or decrease with crude oil
prices (Borenstein and Kellogg, 2014; Muehlegger and Sweeney, 2017).
10

For a complete list of NAICS codes with descriptions see https://www.census.gov/cgibin/sssd/naics/naicsrch. Note that the “supermajors” Chevron and ExxonMobil, as well as other verticallyintegrated companies like Valero and Western Refining, are in NAICS Code 324110 “refining,” and thus are
excluded from this analysis.

7

In principle, one could perform similar analyses on other types of energy companies, such as
natural gas transmission and distribution firms, or electric utilities.11 We instead focus on oil
and gas extraction; whereas oil prices are driven by worldwide supply and demand shocks,
natural gas prices can be substantially impacted by U.S. supply conditions, as described
in detail in Hausman and Kellogg (2015). Also, these other energy firms in our data are a
heterogeneous mix of gas-only, electric-only, and gas- and electric utilities; and of competitive
producers and price-regulated utilities. These different types of firms are affected quite
differently by energy price shocks, limiting both power and generalizability.
Conceptually, it would also be interesting to look at other competitive commodity markets.
We considered coal producers, for example. While coal is traded worldwide and thus has
a fairly exogenous price, coal prices are much less variable than oil prices, limiting statistical power. Moreover, while we have 78 oil and gas companies, there are only eight coal
mining companies in our data. Another possibility would be companies engaged in gold
or silver mining, but there are only nine and two companies, respectively, in these sectors.
In addition, we considered agricultural commodities but there are only four companies in
our data engaged in corn, poultry, or cotton production; and other agricultural companies
(e.g. Monsanto) tend to be broader conglomerates with many different lines of business. In
short, none of these other commodity markets have nearly as many large, publicly-traded
companies as does oil and gas.
For each firm, we observe financial measures on an annual basis, including total market
value, total book value, net income, total assets, the return on equity, the return on assets,
the number of employees, and capital expenditures.12 Each firm also reports executive
compensation for its five highest ranked employees.13
Altogether, we observe 934 individual executives at oil and gas companies. As mentioned
above, total compensation of all oil and gas executives in the latter part of our sample is
almost $1 billion per year, and it peaked at $1.1 billion in 2008.14 Overall, we have over
4,600 executive-year observations, compared to 827 executive-year observations in B&M.
For their analysis of the oil industry, B&M use a dataset on CEO compensation from the 51
11

Related work on utilities includes Joskow et al. (1993) and Joskow et al. (1996), which examine political
pressure and executive pay at regulated utilities.
12
Market value is essentially the year-end stock price times the number of shares. Book value is the
stockholders’ equity from the balance sheet, with adjustments for deferred taxes, investment tax credits, and
preferred stock. The return on equity is the income to common equity ratio, multiplied by 100. The return
on assets is the income to assets ratio, multiplied by 100.
13
Some firms report compensation for more than five executives, but we limit the sample to the top five
in each firm-year.
14
The average per year for 2007 to 2016 is $900 million, reflecting mean compensation of $4 million
annually for around 225 executives.

8

largest U.S. oil companies between 1977 and 1994. Our data include almost twice as many
companies, with not only the very largest U.S. companies but also many smaller, though
still publicly-traded, companies. In addition, whereas B&M examine CEOs only, we look
at all top executives. This larger sample size yields a significant improvement in statistical
precision, allowing us to perform richer analyses, and to include time-varying controls for
capital and labor in most specifications.
For each executive, in addition to total compensation we observe its components: salary,
stocks and stock options, bonuses, long-term incentives, and other compensation (such as
benefits and perquisites). The value of stocks and options is the grant-date fair value of
stock/options awarded. The reporting format for some of the individual components of
compensation changes in 2006, as we describe in the Appendix. We also observe whether
the executive is the CEO.
We merge in crude oil prices from the Energy Information Administration. We use the West
Texas Intermediate (WTI) price; this is the standard benchmark price for U.S. crude and
it closely follows other international crude prices.15,16 We focus primarily on December oil
prices, since market value is measured at year-end; however we also examine annual average
prices.17
As we discuss later in more detail, we have two measures of firm governance. The first is the
proportion of executives that are not on the board of directors; we construct this variable
from Compustat data. Second, from Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) we have the
proportion of board members that are not insiders (e.g., employees or family members of
employees).
To control for macroeconomic conditions, we use real GDP and the unemployment rate from
FRED. Finally, we deflate all prices using the CPI - All Urban Consumers: All Items Less
Energy, from FRED.
We show summary statistics in the Appendix (Table A3). Average annual compensation in
our sample is just over $3 million, with about half coming from stocks and stock options.
Market value has missing observations, making up around 7 percent of the sample; these
missing values are concentrated in firms not listed on a major S&P index and in firm-year
15

We also collect data on the Brent crude oil price, which diverged somewhat from the WTI price over
our time period. Our main results are very similar using the Brent price.
16
For supplementary analysis, we also collect natural gas prices at Henry Hub, a major pipeline hub in
Louisiana and the official delivery location for most U.S. natural gas futures contracts.
17
A firm could of course have a fiscal year ending in a month other than December; however, in our sample
97 percent of all fiscal years end in December.

9

observations just prior to a firm’s IPO. Across several variables, mean and median values
differ because of skew, so we log transform most variables in the specifications that follow.
The difference between mean and median values is especially pronounced for the return on
assets and return on equity variables; the negative mean values are driven by very negative
values during recession and low oil price years.
Before presenting the details of our empirical analysis, we present descriptive evidence on
the positive correlation between executive compensation, oil prices, and market value. The
time-series plots in Figure 1 show that executive compensation and market value at oil and
gas companies closely follow the pattern for crude oil prices during the period 1992–2016.18
The left-hand panel shows the national average compensation for energy executives (thick
black line) versus executives in all other industries (thin grey line).19 It is immediately
apparent that compensation at oil and gas companies is highly correlated with the crude
oil price (thick orange line). Asymmetry also appears in this figure: compensation tracks
upward movements of oil prices more closely than downward movements. Firm market value
is even more closely tied to oil prices, as shown in the right-hand panel. Also apparent in the
right-hand panel is the highly variable nature of market value for oil and gas firms. Figure
1 motivates the regression analyses that follow, showing that this is an industry where both
executive compensation and market value are closely tied to oil prices.

4

Main Results

4.1

Pay for Performance

We begin by measuring pay for performance for U.S. energy executives. That is, we measure
the extent to which executive compensation varies with the value of the firm. We estimate
the following:
ln(Ci,t,p ) = α + β1 · ln(Vi,t ) + Xi,t,p Θ + εi,t,p ,
(1)
where Ci,t,p is compensation at firm i in year t for executive p, V is market value, and X is a
vector of controls.20 Time-series controls (to account for macroeconomic conditions) include
18

Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) document a similar correlation during the period 1977–1994.
The data are for an unbalanced panel, as described below; the figure looks very similar if firm fixed
effects are removed to adjust for compositional changes.
20
When we take the log of compensation, we add $1 to any zero values; this affects only one observation.
The right-hand side variable, market value, has no zero or negative values. In the Appendix we show that
results are similar for alternative measures of firm performance, including book value, the return on equity,
and the return on assets.
19

10

Figure 1: Executive Compensation, Market Value, and Oil Prices

Note: This figure plots the average executive compensation (left panel) and the average year-end market value (right panel)
for firms in Compustat. In each panel, the thick black line is for 78 oil and gas firms and the thin grey line for all other firms
in Compustat. Executive compensation is averaged across the top five executives at each firm. Crude oil prices (West Texas
Intermediate light sweet crude) are plotted in orange. All values are in 2016 dollars, using the CPI-All Urban Less Energy.

GDP growth, unemployment, and a linear trend. Firm fixed effects aid with precision and
account for compositional changes. A CEO dummy also aids with precision. Standard errors
are two-way clustered by firm (to allow for correlation across individuals and across years
within a firm) and by year (to allow for correlation across firms within a year).
Results, shown in Column 1 of Table 1 indeed show a positive coefficient. The coefficient
is 0.29, statistically significant at the one percent level, indicating that for every 10 percent
increase in market value, executive compensation rises by almost 3 percent.21 This specification is analogous to Column 3 of Table 1 in B&M. The magnitude we estimate is somewhat
smaller than what is estimated by B&M; their coefficient is 0.38.
The coefficient of 0.29 is economically significant. From 2000 to 2010, the average market
value of firms in our sample rose by 84 log points, or $10 billion in real terms. At the same
time, executive compensation rose 52 log points, or $1.5 million per executive. The coefficient
21

Aggarwal and Samwick (1999b) interact market value with a measure of the variance in firm returns,
thus allowing heterogeneity in pay-for-performance across the variance of returns. When we estimate an
augmented regression with this feature (Appendix Table A4), results are largely unchanged, with a similar
slope estimate on the value of the firm and a small and statistically insignificant slope on the interaction
term.

11

Table 1: Does Executive Compensation Increase with Oil Prices?

Log market value

(1)
OLS

(2)
IV

0.29***
(0.04)

0.19***
(0.05)

Log crude oil price

First-stage F-statistic
Observations
Within R2

(3)
OLS

0.19***
(0.06)

4,673
0.52

90.59
4,673
0.51

4,673
0.46

Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from three separate regressions. The dependent variable in all regressions is log total annual compensation.
All regressions include company effects, macroeconomic variables (national GDP
growth rate and unemployment rate) and a linear trend, as well as an indicator for
whether the executive is the CEO. In Column 2 we instrument for log market value
with log crude oil prices. Compensation, market value, and oil prices are normalized to 2016 dollars. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firm and by year.
*** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

on market value indicates that compensation would be expected to rise over 20 log points,
accounting for around half of the total increase over this time period. Moreover, recall that
total compensation includes stocks and options, which we value using the grant-date value.
The exercised value, i.e. realized pay, will be even more closely tied to the firm’s stock price
and therefore market value.
Regressions of this form are typically interpreted as measuring pay-for-performance. We
next turn to a series of specifications that isolate the extent to which this market value effect
is driven by changes in global oil prices, as opposed to generic changes to market value.

4.2

Oil Price Effect

Next, we examine the extent to which executive compensation increases due to changes
in market value driven by oil prices. We follow B&M and use an instrumental variables
regression of the following form:
di,t ) + Xi,t,p Θ + εi,t,p ,
ln(Ci,t,p ) = α + β2 · ln(V

(2)

d ) is the predicted log market value, from a regression of log market value on log
where ln(V
oil price:
ln(Vi,t ) = α + δ · ln(Ot ) + Xi,t Θ + εi,t .
(3)

12

Here O is the December crude oil price.22 This IV specification allows us to isolate the
degree to which changes in market value are driven by global oil prices, over which executives
have no control. We can thus compare the impacts of generic changes in market value on
compensation to the impacts of oil-price-induced changes in market value.
In this IV specification, our identifying variation now comes from an annual time series,
whereas in the previous specification, we leveraged panel variation in firm-level market value.
As such, the macroeconomic controls and the linear time trend that we include are now particularly important. Below (Section 4.4), we show the sensitivity of our results to alternative
sets of controls. In the Appendix, we also show placebo regressions using other industries,
such as manufacturing.
The first stage results are shown in the Appendix (Table A5). The coefficient on the oil
price has the expected sign and is statistically different from zero at the one percent level.
The coefficient of 0.99 indicates that for every 10 percent change in oil prices, market value
at the average oil and gas company increases by 9.9 percent. Oil prices are a tremendous
driver of value for these firms.23
The IV estimates are shown in Column 2 of Table 1.24 When we instrument for market value
using oil prices, we estimate a coefficient on market value of 0.19, statistically significant at
the one percent level. For every 10 percent increase in market value driven by an increase
in oil prices, executive compensation rises by 1.9 percent. The coefficient is statistically
different from zero at the 1% level, but not statistically different from 0.29 (the coefficient
in Column 1), indicating that we cannot reject that compensation responds just as much to
changes in market value due to oil prices as it does to generic changes in market value.
Our estimate is consistent with B&M, but much more precisely estimated. In particular, our
standard error is less than one-third the magnitude (0.05 compared to 0.17) of their analogous
estimate (Column 4 of Table 1 of their paper). This increased statistical power reflects our
22

For simplicity, we use the same α, XΘ, and ε notation in all equations; obviously the actual estimated
values vary across equations. In general, most of our specifications are run at the individual executive level,
but the p subscript is dropped from equation 3 as all variables in that equation are at the firm level.
23
The first-stage coefficient of 0.99 also suggests that oil and gas companies are not significantly hedging their exposure to oil price risk. Oil and gas executives, however, are potentially a different story. For
executives, not only their income, but also their wealth and human capital, are closely tied to oil prices.
Executives are typically forbidden from short-selling company stock or otherwise hedging, as this would prevent performance incentives from having their intended effect (Jin, 2002; Hall and Murphy, 2002). However,
in this case given the widespread availability of futures contracts for crude oil it seems reasonable to believe
that at least some executives have managed to partially hedge their exposure.
24
The table also reports the first-stage instrument F-statistic, specifically the Kleibergen-Paap (2006)
statistic that accounts for the clustered standard errors. The value of 90.59 indicates that we do not have a
weak instruments problem.

13

larger sample size and somewhat longer time frame. We also have about 20 percent more
variation in oil prices as measured by the standard deviation of the log real price. We also
have more precision than B&M in specifications using accounting rates of return as the
measure of firm value (Table A6). Our point estimate is smaller than B&M (0.19 compared
to 0.35). However, when using annual average oil prices, rather than December prices, we
estimate a coefficient of 0.31, more comparable to the B&M estimate (see Appendix, Table
A6).
Finally, we show in Column 3 of Table 1 the estimates from an alternative regression, in
which we regress compensation directly on oil prices:
ln(Ci,t,p ) = α + ψ · ln(Ot ) + Xi,t,p Θ + εi,t,p .

(4)

The coefficient on the oil price is 0.19, statistically significant at the one percent level. This
implies that for a 10 percent rise in oil prices, executive compensation rises by 1.9 percent.
This is an economically significant amount. The mean absolute year-on-year change in oil
prices over this period was 30 log points. Thus in a typical year, oil and gas executives
saw their compensation vary by 6 log points because of oil price changes, or $180,000 at
the mean pay level. Moreover, from 2013 to 2015, oil prices fell by 100 log points (60
percent)—implying a drop in annual compensation of over $500,000 per executive.

4.3

Controlling for Labor and Capital

B&M interpret their IV estimate as evidence of rent extraction. But under some conditions
this pattern could be explained with a simple model of firm profit maximization. When oil
prices go up, firms want to produce more—so firms will choose to buy more of all inputs
(capital, labor, and executives), in order to produce and sell more oil. More executives could
mean hiring more individuals for executive roles or asking executives to work more hours –
either of which would increase executive compensation.
In this subsection we test whether results change when we control for labor and capital.
A firm will maximize profit by choosing inputs to equate the marginal rate of technical
substitution with the input price ratio. That is, the firm equates the marginal product per
dollar for each input. When the production technology is, for example, Cobb-Douglas or
CES, then the marginal rate of technical substitution does not depend on output prices,
so whether the price of oil is $20, $100, or $200 per barrel, the firm will still choose the
same ratio of inputs, and controlling for labor and capital is equivalent to controlling for the

14

Table 2: Controlling for Capital and Labor

Log market value

(1)
IV

(2)
IV

(3)
IV

(4)
IV

(5)
IV

(6)
IV

0.19***
(0.05)

0.19***
(0.06)

0.15**
(0.05)
0.17***
(0.04)

0.14**
(0.05)

0.16***
(0.05)

0.13**
(0.05)
0.10***
(0.03)
0.12***
(0.04)

0.11**
(0.05)
0.10***
(0.03)
0.06
(0.07)
0.00
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)

72.49
4,603
0.51

76.13
4,553
0.52

84.49
4,553
0.52

Log employees
Log capital expenditures
Log employees, squared
Log capital expenditures, squared

First-stage F-statistic
Observations
Within R2

90.59
4,673
0.51

96.12
4,553
0.51

89.21
4,623
0.52

Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from six separate IV regressions, identical to Column 2 of Table 1, but
with additional labor and capital control variables. Thus, the dependent variable in all regressions is log total annual compensation. Column 1 re-creates the result from Table 1. Column 2 limits the sample to the firm-year observations for which
employee and capital expenditure data are available. Columns 3–6 include the additional controls. Compensation, market
value, oil prices, and capital expenditures are normalized to 2016 dollars. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firm and
by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

overall level of demand for inputs.25
We thus estimate a series of alternative specifications for our baseline IV regression in which
we control for labor and capital. Specifically, we include log employee counts and the log of
capital expenditures as control variables. We also show a version with quadratic functions
of these variables. Results are shown in Table 2. Column 1 of this table re-creates our main
specification from before, that is, Column 2 of Table 1. Column 2 limits the sample to the
firm-year observations for which employee and capital expenditure data are available; this
drops 2.6% of observations, but results are unchanged. Columns 3 and 4 add the labor and
capital controls one-at-a-time. We see that each of these cuts the coefficient on log market
value by about 20 to 30 percent, with the capital control having a bigger impact on the
market value coefficient. When we include both capital and labor controls, the coefficient
on log market value drops to 0.13. A quadratic version (Column 6) drops the market value
coefficient a bit further.
25
These controls could be viewed as a proxy for firm size. Studies have long shown that large firms pay
their executives more than small firms, suggesting that the value of executive skill is increasing in firm size
(see, e.g. Murphy, 1999). Tervio (2008), for example, concludes that high levels of top executive compensation
are mainly due to firm size rather than the scarce ability of executives, and Gabaix and Landier (2008) find
that the sixfold increase in CEO pay between 1980 and 2003 can be attributed to the sixfold increase in
market capitalization of large U.S. companies during the same period. Thus a possible interpretation of the
observed oil price effect could be that firm size increases with oil prices, increasing the marginal product of
top executives.

15

Part of this oil price effect thus appears to be explained by firms choosing to buy more of all
inputs when oil prices rise. However, a positive coefficient on instrumented log market value
remains. Even controlling for other inputs, oil and gas executives see their compensation
increase by 1.3 percent for every 10 percent rise in oil-price induced changes to market value.
Thus the pattern seems not to be immediately explained by a simple model of firm profit
maximization with a Cobb-Douglas or CES production function.
Next we perform a series of additional analyses aimed at better understanding the underlying
mechanisms. Throughout, we proceed with the more conservative specification that controls
for capital and labor.

4.4

Robustness to Alternative Specifications

In the Appendix, we show robustness of these main results to a variety of additional alternative specifications. First, because the identifying variation is time-series variation, we
consider specifications of the regression of compensation on oil prices (Column 3 of Table
1) that use various alternative comparison groups. In these we can examine the differential
impact of oil prices on compensation in oil and gas companies relative to other industries.
These comparisons are designed to assess whether our macroeconomic controls are sufficient.
We use manufacturing as a comparison group, then services. We also estimate a specification
that includes all firms in Compustat, with a separate coefficient on the oil price for each
industry. We find an impact of oil prices on compensation for oil and gas extraction firms
and not for the comparison groups (Table A7).
We also report estimates (Tables A8 and A9) from a wide variety of alternative specifications
for our IV specification. To be conservative, we focus on the specification that controls for
capital and labor. We first show that the results do not rely on the macroeconomic controls
that we use. Next we show that results with person fixed effects are very similar to the
main results. This specification is reassuring because it suggests the results are not driven
by compositional changes, such as endogenous entry and exit of executives.26 Results are
similar if we control for the national median level of executive compensation for all other
industries. This is reassuring that general trends in executive compensation are not driving
the result. Finally, the point estimate drops to only 0.03 when we include a quadratic trend,
26

Interestingly, the executives our sample tend to remain in the oil and gas business their entire career.
In particular, for this subset of executives 93 percent of all person-year observations are for oil and gas
companies. This is notable because it implies that the oil price effect is not driven by movement of executives
between this and other sectors, for example, with highly productive executives moving into the industry
during high oil price periods.

16

although it is not statistically different (5 percent level) from the original point estimate of
0.13. Overall, the results are somewhat sensitive to the time series controls that we include,
which makes sense given that we are identifying off of annual time-series variation in oil
prices.
Results are very similar using various subsets of the data: limiting the sample to firms on
the S&P 1500; limiting the sample to a balanced panel; defining the oil and gas sector with
SIC sector definitions; weighting by a time-invariant measure of firm size (assets); or using
all executives reported in Compustat rather than just the top five.
We show that results are also very similar for alternative variable definitions: an alternative
total compensation measure reported in Compustat; using Brent oil prices rather than WTI
oil prices; or including the log of natural gas prices as an additional instrument. Thus,
overall, the oil price effect is robust across alternative specifications.
Finally, in Table A10, we separate the sample into CEOs and non-CEOs, finding an oil price
effect in both subsamples. While the highest paid executive at most of the companies in our
sample is the CEO, the other top-five highest paid executives hold a wide range of positions
include Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Chief Operating Officer (COO), and General Counsel.
That we find essentially identical results for CEOs and non-CEOs is notable. Individuals
in these other roles bring skills to the organization that are quite different from the CEO.
If one thought that the observed oil price effect was reflecting increased demand for certain
skills and ability bundles that are particularly valued when oil prices are high (Eisfeldt
and Kuhnen, 2013), then it would not necessarily follow that the very different skills and
backgrounds for CEOs and non-CEOs would respond equivalently. Still, as we discuss in
Section 6, it is possible that during periods with high oil prices, the marginal product of all
executive types rises.

5
5.1

Additional Results
Components of Pay

We next test for the oil price effect across the different components of executive compensation. We break total compensation down into five categories: salaries, stocks and stock
options, bonuses, long-term incentive programs, and other pay (such as benefits). These
separate components are interesting because of secular trends in compensation practices.
Nationwide, the use of stocks and stock options expanded dramatically through the 1990s,
17

Table 3: For Which Components of Pay Is There an Oil Price Effect?
(1)
IV
Salary

(2)
IV
Stocks & options

(3)
IV
Bonuses

(4)
IV
Other incentives

(5)
IV
Other pay

Log market value

-0.05*
(0.02)

0.08
(0.09)

0.59***
(0.17)

0.56***
(0.15)

0.21**
(0.10)

First-stage F-statistic
Observations
Within R2

84.37
4,546
0.34

101.75
3,934
0.48

56.65
3,083
0.27

175.26
1,729
0.38

84.31
4,443
0.14

Note: This table reports results from five separate IV regressions. The regressions are identical to Column 4 of Table 2,
but with alternative dependent variables: each of five components of executive pay (logged). Standard errors are two-way
clustered by firm and by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

then plateaued.27 The growth of stocks and options continued for longer in the energy sector
than in other sectors, and as a result, energy relies more heavily on these forms of compensation than other sectors. See Appendix Figure A2. At the end of our sample period, oil and
gas executives received an average of over seventy percent of compensation from components
other than salary.
We regress each component on market value, instrumented with the oil price. We use the
same set of controls as in the primary results shown in Column 4 of Table 2, including
capital and labor. We also add a dummy to account for changes in the way Compustat
reports these variables after 2006 (details in the Appendix). All five components of pay have
some observations equal to zero. We have dropped these from our log regressions, so these
results are conditional on a non-zero value. In the Appendix (Table A11), we instead use
an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation, thus retaining observations for which the value of
that component of compensation is equal to zero.28
Results are shown in Table 3. Salary (Column 1) does not reflect an oil price effect. If
anything, salary appears to decrease with increases in market value driven by oil prices, but
the coefficient is close to zero and only marginally statistically significant. Stocks and options
(Column 2) have a positive point estimate. When crude oil prices cause market value to rise
27

One of the reasons nationwide for the rise in the use of stocks and options was legislation in 1993 that
limited tax deductions to the first $1 million of salary (Rose and Wolfram, 2002). In the Appendix, we show
with histograms that this appears to be somewhat binding for CEO pay, although not for other executive
pay. We also show in the Appendix (Table A10) that oil price effect appears to be approximately equally
prevalent with CEOs and other executives, so this tax rule does not appear to be a primary driver of this
pattern.
28
The sample size for these regressions should thus match that of Column 5, Table 2. We actually have
one more observation in the inverse hyperbolic sine regressions, because there is one executive with zero
reported overall compensation.

18

by 10 percent, the value of stocks and options granted to executives rises by 0.8 percent.
That this coefficient is somewhat small and not statistically significant is perhaps surprising.
However, we measure the value of stocks and options at the time they are granted, i.e. exante not ex-post, so we have removed most of the mechanical positive correlation between
realized pay and oil prices.
Moreover, in the Appendix (Table A12), we show that this appears to be at least in part
because the value of stocks and options is tied more closely to annual average oil prices
than to the December price that we use in our main specifications. This is intuitive if, for
instance, these are granted earlier in the year, since their value is computed at the time they
are granted. In our sample, several years saw enough within-year variability in oil prices for
the December and annual average prices to differ by at least 25 percent.29
Columns 3-5 examine bonuses, other incentives, and other pay. Together, these make up
around 30 percent of pay (see Table A3). When crude oil prices increase market value by 10
percent, bonuses (Column 3) rise by 5.9 percent and other incentives by 5.6 percent, both
statistically significant at the one percent level. In the Appendix, we show that the oil price
effect for bonuses is still evident when zeroes are included; in fact, the point estimate is
substantially larger. The point estimate for other incentives drops, but it is not statistically
different from the point estimate shown in Table 3. This evidence on bonuses and longterm incentives is consistent with the metrics that firms report using when setting pay: one
recent industry report noted that common metrics for annual bonus payments are production
and the value of reserves, both of which are positively correlated with oil prices; and that
a common metric for long-term incentive payments is total shareholder return (Alvarez &
Marsal, 2018).
For none of these latter components (Columns 3-5) do we reject the null that compensation
responds just as much to changes driven by oil prices as it does to generic changes in company
value. That is, we fail to reject that the IV estimates are identical to point estimates from
analogous OLS regressions, shown in the Appendix (Table A13). And overall, the results in
Table 3 indicate that the oil price effect is not simply a mechanical result stemming from
stock and option awards.
29

Another possible explanation for the small coefficient for stocks and options is heterogeneity in the way
firms compute the grant-date fair value of stocks and options, detailed in Coles et al. (2014).

19

5.2

Governance

We next test whether the oil price effect varies with firm governance. Our analysis of governance follows B&M, who argue that companies with strong independent leadership from the
board should be better able to prevent executives from co-opting the pay process, suggesting
that “we should expect more pay for luck in the poorly governed firms” (p 918). Whereas
B&M test governance using relative industry performance as a measure of luck, our analysis
is the first to test the effect of governance using oil prices. We leverage two indicators of
firm governance.
First, from the Compustat data, we observe whether each of the firm’s top-five executives
also sits on the board of directors. We construct a variable equal to the proportion of the
top five executives that do not sit on the board. Higher levels of this measure thus indicate
better governed companies with more independence on the board. The mean in our sample
is 0.64. That is, on average about two-thirds of the top-five executives do not sit on the
board. Table A3 includes descriptive statistics for all our governance measures.
Second, from ISS data, we observe whether each of the firm’s board members has any sort
of insider status, for instance because the member is an employee or the close relative of an
employee. From this, we construct a variable equal to the proportion of the board members
that are not insiders. Again, a higher value indicates a higher level of governance. The mean
in our sample is 0.75.30 Thus on average about three-quarters of board members are not
insiders.
For each of the measures, we focus on a time-invariant measure, equal to the mean value
observed across all years for each firm. We show results in the Appendix (Table A14)
that leverage variation across time within a firm, although we note it is less clear that this
variation is exogenous.
We estimate a series of regressions in which we augment our standard IV specification with an
interaction of market value with each governance measure. The coefficient on this interaction
thus tells us how the oil price effect differs for better-governed firms. We display 2SLS results,
matching the specification in Column 4 of Table 2.31 We have two first-stage equations: we
instrument for both the log market value and for the interaction of market value with the
governance indicator. Our two instruments are log oil prices and the interaction of log
oil prices with the governance measure. We show results both for total compensation and
30

Missing values arise both because the ISS data do not cover the years 1992-1996, and because they do
not cover the smallest firms in our sample.
31
We also show OLS results in Appendix Table A15.

20

Table 4: Does Good Governance Reduce the Oil Price Effect?
(1)
2SLS

(2)
2SLS

Panel A: All Compensation
Log market value
Log m.v. X Portion of execs not on board

0.17
(0.20)
-0.07
(0.27)

0.44*
(0.23)

Log m.v. X Portion of board non-insiders

First-stage F-statistic
Observations
Within R2

(3)
2SLS

Panel B: Bonuses & Cash Incentives
0.96***
(0.22)
-0.55
(0.35)

-0.46
(0.28)

33.25
4,553
0.52

38.06
3,406
0.56

(4)
2SLS

1.37***
(0.36)

-1.09**
(0.44)

43.33
4,117
0.43

58.95
3,133
0.50

Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from four separate 2SLS regressions. The dependent variable in
Columns 1 and 2 is log total annual compensation; and log bonuses and non-stock incentives in Columns 3 and 4. In all
columns, we have two first stage equations: we instrument for log market value and the governance interaction with both
log crude oil prices, and with log oil price interacted with the governance measure. All regressions include the same controls as in Column 4 of Table 2, including capital and labor. Columns 3 and 4 additionally include a dummy for data
reporting changes beginning in 2006. The sample size varies across columns because of differential data availability across
the different governance measures. Compensation, market value, and oil prices are normalized to 2016 dollars. Standard
errors are two-way clustered by firm and by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

separately for bonuses and cash incentives. We analyze this second category separately
because this is the component of pay over which boards tend to have the most discretion,
and because our analysis earlier showed a significant oil price effect in this category.
Results are shown in Table 4.32 Overall, the results suggests a smaller oil price effect at
better-governed companies. In particular, the interaction of market value and governance
has a negative sign in all four specifications, indicating a smaller oil price effect with more
independents on the board. Governance seems to particularly matter for bonuses and cash
incentives, the components of pay that tend to be most discretionary. The first-stage instrument F-statistics range from 33 to 59, indicating that we do not have a weak instruments problem, though the interaction term is statistically significant in only one of the four
specifications. Finally, we also show using OLS (see Appendix Table A15), that executive
compensation in well-governed firms is less tied overall to market value, consistent with these
firms using more nuanced forms of pay-for-performance.
The magnitudes are suggestive of an economically significant effect across all columns. For
instance, removing one of the top five executives from the board removes 8 percent of the
32

The sample size drops in Columns 2-4 because of missing data for the non-insiders variable and because
of some zero values for bonuses and cash incentives. In the Appendix, we show estimates of the overall oil
price effect for the sub-sample that has complete governance variable coverage and non-zero bonus and cash
incentives values.

21

oil price effect in Column 1 and 11 percent of the oil price effect in Column 3.33 Similarly,
in Columns 2 and 4, replacing one insider from a nine-member board removes 11 percent of
the oil price effect on total compensation and 9 percent of the effect for bonuses and cash
incentives.34 Results with time-varying measures are presented in Appendix Table A14. We
again estimate negative coefficients in Columns 2–4, albeit with weak first stages.
Still, these results must be interpreted cautiously. We do not have exogenous variation in
governance quality. One might be concerned, therefore, that these governance results are
driven by other differences in firms that are correlated with the board composition measures
that we have used here. For instance, board composition might be correlated with firm size.
To explore this possibility, we estimate alternative specifications (see Appendix Table A16)
that control for firm size. Specifically, we include interactions of the market value and oil
price variables with a time-invariant measure of firm size, average log employees over our
sample period. The coefficients on the governance variables are robust to this additional
control, suggesting that heterogeneity along this dimension is not driving the governance
results. Nonetheless, without exogenous variation in governance quality it is difficult to
make strong causal statements on this basis of these regressions.

5.3

Asymmetry

We next explore whether the oil price effect is symmetric with regard to increases and
decreases of the firm’s market value. We estimate augmented versions of our standard
specifications, separating the coefficients on market value and oil prices into two coefficients
each. In particular, we construct an indicator variable equal to one if market value is higher
(in real terms) than the previous year. We then interact the log of market value with both
this indicator variable and with one minus this indicator variable. The regression thus tells
us whether the sensitivity of executive pay to firm performance is the same when the firm’s
value is rising versus falling.
Results are shown in Table 5. We estimate an economically large and statistically significant
difference across the two coefficients. In Column 1, the sensitivity of executive compensation
to market value is around one third higher when the firm’s value is rising (in real terms).
33
Removing one of the top five executives decreases the “portion not on the board” by 20 percentage
points, and −0.07 · 0.20 = −0.014, or 8 percent of the log market value effect on total compensation of 0.17
if all executives are on the board.
34
Removing one insider decreases the “portion non-insiders” by 11.1 percentage points, and −0.46·0.111 =
−0.05, or 11 percent of the log market value effect on total compensation of 0.44 if all board members are
insiders.

22

Table 5: Is the Oil Price Effect Asymmetric?
(1)
OLS

Log market value, if rising
Log market value, if falling

(2)
OLS

0.28***
(0.04)
0.21***
(0.04)

Log oil price, if rising

0.20***
(0.07)
0.06
(0.06)

Log oil price, if falling
Log market value, if oil price rising

0.29***
(0.10)
0.18*
(0.10)

Log market value, if oil price falling

p-value, rising versus falling
First-stage F-statistic
Observations
Within R2

(3)
2SLS

0.004

0.006

4,357
0.53

4,357
0.51

0.067
17.92
4,357
0.52

Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from three separate regressions. The dependent variable in all regressions is log total annual compensation. We also report the p-value
for a test of equality of the “if rising” versus “if falling” coefficients. All regressions include
the same controls as in Column 4 of Table 2. Column 1 also includes (not shown) a dummy
variable to indicate whether market value is rising; Columns 2 and 3 include a dummy variable
to indicate whether oil prices are rising. Column 3 has two first stage equations: “log market
value, if oil price rising” and “log market value, if oil price falling” are instrumented with “log
oil price, if oil price rising” and “log oil price, if oil price falling.” Compensation, market value,
and oil prices are normalized to 2016 dollars. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firm
and by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Similarly, we construct an indicator variable for whether oil prices are rising or falling, then
include interactions of this indicator variable with the log oil price. Results are shown in
Column 2 of Table 5.35 We again find an economically and statistically significant difference
(p-value<0.01). In particular, the point estimate for increasing oil prices is three times larger
than the point estimate for decreasing oil prices.
Finally, we estimate a 2SLS version, in which log market value is interacted with the oil price
rising/falling dummy. Thus we have two first stage equations, in which our instruments are
log crude oil prices if oil prices are rising, and log crude oil prices if oil prices are falling.36
Results, in Column 3, again indicate an asymmetric oil price effect. In this specification the
difference between the two coefficients is not statistically significant (p-value=0.07), but the
35

Note that the number of observations drops because we do not observe market value in 1991, and thus
we are unable to construct the “rising/falling” dummy for market value in 1992. In the Appendix, we show
estimates of the overall oil price effect for the sub-sample that begins in 1993.
36
Ideally, we would estimate a 2SLS version, with the indicator variable for market value rising or falling,
using three first-stage equations (i.e., instrumenting with the oil price rising indicator variable). However,
we find that we lose first stage power when we have three endogenous variables. Thus we interact the market
value variable with the oil price rising/falling indicator variable directly.

23

point estimate for increases is again larger than the point estimate for decreases.
In the appendix we also test whether this asymmetry differs for executives with compensation
levels above and below the median. Oil prices matter for both groups, and asymmetry is
present for both groups, but the overall sensitivity to oil prices is stronger for executives
paid above their peer group median.37

6

Discussion

6.1

Measuring the Degree of Filtering

One of the reasons the oil price effect is interesting is that it is inconsistent with a simple
contracting model along the lines of Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987). Executives are risk
averse, so the optimal contract would filter out oil prices and other observable measures of
luck to make contracts less risky (Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1987). The observed oil price
effect (e.g. Table 2), indicates that companies are not completely filtering out oil prices.
However, are companies doing partial filtering? To what extent are companies filtering out
oil prices?
In this section we perform a back-of-the-envelope calculation aimed at measuring the degree
of filtering. We are not arguing that this type of contracting model is the only way to think
about executive compensation. Indeed, later in this section we continue our discussion of
alternative models. But, we do view this back-of-the-envelope as a useful exercise for evaluating the degree to which these data are consistent or not consistent with one particularly
prominent model.
Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987) derives the optimal compensation contract under assumptions about the executive’s risk aversion and the process controlled by the executive. This
model, and the literature using it (such as B&M and Aggarwal and Samwick (1999b)),
abstract away from the potential impact of luck on executive marginal product. Using the
notation in Aggarwal and Samwick (1999b), the compensation contract is w = α0 +α1 π+α2 θ,
i.e. compensation w is a linear function of firm performance π and observable luck θ. The
37

This evidence of asymmetry both above and below the median differs from Bizjak et al. (2008), which
finds that “pay-for-luck” is driven by CEOs with pay below the peer group median. Their context is different
as their study uses industry returns as a measure of luck, rather than oil prices, but their discussion is
nonetheless quite relevant. In particular, they argue that their evidence is consistent with “competitive
benchmarking being used for retention motives” (p 164), rather than rent extraction: “under [rent extraction],
the asymmetry in pay to luck should be most prevalent in the group of highly paid CEOs because these are
the ones who have likely captured the pay process” (p 165).

24

optimal weight on observable luck θ is negative; i.e., in the optimal contract, luck is filtered
out.
Aggarwal and Samwick (1999b) show that in the optimal contract the weights on firm perα∗
formance and observable luck have the ratio α2∗ = −β, where β is the coefficient from a
1
regression of firm performance on luck. That is, the more firm performance is driven by
observable luck, the greater the relative (negative) weight that should be put on luck in the
optimal contract. It is worth noting that their model assumes that the executive is risk
averse, but that this ratio does not depend on the exact level of risk aversion.
We can examine the extent to which firms filter by calculating the ratio αα21 at the theoretical
optimum versus in practice. The optimal ratio is simply 0.99, the first-stage coefficient in
Table A5 – the contribution of luck to firm performance.38 To calculate the actual ratio
used by the typical firm, we estimate a regression with log compensation as the dependent
variable and both log market value and log oil prices as explanatory variables. Full results
are given in Table A18. When we include the same controls as in Table 1, we estimate a
coefficient on log market value of 0.31 and a coefficient on log oil price of -0.12.39 The ratio
of the coefficients is αα21 = −0.12/0.31 = −0.4.
Thus in practice compensation practices are such that firms put a negative weight on oil
prices that is only 0.4 times the weight put on firm performance. In contrast, the optimal
contract would instead put a negative weight on oil prices that is essentially identical to
the weight on firm performance. That is, for this back-of-the-envelope calculation, which
abstracts away from executive marginal product effects, we see only 40 percent of the optimal
level of filtering being done in practice. Not only do we not find complete filtering, but it
appears that about 60 percent of observable luck is not filtered. U.S. oil and gas firms
compensate their executives in a way that falls well short of this theoretical optimum.

6.2

Rent Extraction vs Shareholder Value

We have presented a number of results that some papers in the previous literature would
have characterized as consistent with rent extraction on the part of executives. But how
could rent extraction occur in equilibrium? In particular, if oil and gas executives are
38

The specification in Table A5 includes additional controls, but we show in the Appendix (Table A19)
that the 0.99 estimate is not very sensitive to the controls.
39
In the Appendix, we consider two sets of robustness checks. First, results are robust to including
additional measures of firm performance; see Table A20. Next, we consider a related specification used in
Garvey and Milbourn (2003). Table A21 shows that their regression yields results that are equivalent to a
non-linear combination of the parameters that we estimate.

25

overpaid when oil prices are high, why are outside hires not able to arbitrage this away?
One possible explanation is that executives in oil and gas have industry-specific human
capital. As documented by Cremers and Grinstein (2014), there is relatively little movement
of executives between oil and gas and other sectors. This lack of movement between sectors
is evident in our sample as well, with the vast majority of executives in our dataset spending
their entire careers in oil and gas (see footnote 26). Thus, it seems plausible that executives
are able to exert market power.
Still, it is difficult to make strong conclusions about the mechanisms underlying the observed oil price effect. As we mentioned in the introduction, much of the broader literature
on executive compensation is aimed at attempting to reconcile the “rent extraction” and
“shareholder value” views. Despite a voluminous literature in this area, it remains very
much an open question as to which view best explains the empirical evidence on executive
compensation. Part of the challenge is that the two views are not mutually exclusive, with
both forces impacting compensation to varying degrees across firms and over time. In addition, there are many alternative approaches for modeling “shareholder value,” making it
hard to make definitive statements about what is (or what is not) consistent with the best
interests of shareholders.
In particular, just because the oil price effect is inconsistent with standard contracting models, need not imply rent extraction. There are alternative approaches for modeling shareholder value in which one would expect executive compensation to increase with oil prices.
For example, as we mentioned earlier, under a simple model of profit maximization, firms buy
more inputs when output prices go up. This would imply increased demand for executives,
and thus increased compensation, during periods with high oil prices. This induced input
demand indeed appears to be part of the explanation. As we showed earlier, the oil price
effect gets smaller after controlling for capital and labor. This attenuation is consistent with
higher executive compensation reflecting, at least in part, higher demand for all inputs.
There are also alternative approaches for modeling shareholder value which focus on retention
concerns. Oyer (2004), for example, considers a model in employees’ outside opportunities
are correlated with firm performance. Under such a model, executive compensation could
increase during high oil prices, not to incentivize effort, but in order to prevent executives
from moving to other firms. As we discussed earlier, retention concerns are potentially
somewhat less compelling in the market for oil and gas simply because it is a relatively insular
market with little movement of executives between this and other sectors, but this paper
along with subsequent work in this area nonetheless raises another potential mechanism
through which compensation would be correlated with market conditions (see, e.g. Lustig et
26

al., 2011; Cremers and Grinstein, 2014; Campbell and Thompson, 2015).40
We find that the oil price effect is pervasive across both CEOs and non-CEOs, and across
several individual components of executive compensation. These results are inconsistent
with standard contracting models, but could be rationalized by increased input demand or
retention concerns. During periods with high oil prices, firms need more effort from nonCEOs, just like they need more effort from the CEO, and outside options matter both for
CEOs and non-CEOs. Moreover, there is no clear reason why increased compensation would
take the form (or not take the form) of any of the individual components of compensation.
Bonuses and cash incentives tend to be the most discretionary, so they would seem to be
particularly susceptible to rent extraction but these components may also simply be the best
way to scale up compensation during oil price shocks. Thus, while these additional results
are interesting, they fail to sharply distinguish between rent extraction and shareholder
value.
Neither increased input demand nor retention concerns can explain, in their simplest form,
the asymmetry results. Under a shareholder value model in which executives are paid their
marginal product, we would expect the pattern to be approximately symmetric. Demand for
executives would increase with rising oil prices, but then decrease proportionally with falling
oil prices. Instead, we find a clear asymmetry. The OLS results in Column 1 of Table 5 are
particularly striking, because they indicate that the impact of market value is not explained
by a contract in which executive pay is a simple linear function of market value.41 At first
glance, this asymmetric pattern would appear to be more consistent with rent extraction,
with executives better able to extract value from the firm when oil prices are rising.
However, there are again alternative approaches for modeling shareholder value that could
explain this asymmetric pattern. For example, there could be something inherently asymmet40

Yet another potential mechanism comes from DeMarzo et al. (2012) which describes a dynamic agency
model in which financing constraints become less binding after positive exogenous shocks: “The intuition
is that the marginal cost of compensating the agent is lower when profitability is high because relaxing the
agency problem is more valuable when profitability is high. This result may help to explain the empirical
importance of absolute, rather than relative, performance measures for executive compensation.”
41
This pattern could arise through the use of bonuses that are bounded below at zero. This is still consistent with the rent extraction interpretation, however, since the use of such bonuses is a choice by compensation committees. Asymmetry could also arise if bonus criteria change with oil prices. Morse et al. (2011) finds
that powerful U.S. CEOs induce board-of-directors to shift the weight on performance measures toward better
performing measures, thereby “rigging” incentive pay. Anecdotal evidence suggests this indeed happens in
the oil industry. A recent article describes how bonus criteria at Comstock Resources changed over time, from
quantitative metrics in years with high oil prices to qualitative metrics (e.g. “leadership development” and
“execution of strategic plan”) in years with falling oil prices. Source: Denning, Liam. “A Tiny Gas Firm’s Big
Lesson on Bosses’ Pay.” 4 June 2018. Bloomberg Opinion, https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/201806-04/comstock-resources-a-lesson-on-oil-gas-executive-pay.

27

ric about capacity investments. For whatever reason, if executive effort is more important for
capacity expansions than capacity reductions, that could generate the asymmetric pattern
observed here. It could be, simply, that executives are most valuable during the “growth”
phase for oil and gas companies, so that compensation increases rapidly during periods of
rising oil prices. Thus while the asymmetry initially appears to point toward rent extraction, it is relatively easy to augment the shareholder value model with additional features to
match the observed pattern. This underscores the challenge in the broader literature with
formulating a test that would allow one to sharply distinguish between rent extraction and
shareholder value.

7

Conclusion

In the years since B&M, executive compensation has changed in a number of important
ways. There has been a dramatic increase in the use of stock options followed by a partial
reversal of this trend. There was a major recession, accompanied by an increase in public
scrutiny of executive compensation, and regulatory rules regarding compensation disclosure
and shareholder involvement have tightened. Finally, the last decade has seen a transformation of the oil and gas industry in the United States, with the rise of hydraulic fracturing
and the entry of dozens of new companies. In these changing times, it is striking that the
fortunes of oil and gas executives still hinge so dramatically on a single global commodity
price.
We find strong evidence that U.S. oil and gas executive compensation is closely tied to
oil prices. In our preferred specification, a 10% increase in firm value driven by oil prices
is associated with a 2% increase in executive compensation. The bulk of this effect – a
1.3% increase – remains even after controlling for capital and labor. Across specifications,
we cannot rule out that executive compensation responds just as much to changes in firm
value driven by oil prices as it does to generic changes in firm value. The related literature
has termed this effect “pay-for-luck” but we more agnostically refer to as the “oil price
effect.”
Moreover, our analysis supports the following additional conclusions. First, we document
the oil price effect for both CEOs and non-CEOs. Second, we show that the oil price effect is
pervasive across different components of pay, but is particularly pronounced for bonuses and
other incentives. Third, we find a smaller oil price effect for better-governed firms. Results
are similar across measures of governance, and robust to controlling for firm size. Fourth,

28

we show that the oil price effect is asymmetric, with executive compensation rising more
during oil price increases than it falls during oil price decreases. These additional analyses
all follow the broader executive compensation literature, but in all four cases we are the first
to perform such tests in the context of oil prices.

29

References
Abowd, John M and David S Kaplan, “Executive Compensation: Six Questions That
Need Answering,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1999, 13 (4), 145–168.
Aggarwal, Rajesh K. and Andrew A. Samwick, “Executive Compensation, Strategic
Competition, and Relative Performance Evaluation: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of
Finance, 1999, 54 (6), 1999–2043.
and , “The Other Side of the Trade-off: The Impact of Risk on Executive Compensation,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (1), 65–105.
Albuquerque, Ana M., Gus De Franco, and Rodrigo S. Verdi, “Peer Choice in CEO
Compensation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2013, 108, 160–181.
Alvarez & Marsal, “Oil and Gas Exploration & Production (E&P) Incentive Compensation Report: Analysis of Compensation Arrangements Among the Largest U.S. E&P
Companies,” 2018.
Antle, Rick and Abbie Smith, “An Empirical Investigation of the Relative Performance
Evaluation of Corporate Executives,” Journal of Accounting Research, 1986, 24 (1), 1–39.
Axelson, Ulf and Sandeep Baliga, “Liquidity and Manipulation of Executive Compensation Schemes,” Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 22 (10), 3907–3939.
Bebchuk, Lucian A, Yaniv Grinstein, and Urs Peyer, “Lucky CEOs and Lucky
Directors,” Journal of Finance, 2010, 65 (6), 2363–2401.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Jesse M Fried, “Executive Compensation as an Agency
Problem,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2003, 17 (3), 71–92.
Bell, Brian and John Van Reenen, “CEO Pay and the rise of Relative Performance
Contracts: A Question of Governance?,” NBER Working Paper No. 22407, 2016.
Bertrand, Marianne, “CEOs,” Annual Review of Economics, 2009, pp. 121–149.
and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The Ones without Principals Are,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (3), 901–932.
Bizjak, John M., Michael L. Lemmon, and Lalitha Naveen, “Does the Use of Peer
Groups Contribute to Higher Pay and Less Efficient Compensation?,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 2008, 90 (2), 152–168.
Bolton, Patrck, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, “Executive Compensation and
Short-Termist Behaviour in Speculative Markets,” Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73,
577–610.
Borenstein, Severin and Ryan Kellogg, “The Incidence of an Oil Glut: Who Benefits
from Cheap Crude Oil in the Midwest?,” Energy Journal, 2014, 35 (1), 15–33.

30

Campbell, T. Colin and Mary Elizabeth Thompson, “Why Are CEOs Paid for Good
Luck? An Empirical Comparison of Explanations for Pay-for-Luck Asymmetry,” Journal
of Corporate Finance, 2015, 35, 247–264.
Chaigneau, Pierre and Nicolas Sahuguet, “The Effect of Monitoring on CEO Compensation in a Matching Equilibrium,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 2018,
53 (3), 1297–1339.
Coles, Jeffrey L., Naveen D. Daniel, and Lalitha Naveen, “Co-opted Boards,” Review
of Financial Studies, 2014, 27 (6), 1751–1796.
Cremers, K. J. Martijn and Yaniv Grinstein, “Does the Market for CEO Talent
Explain Controversial CEO Pay Practices?,” Review of Finance, 2014, 18, 921–960.
Danthine, Jean-Pierre and John B. Donaldson, “Executive Compensation: A General
Equilibrium Perspective,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2015, 18 (2), 269–286.
DeMarzo, Peter M, Michael J Fishman, Zhiguo He, and Neng Wang, “Dynamic
Agency and the q Theory of Investment,” Journal of Finance, 2012, 67 (6), 2295–2340.
Edmans, Alex and Xavier Gabaix, “Is CEO Pay Really Inefficient? A Survey of New
Optimal Contracting Theories,” European Financial Management, 2009, 15 (3), 486–496.
and , “Executive Compensation: A Modern Primer,” Journal of Economic Literature,
2016, 54 (4), 1232–87.
, , and Dirk Jenter, “Executive Compensation: A Survey of Theory and Evidence,”
Handbook of the Economics of Corporate Governance, 2017, 1.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L and Camelia M Kuhnen, “CEO Turnover in a Competitive Assignment Framework,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2013, 109 (2), 351–372.
Energy Information Administration, “U.S. Remains the World’s Top Producer of
Petroleum and Natural Gas Hydrocarbons,” Today in Energy, May 2018.
Gabaix, Xavier and Augustin Landier, “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (1), 49–100.
Garen, John E., “Executive Compensation and Principal-Agent Theory,” Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102 (6), 1175–1199.
Garvey, Gerald T. and Todd T. Milbourn, “Incentive Compensation When Executives Can Hedge the Market: Evidence of Relative Performance Evaluation in the Cross
Section,” Journal of Finance, 2003, 58 (4), 1557–1581.
and , “Asymmetric Benchmarking in Compensation: Executives are Rewarded for
Good Luck but Not Penalized for Bad,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2006, 82, 197–
225.
Gibbons, Robert and Kevin J. Murphy, “Relative Performance Evaluation for Chief
Executive Officers,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1990, 43, 30–S–51–S.

31

Gold, Russell, The Boom: How Fracking Ignited the American Energy Revolution and
Changed the World, Simon and Schuster, 2014.
Gong, Guojin, Laura Yue Li, and Jae Yong Shin, “Relative Performance Evaluation
and Related Peer Groups in Executive Compensation Contracts,” Accounting Review,
2011, 86 (3), 1007–1043.
Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Todd Milbourn, and Fenghua Song, “Strategic Flexibility
and the Optimality of Pay for Sector Performance,” Review of Financial Studies, 2010, 23
(5), 2060–2098.
Hall, Brian J and Kevin J Murphy, “Stock Options for Undiversified Executives,”
Journal of Accounting and Economics, 2002, 33 (1), 3–42.
Harford, Jarrad and Kai Li, “Decoupling CEO Wealth and Firm Performance: The Case
of Acquiring CEOs,” Journal of Finance, 2007, 62 (2), 917–949.
Hausman, Catherine and Ryan Kellogg, “Welfare and Distributional Implications of
Shale Gas,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2015, Spring, 71–125.
Himmelberg, Charles P. and R. Glenn Hubbard, “Incentive Pay and the Market for
CEOs: An Analysis of Pay-for-Performance Sensitivity,” Mimeo, 2000.
Hoffmann, Florian and Sebastian Pfeil, “Reward for Luck in a Dynamic Agency
Model,” Review of Financial Studies, 2010, 23 (9), 3329–3345.
Holmstrom, Bengt, “Moral Hazard and Observability,” Bell Journal of Economics, 1979,
10 (1), 74–91.
and Paul Milgrom, “Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision of Intertemporal Incentives,” Econometrica, 1987, 55 (2), 303–328.
Hopkins, Matt and William Lazonick, “The Mismeasure of Mammon: Uses and Abuses
of Executive Pay Data,” INET Working Paper 49, 2016.
Jenter, Dirk and Fadi Kanaan, “CEO Turnover and Relative Performance Evaluation,”
Journal of Finance, 2015, 70 (5), 2155–2183.
Jin, Li, “CEO Compensation, Diversification, and Incentives,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2002, 66 (1), 29–63.
Joskow, Paul L, Nancy L Rose, and Catherine D Wolfram, “Political Constraints on
Executive Compensation: Evidence from the Electric Utility Industry,” RAND Journal of
Economics, 1996, pp. 165–182.
Joskow, Paul, Nancy Rose, Andrea Shepard, John R Meyer, and Sam Peltzman,
“Regulatory Constraints on CEO Compensation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Microeconomics, 1993, 1993 (1), 1–72.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Bernadette A. Minton, “How Has CEO Turnover Changed?,”
International Review of Finance, 2012, 12 (1), 57–87.

32

Kleibergen, Frank and Richard Paap, “Generalized Reduced Rank Tests Using the
Singular Value Decomposition,” Journal of Econometrics, 2006, pp. 97–126.
Kline, Patrick, “Understanding Sectoral Labor Market Dynamics: An Equilibrium Analysis of the Oil and Gas Field Services Industry,” Mimeo, 2008.
Lewellen, Stefan, “Executive Compensation and Industry Peer Groups,” 2015. Working
Paper, London Business School, https://sites.google.com/site/stefanlewellen/.
Lustig, Hanno, Chad Syverson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, “Technological
Change and the Growing Inequality in Managerial Compensation,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 2011, 99 (3), 601–627.
Morse, Adair, Vikram Nanda, and Amit Seru, “Are Incentive Contracts Rigged by
Powerful CEOs?,” Journal of Finance, 2011, 66 (5), 1779–1821.
Muehlegger, Erich and Richard L. Sweeney, “Pass-Through of Input Cost Shocks
Under Imperfect Competition: Evidence from the U.S. Fracking Boom,” NBER Working
Paper 24025, 2017.
Murphy, Kevin J, “Executive Compensation,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 1999, 3,
2485–2563.
, “Executive Compensation: Where We Are, and How We Got There,” Handbook of the
Economics of Finance, 2013, pp. 211–356.
Noe, Thomas H and Michael J Rebello, “Optimal Corporate Governance and Compensation in a DynamicWorld,” Review of Financial Studies, 2012, 25 (2), 480–521.
Oyer, Paul, “Why Do Firms Use Incentives That Have No Incentive Effects?,” Journal of
Finance, 2004, 59 (4), 1619–1649.
Rose, Nancy L and Catherine Wolfram, “Regulating Executive Pay: Using the Tax
Code to Influence Chief Executive Officer Compensation,” Journal of Labor Economics,
2002, 20 (2), S138–S175.
Tervio, Marko, “The Difference that CEOs Make: An Assignment Model Approach,”
American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 642–68.
Wade, James B., Joseph F. Porac, and Timothy G. Pollock, “Worth, Words, and
the Justification of Executive Pay,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, 1997, 18 (SI),
641–664.
Yergin, Daniel, The Quest: Energy, Security, and the Remaking of the Modern World,
Penguin, 2011.

33

Online Appendix: Are Energy Executives Rewarded For
Luck?
Data
As we describe in the paper, our analyses are based on executive compensation data from
Compustat. These data have been widely used and are described in detail elsewhere:
• Gine, Mireia. “WRDS E-Learning Session” [Pdf of slides]. 18 September 2009. Available at https://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/E-Learning/ 000Course%20Materials/
ExecutiveCompensationChanges.pdf.cfm?.
• “ExecuComp Data Definitions in Alphabetical Order.” https://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/
wrds/support/Data/ 001Manuals%20and%20Overviews/ 001Compustat/ 007Execucomp/
005ExecuComp%20Data%20Definitions.cfm. Accessed 5 June 2018.
• “RiskMetrics Directors Definitions.” https://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/support/
Data/ 001Manuals%20and%20Overviews/ 037ISS%20(formerly%20RiskMetrics)/ISS %20(formerly%20RiskMetrics)%20Directors%20Definitions.cfm
The Compustat data include S&P 1500 firms, as well as other firms. Some of the additional
firms included were at one time on the S&P 1500; they continue to be included in Compustat
as long as they are still trading.
Beginning in 2006, reporting for some of the variables changes. This was driven by regulatory requirements on what firms report in their annual proxy statements. The tdc1 variable,
total compensation, has good continuity across time, albeit with some changes to its subcomponents.
The variables we use are listed and defined in Table A1.

A-1

Figure A1: Impact of the $1 Million Deduction Limit

Note: This figure shows histograms of nominal executive pay in 2016 for CEOs, CFOs, and other executives. The top row shows salary pay and
the bottom row shows non-salary pay, in thousands of dollars. In the top row, a vertical red line at $1 million (the deduction limit) is shown.

Figure A2: Non-Salary Portion of Pay

Note: This figure plots, by sector, the average portion of compensation
coming from bonuses, stock and options awards, and other non-salary
components of pay. Each sector is defined by a two-digit NAICS code;
sector 21 has been broken down into “Oil & Gas Extraction” versus
other firms in sector 21, including mining and quarrying and support
activities for oil and gas. One outlier for sector 71 has been dropped.

A-2

Table A1: Variables Used
Variable

Compustat name(s)

Notes

Total compensation

tdc1

“Total Compensation.”

Salary

salary

“The dollar value of the base salary earned by the named executive officer during the fiscal year.”

Bonus

bonus

“The dollar value of a bonus earned by the named executive officer during the fiscal year.”

Stocks and
options

rstkgrnt,
option awards blk value,
stock awards fv,
option awards fv

We sum across the stock variable and the options variables in Compustat. Prior to 2006, we use
rstkgrnt (“The value of restricted stock granted during the year (determined as of the date of
the grant).”) + option awards blk value (“The aggregate value of stock options granted to
the executive during the year as valued using Standard & Poor’s Black-Scholes methodology.”)
After 2006 we use stock awards fv (“Fair value of all stock awards during the year as detailed
in the Plan Based Awards table. Valuation is based upon the grant-date fair value as detailed in
FAS 123R.”) + option awards fv (“Fair value of all options awarded during the year as
detailed in the Plan Based Awards table. Valuation is based upon the grant-date fair value as
detailed in FAS 123R.”)

Incentives

ltip, noneq incent

Prior to 2006, we use ltip (“This is the amount paid out to the executive under the company’s
long-term incentive plan. These plans measure company performance over a period of more than
one year (generally three years).”). After 2006 we use noneq incent (“Value of amounts earned
during the year pursuant to non-equity incentive plans. The amount is disclosed in the year that
the performance criteria was satisfied and the compensation was earned.”) As described in
Hopkins and Lazonick (2016), some elements of “bonus” moved to “noneq incent” in 2006. Also,
“ltip” in some cases includes stock units, which are excluded from “noneq incent.” Since our oil
price effects results are comparable across the various non-salary components of pay, and since we
include a dummy for the reporting changes, we are reassured that these changes do not explain
our oil price effect results.

Other
compensation

othann, allothtot,
defer rpt as comp tot,
othcomp

Prior to 2006, we use othann (“The dollar value of other annual compensation not properly
categorized as salary or bonus. This includes items such as: Perquisites and other personal
benefits ... Tax reimbursements ...”) + allothtot (“This is the amount listed under ‘All Other
Compensation’ in the Summary Compensation Table. This is compensation that does not belong
under other columns, which includes items such as: Severance payments, Debt forgiveness, ...
Payment for unused vacation, Tax reimbursements, Signing bonuses...”). After 2006, we use
defer rpt as comp tot (“Amount of deferred compensation earnings that were reported as
compensation in the Summary Compensation Table.”) + othcomp (“Other compensation
received by the executive including perquisites and other personal benefits, termination or
change-in-control payments, contributions to defined contribution plans (e.g. 401K plans), life
insurance premiums, gross-ups and other tax reimbursements, discounted share purchases etc.”)

Market
value

mktval

“The Close Price for the fiscal year multiplied by the company’s Common Shares Outstanding.”

Book value

seq, txdb, itcb, pstkrv,
pstkl, pstk

We use seq+txdb+itcb-pstkrv: the sum of “Stockholders Equity,” “Deferred Taxes,” and
“Investment Tax Credit,” subtracting “Preferred Stock.” Where pstkrv is missing, we use pstkl
or pstk. This constructed book value has a correlation of 0.996 with seq.

Net
income

ni

“Net Income (After EI and DO).”

Assets

assets

“Total Assets”

Return on
assets

roa

“Return on Assets”

Return on
equity

roeper

“Return on Equity”

Employees

empl

“Employees (## Thous)”

Capital expenditures

capx

“Capital Expenditures”

Executives
not on the
board

execdir

We take the average across the top five executives of one minus execdir, “Flag to indicate that
the executive served as director during the year.”

Board
members
not
insiders

classification

We use the portion of the board members with classification, “Independent Outsiders (I).”
Thus excluded categories are “Insiders / Employees (E)” and “Affiliated Outsiders / Linked (L).”

Note: All variables are from Compustat, with the exception of “Board members not insiders,” which is constructed using Institutional Shareholder
Services (ISS) data.

A-3

Table A2: Company List
Company
ANADARKO PETROLEUM CORP
APACHE CORP
APPROACH RESOURCES INC
BARRETT RESOURCES CORP
BILL BARRETT CORP
BONANZA CREEK ENERGY INC
BROWN (TOM) INC
BURLINGTON RESOURCES INC
CABOT OIL & GAS CORP
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORP
CALLON PETROLEUM CO/DE
CARRIZO OIL & GAS INC
CHESAPEAKE ENERGY CORP
CIMAREX ENERGY CO
COMSTOCK RESOURCES INC
CONCHO RESOURCES INC
CONOCOPHILLIPS
CONTANGO OIL & GAS CO
DENBURY RESOURCES INC
DEVON ENERGY CORP
ENCORE ACQUISITION CO
ENERGEN CORP
EOG RESOURCES INC
EVERGREEN RESOURCES
FOREST OIL CORP -OLD
FREEPORT MCMRN OIL&GAS -REDH
GEORESOURCES INC
GULFPORT ENERGY CORP
HARVEST NATURAL RESOURCES
HESS CORP
HS RESOURCES INC
KCS ENERGY INC
KERR-MCGEE CORP
KEY PRODUCTION CO INC
LOUIS DREYFUS NAT GAS CORP
MARATHON OIL CORP
MARINER ENERGY INC
MATADOR RESOURCES CO
MURPHY OIL CORP
NEWFIELD EXPLORATION CO
NOBLE ENERGY INC
NORTHERN OIL & GAS INC
NUEVO ENERGY CO
OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM CORP
OCEAN ENERGY INC
ORYX ENERGY CO
PATINA OIL & GAS CORP
PDC ENERGY INC
PENN VIRGINIA CORP
PENNZENERGY CO
PETROHAWK ENERGY CORP
PETROQUEST ENERGY INC
PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES CO
PLAINS RESOURCES INC
POGO PRODUCING CO
PRIMA ENERGY CORP
QEP RESOURCES INC
QUICKSILVER RESOURCES INC
RANGE RESOURCES CORP
RANGER OIL LTD
REMINGTON OIL&GAS CP -CL B
REX ENERGY CORP
ROSETTA RESOURCES INC
SANTA FE SNYDER CORP
SILVERBOW RESOURCES INC
SM ENERGY CO
SNYDER OIL CORP
SOUTHWESTERN ENERGY CO
SPINNAKER EXPLORATION CO
SRC ENERGY INC
STONE ENERGY CORP
UNION PACIFIC RESOURCES GRP
UNIT CORP
UNITED MERIDIAN CORP
UNOCAL CORP
VASTAR RESOURCES INC
VINTAGE PETROLEUM INC
WISER OIL CO
WPX ENERGY INC
XTO ENERGY INC

Total executiveby-year
observations
145
142
49
42
53
44
36
64
128
19
53
52
78
80
57
56
147
52
78
133
20
127
124
19
91
50
25
40
130
132
44
56
71
22
20
132
21
36
132
128
129
42
32
133
52
31
35
80
73
46
28
56
140
62
80
25
45
63
56
39
68
55
45
39
100
135
30
135
12
34
109
28
93
24
73
23
77
53
45
94

Mean
compensation,
millions
6.59
4.32
1.60
0.93
1.79
1.41
1.44
3.96
1.91
3.88
1.45
1.37
11.54
3.39
2.90
3.74
7.97
1.30
2.60
4.23
2.00
1.45
4.44
1.46
2.08
7.63
0.35
1.66
1.05
5.27
0.66
0.76
2.33
0.54
1.22
4.75
3.50
1.50
2.72
2.47
2.87
2.73
1.63
11.72
2.25
1.09
2.04
1.76
1.30
1.26
2.46
1.48
3.00
1.64
1.54
0.64
3.00
2.15
4.82
0.51
0.57
0.93
2.03
1.34
1.26
1.58
0.94
2.28
1.20
0.82
1.27
3.36
1.23
0.83
2.30
1.28
0.79
0.45
3.14
11.34

Market
value,
billions
21.63
17.47
0.48
1.30
1.26
0.85
1.17
10.94
3.81
1.34
0.50
1.53
13.66
5.51
1.13
9.15
62.39
0.70
4.07
18.12
2.05
2.41
19.54
0.94
2.25
0.37
2.62
0.33
13.84
0.40
0.38
6.04
0.28
1.43
17.54
1.70
1.52
7.22
4.13
8.52
0.75
0.44
38.31
2.17
2.91
1.23
1.20
0.73
3.32
0.39
6.98
0.37
2.06
0.38
5.00
2.10
8.64
0.98
0.39
0.45
1.77
1.50
0.43
1.73
0.68
5.72
1.34
0.81
0.72
7.15
1.72
1.08
12.01
5.38
1.04
0.13
2.71
8.42

Note: Compensation and market value are the mean values across all years in the
sample. All variables have been normalized to reflect year 2016 dollars using the CPIAll Urban Less Energy.

A-4

Table A3: Summary Statistics
Executives:
Total compensation, $000
Salary, $000
Bonuses, $000
Stock and option awards, $000
Other incentives, $000
Other, $000
CEO
Firms, financials:
Market value, $000,000
Book value, $000,000
Net income, $000,000
Assets, $000,000
Return on assets
Return on equity
Employees, thousands
Capital expenditures, $000,000
Firms, governance:
Executives not on the board
Board members not insiders

N

Mean

Std. Dev.

Median

5,045
5,045
5,045
5,045
5,045
5,045
5,045

3,258
497
402
1,815
333
211
0.19

5,959
330
1,935
3,660
1,190
2,173
0.39

1,639
396
130
717
0
40
0.00

4,679
4,791
5,039
5,039
5,039
4,888
4,977
4,969

8,486
5,785
267
10,377
-0.54
-5.95
2.86
1,608

15,950
12,334
2,110
20,986
25.88
138.10
6.04
2,724

2,587
1,449
58
2,983
3.41
8.44
0.66
627

5,045
3,597

0.64
0.75

0.12
0.11

0.67
0.77

Note: A unit of observation is an executive in a firm in a year. The sample includes the top five
executives at oil and gas extraction companies (NAICS 211111) during the period 1992-2016, a
total of 934 different executives at 78 different companies (unbalanced). The return on assets
(equity) is the income to assets (equity) ratio, multiplied by 100. All governance measures are
time-invariant: the simple mean for a firm across years. All variables have been normalized to
reflect year 2016 dollars using the CPI-All Urban Less Energy.

Table A4: Pay for Performance: Robustness to Including Variance of Returns
Log market value
Log market value X CDF(Variance of returns)
CDF(Variance of returns)
Observations
Within R2

(1)
0.23***
(0.05)
0.02
(0.07)
-0.36
(0.56)
3,979
0.52

Note: This table recreates the results from Column 1 of Table 1, adding as explanatory variables the CDF of the variance of firm returns, and the interaction between that and log
market value. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; **
5% level; * 10% level.

Table A5: First Stage: The Effect of Oil Prices on Market Value
(1)
Log market value
0.99***
(0.10)
4,673
0.52

Log crude oil price
Observations
Within R2

Note: This table reports results from a regression of log market value on log crude oil prices, i.e. the first stage regression
for Column 2 of Table 1. Consistent with the main regression
(Table 1), we estimate this first stage at the executive-by-year
level, even though the variable of interest varies only at the
firm-by-year level. The regression includes the same controls
as in the main regression. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firm and by year. *** Statistically significant at the
1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

A-5

Table A6: Oil Price Effect: Robustness to Alternative Measures of Firm Value

Log market value

(1)
0.29***
(0.04)

(2)
0.19***
(0.05)

(3)
0.31***
(0.09)

Log book value

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.28***
(0.04)

0.28***
(0.08)

0.28***
(0.05)

ROE

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.17***
(0.05)

0.39**
(0.16)

0.52***
(0.18)

ROA
First-stage F-statistic
Observations
Within R2

4,673
0.52

90.59
4,673
0.51

15.04
4,673
0.52

4,304
0.51

22.70
4,304
0.51

55.53
4,304
0.51

14.33
4,547
0.46

4,547
0.47

17.94
4,547
0.45

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.62***
(0.19)

1.13**
(0.43)
14.10
4,673
0.46

1.61***
(0.55)
14.17
4,673
0.44

4,673
0.46

Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from 4 separate OLS and 8 separate IV estimates, aimed at assessing the robustness of the
results across alternative specifications. Column 1 recreates the OLS results from Table 1, which uses market value as the firm performance measure.
Column 2 recreates the results from Column 2 of Table 1, which uses market value as the firm performance measure and the December oil price as the
instrument. Columns 3-12 use alternative measures of firm performance, and either OLS specifications (Columns 4, 7, 10), IV specifications using the
December oil price (Columns 5, 8, 11), or IV specifications using the annual average oil price (columns 3, 6, 9, 12). *** Statistically significant at the
1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Table A7: The Effect of Oil Prices on Executive Compensation, Other Industries
(1)
0.19***
(0.06)

Log crude oil price
Log oil price X I(oilgasextract)
Log oil price X I(other manufacturing)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.19***
(0.06)
0.01
(0.04)

0.19***
(0.06)

0.19***
(0.06)
0.01
(0.04)
0.03
(0.04)
0.03
(0.11)
0.15
(0.11)
0.05
(0.05)
0.13**
(0.06)
0.05
(0.09)
211,563
0.29

Log oil price X I(services)

0.04
(0.04)

Log oil price X I(oilgassupport)
Log oil price X I(refining)
Log oil price X I(chemicals)
Log oil price X I(utilities)
Log oil price X I(other industries)
Observations
Within R2

4,673
0.46

86,499
0.32

106,010
0.25

Note: Column 1 is identical to Column 3 of Table 1, including as controls a CEO indicator, a linear trend, the GDP growth rate, the unemployment rate, and firm fixed
effects (controls not shown for space). Column 2 compares oil and gas results to nonenergy related manufacturing, by including sector-specific oil price coefficients and
sector-specific macroeconomic controls (the trend, GDP growth rate, and unemployment rate). Column 3 similarly compares oil and gas to services. Column 4 similarly
compares oil and gas to all industries. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; **
5% level; * 10% level.

A-6

Table A8: Additional Robustness, Alternative Controls: Oil Price Effect
Log market value
First-stage F-statistic
Observations
Within R2

(1)
0.13**
(0.05)
76.13
4,553
0.52

(2)
0.12**
(0.06)
39.42
4,553
0.52

(3)
0.11*
(0.05)
85.82
4,380
0.46

(4)
0.11*
(0.06)
79.40
4,553
0.52

(5)
0.12**
(0.06)
76.69
4,553
0.52

(6)
0.03
(0.05)
100.18
4,553
0.51

Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from six separate IV estimates, aimed at assessing the robustness of the results across alternative specifications. Unless stated otherwise, all columns include controls for a linear trend,
GDP growth, the national unemployment rate, the firm’s capital expenditures and
number of employees, and a CEO dummy. Column 1 replicates Table 2, Column
4. Column 2 does not control for cyclicality. Column 3 includes person effects.
Column 4 controls for the national median compensation for industries other than
oil and gas. Column 5 controls for the national median compensation for industries other than oil and gas, net of firm effects. Column 6 controls for a quadratic
rather than simply linear trend. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; **
5% level; * 10% level.

Table A9: Additional Robustness, Alternative Sub-Samples and Variable Definitions: Oil Price Effect
Log market value
First-stage F-statistic
Observations
Within R2

(1)
0.10
(0.07)
50.63
2,702
0.60

(2)
0.27***
(0.08)
61.88
1,912
0.65

(3)
0.15**
(0.06)
74.73
4,398
0.50

(4)
0.33**
(0.12)
157.70
4,553
0.56

(5)
0.13**
(0.06)
72.77
4,920
0.43

(6)
0.10*
(0.05)
75.28
3,406
0.55

(7)
0.11**
(0.05)
85.91
4,117
0.55

(8)
0.07
(0.04)
91.84
3,133
0.59

(9)
0.14**
(0.05)
78.19
4,357
0.52

(10)
0.48***
(0.09)
74.60
5,307
0.45

(11)
0.12**
(0.05)
56.23
4,553
0.52

(12)
0.08
(0.05)
52.44
3,791
0.46

Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from eight separate IV estimates, aimed at assessing the robustness of the results
across alternative specifications. Unless stated otherwise, all columns include controls for a linear trend, GDP growth, the national unemployment rate, the firm’s capital expenditures and number of employees, and a CEO dummy. Column 1 limits the sample to firms on the
S&P 1500. Column 2 limits the sample to a balanced panel. Column 3 uses SIC sector definitions, rather than NAICS definitions. Column
4 weights by time-invariant firm size (assets). Column 5 uses all reported executives, rather than the top 5. Column 6 limits the sample to
observations for which the governance variable relating to non-insider status is not missing, matching Table 4. Column 7 limits the sample to
observations for which the bonuses and cash incentives variable used in Table 4 is non-zero, matching Table 4. Column 8 limits the sample
to observations for which the non-insider variable is non-missing and the bonuses and cash incentives variable is non-zero, matching Table
4. Column 9 limits the sample to 1993-2016, to match Table 5. Column 10 uses TDC2 rather than TDC1; this alternative compensation
variable from Compustat uses the value of options exercised, rather than options granted. Column 11 uses Brent rather than WTI. Column
12 adds the log of the natural gas price as a second instrument. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Table A10: CEOs vs Non-CEOS
Log market value
First-stage F-statistic
Observations
Within R2

(1)
0.13**
(0.05)
76.13
4,553
0.52

(2)
0.15*
(0.08)
75.83
853
0.48

(3)
0.13**
(0.06)
75.59
3,696
0.39

Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from three separate IV estimates, aimed at assessing the robustness of the results across CEO versus
non-CEO status. Unless stated otherwise, all columns
include controls for a linear trend, GDP growth, the
national unemployment rate, the firm’s capital expenditures and number of employees, and a CEO dummy.
Column 1 replicates Table 2, Column 4. Column 2
limits to CEOs. Column 3 limits to non-CEOs. ***
Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; *
10% level.

A-7

Table A11: Components of Pay, Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Transformation

Market value, transformed
First-stage F-statistic
Observations

(1)
Salary
-0.11**
(0.05)
82.57
4,554

(2)
Stocks & options
-0.23
(0.17)
82.57
4,554

(3)
Bonuses
2.02***
(0.33)
82.57
4,554

(4)
Other incentives
0.25
(0.35)
82.57
4,554

(5)
Other pay
0.11
(0.11)
82.57
4,554

Note: This table matches Table 3, but the variables have been transformed with an inverse hyperbolic
sine function, to allow for zeroes. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Table A12: Components of Pay, Using Annual Average Oil Price

Log crude oil price, annual average
Log crude oil price, December
Observations

(1)
Salary
-0.02
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.02)
4,546

(2)
Stocks & options
0.17**
(0.08)
-0.02
(0.09)
3,934

(3)
Bonuses
0.14
(0.11)
0.38***
(0.08)
3,083

(4)
Other incentives
0.35**
(0.13)
0.40***
(0.11)
1,729

(5)
Other pay
0.30
(0.23)
0.02
(0.08)
4,443

Note: This table matches Table A13, but including both the annual average oil price and the December price.
*** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Table A13: Components of Pay, OLS

Log market value
Observations

(1)
Salary
0.01
(0.02)
4,546

(2)
Stocks & options
0.25***
(0.07)
3,934

(3)
Bonuses
0.39***
(0.08)
3,083

(4)
Other incentives
0.49***
(0.11)
1,729

(5)
Other pay
0.06
(0.05)
4,443

Note: This table matches Table 3, but with OLS specifications rather than IV. Standard errors
are two-way clustered by firm and by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5%
level; * 10% level.

A-8

Table A14: Time-Varying Governance Measures

Log market value
Log m.v. X Portion of execs not on board
Log m.v. X Portion of board non-insiders
First-stage F-statistic
Observations
Within R2

(1)
(2)
Panel A: All Compensation
0.09
0.15
(0.21)
(0.10)
0.03
(0.29)
-0.06
(0.10)
3.90
41.88
4,553
2,428
0.52
0.52

(3)
(4)
Panel B: Bonuses & Cash Incentives
0.86***
1.07***
(0.20)
(0.24)
-0.39
(0.24)
-0.75*
(0.36)
4.48
26.54
4,117
2,279
0.44
0.45

Note: This table matches Table 4 in the main text, but we use time-varying governance measures rather than firmlevel averages across time. The sample size drops in Columns 2 and 4 because the insider variables do not cover the
years 1992-1996. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firm and by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1%
level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Table A15: Governance, OLS

Log market value
Log m.v. X Portion of execs not on board
Log m.v. X Portion of board non-insiders
Observations
Within R2

(1)
(2)
Panel A: All Compensation
0.47**
0.68***
(0.17)
(0.16)
-0.39
(0.24)
-0.62***
(0.20)
4,553
3,406
0.52
0.56

(3)
(4)
Panel B: Bonuses & Cash Incent.
0.61***
1.12***
(0.21)
(0.18)
-0.37
(0.31)
-0.99***
(0.23)
4,117
3,133
0.45
0.51

Note: This table matches Table 4 in the main text, but using OLS rather than 2SLS. Standard errors are twoway clustered by firm and by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Table A16: Governance Results are Robust to Controlling for Size

Log market value
Log m.v. X Portion of execs not on board
Log m.v. X Portion of board non-insiders
Log m.v. X Log employees
First-stage F-statistic
Observations
Within R2

(1)
(2)
Panel A: All Compensation
0.17
0.44*
(0.21)
(0.23)
-0.07
(0.30)
-0.45
(0.29)
-0.00
-0.04
(0.20)
(0.17)
9.76
25.27
4,553
3,406
0.52
0.56

(3)
(4)
Panel B: Bonuses & Cash Incent.
1.07***
1.37***
(0.22)
(0.36)
-0.71**
(0.34)
-1.09**
(0.44)
-0.46
0.05
(0.55)
(0.40)
20.67
47.81
4,117
3,133
0.43
0.50

Note: This Table matches Table 4, but with an additional regressor to allow for heterogeneity by size. In addition to the governance interactions included in Table 4, interactions with a time-invariant measures of size (log
employees) is included. The size variable has been re-scaled to have a standard deviation of a magnitude comparable to the governance variables. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firm and by year. *** Statistically
significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

A-9

Table A17: Above and Below Median

Log oil price, if rising
Log oil price, if falling
p-value, rising versus falling
Observations
Within R2

(1)
OLS
Below median
0.18*
(0.10)
0.03
(0.06)
0.046
1,576
0.41

(2)
OLS
Above median
0.34***
(0.07)
0.21***
(0.05)
0.020
1,724
0.50

Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from two
least squares regressions. The specification is identical to Column
2 in Table 5, but with the sample split by whether the executive’s
pay is below (Column 1) or above (Column 2) the peer group median in the prior year. Thus the dependent variable is log total
annual compensation. Compensation, market value, and oil prices
are normalized to 2016 dollars. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firm and by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1%
level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Table A18: Coefficients for Filtering Test
(1)
OLS
0.31***
(0.04)
-0.12**
(0.06)
4,673
0.52

Log market value
Log crude oil price
Observations
Within R2

Note: This table is identical to Columns 1 and 3 of Table
1, but including both market value and oil prices as explanatory variables in the same regression. The dependent
variable is log total annual compensation. Controls include
company effects, macroeconomic variables (national GDP
growth rate and unemployment rate) and a linear trend, as
well as an indicator for whether the executive is the CEO.
Compensation, market value, and oil prices are normalized
to 2016 dollars. Standard errors are two-way clustered by
firm and by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1%
level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Table A19: Robustness of First Stage, for Optimal Filter
Log crude oil price
Observations
Within R2

(1)
0.99***
(0.10)
4,674
0.52

(2)
0.99***
(0.10)
967
0.50

(3)
0.93***
(0.11)
4,674
0.51

(4)
1.33***
(0.12)
4,674
0.44

Note: The dependent variable is log market value. Column 1 is identical to Table
A5. Column 2 runs the regression at the firm, rather than executive, level. Column
3 includes only firm effects and a linear trend as controls. Column 4 includes only
firm effects as controls. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firm and by year.
*** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

A-10

Table A20: Robustness of Filtering Test
Log crude oil price
Log market value

(1)
-0.12**
(0.06)
0.31***
(0.04)

(2)
-0.09
(0.06)
0.23***
(0.04)

0.05***
(0.01)
-0.77
(1.50)
0.00
(0.01)

0.04***
(0.01)
-0.96
(1.25)
-0.00
(0.01)
0.09***
(0.03)
0.07*
(0.03)
0.88***
(0.04)
4,553
0.52

Log book value
Log assets
Return on equity
Return on assets
Trend (national)
GDP growth rate (national)
Unemployment rate (national)
Log employees
Log capital expenditures
CEO indicator
Observations
Within R2

0.88***
(0.04)
4,673
0.52

(3)
-0.10
(0.07)
0.21***
(0.05)
0.02
(0.06)
0.18***
(0.06)
-0.06
(0.13)
0.15
(0.39)
0.03***
(0.01)
-0.41
(1.28)
0.00
(0.01)

(4)
-0.00
(0.08)
0.19***
(0.04)
0.03
(0.06)
0.19***
(0.06)
-0.05
(0.12)
0.02
(0.39)
0.03***
(0.01)
-0.50
(1.53)
-0.01
(0.01)

0.88***
(0.04)
4,299
0.53

0.88***
(0.04)
4,299
0.53

Note: Column 1 is identical to Table A18. Column 2 adds labor and capital
controls. Column 3 adds additional measures of firm value. Column 4 adds
additional measures of firm value and uses the annual average oil price. ***
Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Table A21: Luck and Skill Variables Specification

Luck
Skill
Trend (national)
GDP growth rate (national)
Unemployment rate (national)
CEO indicator
Observations
Within R2

(1)
OLS
0.19***
(0.05)
0.31***
(0.04)
0.05***
(0.01)
-1.15
(1.57)
-0.00
(0.01)
0.88***
(0.04)
4,673
0.52

Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors
from a regressions of log total compensation on Luck and
Skill, as defined in Garvey and Milbourn (2003). Compensation, market value, and oil prices are normalized to 2016
dollars. Standard errors are two-way clustered by firm and
by year. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5%
level; * 10% level.

A-11

