                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOW PREVALENT IS DOWNWARD RIGIDITY IN NOMINAL WAGES? INTERNATIONAL
           EVIDENCE FROM PAYROLL RECORDS AND PAY SLIPS

                                       Michael W. Elsby
                                         Gary Solon

                                      Working Paper 25393
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25393


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2018




The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the UK Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC), award reference ES/L990633/1. They thank Francesco Devicienti, Aedin Doris,
Jose Ignacio Garcia Perez, David Kaplan, Pedro Portugal, and Uwe Sunde for generously
providing additional details on the results from their studies. They also thank Andreas Steinhauer
and Josef Zweimuller for kindly providing the results for Austria. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Michael W. Elsby and Gary Solon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Prevalent Is Downward Rigidity in Nominal Wages? International Evidence from Payroll
Records and Pay Slips
Michael W. Elsby and Gary Solon
NBER Working Paper No. 25393
December 2018
JEL No. E24,J3

                                         ABSTRACT

For more than 80 years, many macroeconomic analyses have been premised on the assumption
that workers’ nominal wage rates cannot be cut. Contrary evidence from household surveys
reasonably has been discounted on the ground that the measurement of frequent wage cuts might
be an artifact of reporting error. This article summarizes a more recent wave of studies based on
more accurate wage data from payroll records and pay slips. By and large, these studies indicate
that, except in extreme circumstances (when nominal wage cuts are either legally prohibited or
rendered beside the point by very high inflation), nominal wage cuts from one year to the next
appear quite common, typically affecting 15-25 percent of job stayers in periods of low inflation.


Michael W. Elsby
University of Edinburgh
School of Economics
31 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh
EH8 9JT
United Kingdom
Mike.Elsby@ed.ac.uk

Gary Solon
Department of Economics
Eller College of Management
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
gary.r.solon@gmail.com
How Prevalent Is Downward Rigidity in Nominal Wages?
International Evidence from Payroll Records and Pay Slips

       In Chapter 2 of The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money (1936), John
Maynard Keynes put forward an assumption of downward rigidity in nominal wages as the
cornerstone of his analysis of what happens in the labor market over the business cycle.
According to his analysis, if the real value of the existing nominal wage exceeds the market-
clearing level, downward nominal rigidity prevents arbitrage towards that level. Instead,
employment is determined by the short side of the market (the labor demand side), and the
excess supply of labor at that wage manifests as high unemployment. Keynes’s brief theoretical
account of why workers refuse to accept a nominal wage reduction, even when unemployment is
the consequence, involved workers’ concern about their wages relative to their reference group.
Keynes did not directly address why workers would be so preoccupied with their relative wage
that they would prefer job loss, even during a recession, to accepting a wage cut. Keynes’s
empirical basis for his assumption was that, “whether logical or illogical, experience shows that
this is how labour in fact behaves.” He did not provide any quantitative evidence to support this
observation.
       In the 80-plus years since publication of The General Theory, Keynes’s premise of
downward nominal wage rigidity has continued to be highly influential. This has much to do
with its potential to address some of the most enduring macroeconomic questions: To the extent
that it prevents the real value of nominal wages from adjusting downward sufficiently in times of
recession, it offers a potential account for cyclical unemployment fluctuations. And, by implying
that higher inflation might ease reductions in real labor costs that would otherwise be frustrated,
it provides a potential foundation for a Phillips curve trade-off between inflation and




The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the UK Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC), award reference ES/L990633/1. They thank Francesco Devicienti, Aedin Doris, José
Ignacio García Pérez, David Kaplan, Pedro Portugal, and Uwe Sunde for generously providing additional
details on the results from their studies. They also thank Andreas Steinhauer and Josef Zweimuller for
kindly providing the results for Austria.
unemployment. A quintessential implication, noted prominently in Tobin’s (1972) presidential
address to the American Economic Association, and extended in Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry’s
influential 1996 paper, is that positive inflation can “grease the wheels of the labor market.”
       As rates of inflation have subsided in recent decades, and with the onset of the Great
Recession, interest in Keynes’s hypothesis of downward nominal wage rigidity has naturally
revived, inspiring an array of modern applications. Formal theories of the Phillips curve in the
short and long run have been developed, and extended to analyze the persistent rise in U.S.
unemployment that accompanied the Great Recession (Benigno and Ricci 2011; Daly and Hobijn
2014). In international macroeconomics, the adverse interaction of downward nominal wage
rigidity with currency pegs has been advanced as a key determinant of recent rises in
unemployment in the Eurozone and its periphery (Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe 2016). Most
recently, the asymmetric nature of downward nominal wage rigidity has been invoked to provide
a potential explanation for asymmetries in unemployment fluctuations over the business cycle
(Dupraz, Nakamura, and Steinsson 2017).
       But the durability of Keynes’s hypothesis also owes much to its empirical immediacy. An
economy subject to a binding downward constraint on nominal wage changes should bear two
hallmarks: a scarcity of nominal wage cuts, and a consequent abundance of nominal wage
freezes. Accordingly, a large empirical literature has sought to provide measures of the
frequencies of nominal wage cuts and freezes, aided by increasing availability of the requisite
longitudinal data on individual wages.
       Until recently, most such evidence had been based on reports of job stayers obtained
from household surveys. Defying simple conclusions, that evidence seemed to suggest not only
that nominal wage cuts are quite common—indicating a degree of downward flexibility in
nominal wages—but also that nominal wage freezes are similarly common—indicating a degree
of nominal rigidity. To complicate matters further, both results reasonably have been discounted
on the ground that they could be artifacts of the considerable response error in household
surveys. Thus, despite the seeming immediacy of Keynes’s hypothesis, a clear assessment of the
empirical basis for downward nominal rigidity has proved elusive due to the difficulty of
obtaining reliable estimates of the incidence of nominal wage changes.



                                                 2
        The main point of the present article is to draw attention to a more recent literature that,
cumulatively, has made considerable progress on these challenges. Our motivation is that the
most compelling way to address a concern over measurement error is to seek more accurate data.
The literature we survey does so by focusing on wage data taken from employers’ payroll
records and pay slips. We believe this growing body of evidence has been under-noticed, perhaps
because the studies have been scattered across many countries and across journals in multiple
fields in economics, but also because several sources of such data have become available only
recently.
        Here we gather together studies for Great Britain, the United States, West Germany,
Austria, Italy, Spain, Mexico, Ireland, South Korea, Portugal, and Sweden. Collectively they
make an important point: Except in extreme circumstances (when nominal wage cuts are either
legally prohibited or rendered beside the point by very high inflation), nominal wage cuts from
one year to the next appear quite common, typically affecting 15-25 percent of job stayers in
periods of low inflation. And, consistent with this picture of downward flexibility, nominal wage
freezes are found to be much less frequent, typically affecting fewer than 8 percent of job
stayers, and with weak evidence for large accumulations of wage freezes in times of low
inflation.
        None of this denies the existence of some nominal wage stickiness. We ourselves, like
most of our readers, have our salaries set in nominal terms and typically see them adjusted only
once a year. But does it follow from such apparent wage stickiness that nominal wages cannot
be cut, even when inefficient layoffs or hiring decisions are the alternative? In light of the
emerging evidence from more accurate wage data, we will conclude that Keynes’s assumption
that nominal wages cannot be cut needs to be reconsidered.


The Economic Consequences of (Downward Nominal) Wage Rigidity

        To give a sense of what’s at stake, we first provide some context for the potential effects
of downward nominal wage rigidity viewed from the perspective of modern theories of the labor
market. The interpretation of Keynes summarized in the opening paragraph of this paper
provides a particularly simple “spot market” view of the labor market. But a distinctive


                                                  3
characteristic of employment relationships is that they are frequently long-term in nature:
Employees often work for the same employer for extended periods of time.
        This simple observation has important implications for the economics of wage rigidity,
and thereby for the place of downward nominal rigidity within it. As noted since the seminal
work of Becker (1962), the effective price of labor ceases simply to be the flow wage, but rather
is the expected present discounted value of the stream of wages anticipated over the course of the
employment relationship. In addition, the seeming paradox of Keynes’s theory—that workers
will refuse nominal wage cuts, even when unemployment is the alternative—is thrown into
sharper relief once the durability of employment relationships is acknowledged: It implies that an
existing gainful exchange of labor is forfeit by a refusal to countenance a wage cut, even when it
is mutually advantageous for firm and worker to do so (Barro 1977). A corollary of these
implications is that all that is required to obviate such inefficient layoffs is that (the present value
of) wages be sufficiently flexible at the point when separation is potentially at issue. Subject to
this requirement, flow wages can otherwise be arbitrarily rigid, and indeed can accommodate
many of the outward signs of downward nominal wage rigidity: Nominal wages can remain
constant for periods of time if neither firm nor worker wishes to separate; and, when nominal
wages are adjusted, they naturally will rise more often than they fall due, for example, to the
presence of inflation (Malcomson 1997).
        Thus, there are plausible theoretical arguments that caution against positing a strong link
between ostensibly rigid wages and unemployment consequences through excess layoffs. These
arguments have cast a long legacy, informing the majority of modern theoretical analyses of
labor markets. But, even in the light of these arguments, there remain potential channels through
which rigid wages in general, and downwardly rigid nominal wages in particular, may have
allocative effects on labor market quantities. Here we highlight three such channels.
        The first shifts its focus away from layoffs, and considers instead potential effects on
hiring. An implication of Becker’s insight is that a firm’s incentive to hire will be shaped by the
present value of wages it must offer to newly hired workers. Hires will fall more precipitously
during recessions if firms perceive such present values to be inflexible. A sufficient condition for
the latter, noted prominently in modern accounts of unemployment fluctuations, is inflexibility in
both the wages of newly hired and incumbent workers (Shimer 2004; Hall 2005). Clearly, by

                                                   4
contributing to rigidity in the path of incumbent wages, any evidence of downward nominal
wage rigidity among job stayers could thus provide a partial empirical basis for declines in hiring
in recession.
        Second, there is evidence to suggest that the wages of newly hired and incumbent
workers are not set in isolation. Bewley’s (1999) interviews highlighted the role of the internal
wage structure within firms in linking the wages of new hires to those of job stayers. If new hires
are paid according to existing wage structures, perhaps for reasons of equal treatment, then any
rigidity in incumbent wages is then propagated onto the wages of new hires (Gertler and Trigari
2009; Snell and Thomas 2010). An implication of this view, then, is that any downward rigidity
in nominal wages of job stayers will additionally contribute to downward nominal rigidity
among new hires’ wages, further depressing hiring incentives in times of recession.
        Third, it is important to remember that the theoretical contention that wages ought to be
flexible at the point of potential separation is just a hypothesis, albeit perhaps a compelling one.
Moreover, it is a hypothesis that is devilishly difficult to test, requiring as it does a counterfactual
judgment on whether observed job losses could, and should, have been prevented by wage cuts.
In the absence of strong evidence on that, it is reasonable to entertain alternative accounts that
might restore such channels. One such account is again suggested by Bewley’s interviews, which
noted that employers were reluctant to cut wages because of adverse effects on workers’
productivity due to lower morale. While formal economic theories of this phenomenon remain in
their infancy, it is natural to wonder if the prospect of any such productivity losses might provide
a potential motive for excess layoffs that, in the words of one of Bewley’s interviewees, “get the
misery out the door.” 1 And the anticipation of such productivity losses in the future might in turn
further retard firms’ incentives to hire. Both of these forces might be expected to contribute to
unemployment in times of recession.



1
  On the other hand, immediately after that quotation on page 16, Bewley explains that his “mistaken” prior view
had been that “an individual firm could save a significant number of jobs by reducing pay. This is seldom true, and
the firms for which it is true are precisely the ones most likely to cut pay.” His detailed evidence appears in his
Section 11.3, “Reasons for Laying Off Workers Rather than Cutting Pay,” which begins, “I was surprised to learn
that most managers did not believe that pay cuts would prevent many layoffs.” This finding is altogether consistent
with the Becker-Barro-Malcomson point that short-term wage stickiness need not induce inefficient allocation
decisions.


                                                         5
        To summarize, much of our understanding of labor market fluctuations thus invokes
some form of wage rigidity, with downward nominal rigidity being a theoretically and
empirically salient variety. If available evidence were to suggest that nominal wages are indeed
rarely cut, and consequently often frozen, it would provide a prima facie empirical grounding for
a host of potential accounts of unemployment fluctuations, on both hiring and layoff margins.
Thus, much is at stake if, as the evidence we survey will suggest, nominal wage cuts are in fact
quite common.


Evidence from Employer Payroll Records and Pay Slips

        Most evidence on nominal wage rigidity has sought to provide measures of year-to-year
changes in individual workers’ nominal wages from longitudinal microdata. Moreover, because
much evidence shows—and the economic theories reviewed in the preceding section would
predict—that those changing employers often realize wage changes, these studies have sought to
focus on the subsample of individuals that are job stayers. 2
        For a long time, the majority of such measures were based on longitudinal analyses of
household surveys, inspired by influential early studies of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
and the Current Population Survey (CPS) in the United States (McLaughlin 1994; Card and
Hyslop 1996; Kahn 1997). As we have noted, such studies typically have measured not only a
substantial fraction of nominal wage cuts among job stayers, but also a similarly common
incidence of nominal wage freezes. For example, our own 2016 Journal of Labor Economics
paper with Donggyun Shin, which tracked job stayers from one January to the next in the CPS,
found that the fraction measured as receiving a nominal wage cut was regularly between 15 and
25 percent. Nonetheless, in the same data, the fraction recorded with zero nominal wage change
frequently was in the region of 10 to 20 percent.



2
 As foreshadowed by our theoretical discussion, an important example of what these studies have not attempted to
measure is the rigidity or otherwise of the wages of newly hired workers. Addressing this question empirically is
surprisingly difficult because it calls for hiring wage data over time for the same jobs within the same firms, and
such data are hard to come by. The effort by Martins, Solon, and Thomas (2012) uses the same Portuguese census of
employers we cite later in this survey and finds that real hiring wages in Portugal were highly procyclical over the
period 1982-2008.


                                                         6
        Household survey reports of wages are notoriously subject to response error, however.
And, as many authors have noted, such errors plausibly could bias both results. On one hand,
differences in individual response errors across survey years may exaggerate the appearance of
wage flexibility: Someone whose nominal wage did not really decrease could still be measured
as receiving a wage cut; and cases in which nominal wages truly did not change will be recorded
as wage changes. Such concerns have motivated some authors, such as Akerlof et al. (1996) and
Altonji and Devereux (1999), to suggest that the appearance of frequent nominal wage cuts in
household surveys is just an artifact of measurement error. On the other hand, if wage reports are
subject to rounding errors, modest wage changes will be recorded as wage freezes, exaggerating
the appearance of wage rigidity. The upshot, of course, is that the nature of the bias depends on
the presumed structure of response errors. 3
        The studies we review take a more direct, and we think more persuasive, approach to
addressing concerns over measurement error, namely to seek more accurate data. Returning to
the measurement goals posed by the literature on nominal wage rigidity, this requires access to
longitudinal data that allow one to track individual workers, and the jobs they do, across years,
and that contain accurate information on wages.
        Our survey has identified 12 such sources of data for 11 countries. We distill relevant
information from these in Table 1. For each study, the table summarizes the source of data used,
the measure of wages employed, 4 and the percentages of job stayers recorded as receiving
nominal wage cuts, and zero change in their nominal wages. In the remainder of this section, we
provide some wider context for the contents of Table 1, paying particular attention to how each
study addresses the measurement challenges noted above, and their implications for the




3
 Relatedly, an approach taken in a portion of the literature, exemplified by some of the work in Dickens et al.
(2007), has been to attempt to correct for measurement error by imposing assumptions about the measurement error
process.
4
  In most instances, the measure does not include non-wage compensation. In the United States, where fringe
benefits such as employer-provided health insurance loom large, this is a potentially significant omission. Lebow,
Saks, and Wilson (2003) have argued that fringe benefits are an additional dimension for adjustment in
compensation, so overlooking them is likely to make total compensation seem less flexible than it actually is. A
similar point applies to variation in work effort.


                                                         7
incidence of nominal wage changes and, thereby, the prevalence of downward nominal wage
rigidity.

Great Britain

        The first steps in the quest for more accurate wage data were taken in part of the British
literature, and so we will begin there. The first row of our Table 1 summarizes the pioneering
study by Smith (2000), who analyzed the 1991-1996 waves of the British Household Panel Study
(BHPS). In many respects, the BHPS is a longitudinal household survey that resembles the PSID
for the United States. And, indeed, Smith’s initial results based on these data resembled those
based on U.S. household surveys, measuring nontrivial minorities of respondents as receiving
both wage cuts and wage freezes.
        Smith’s key discovery, however, was that the BHPS survey incorporated a feature that
was, at the time, unique: respondents were allowed to check their pay slips when reporting their
wages, and the survey recorded who did so. Smith’s results thus provided a first glimpse of the
implications of more accurate wage data for the prevalence of downward nominal wage rigidity.
        The results were striking: Even among the subsample of respondents that consulted their
pay slips, the incidence of nominal wage cuts remained considerable; the proportion with
negative nominal wage change was 18 percent. By contrast, a much smaller fraction of the pay
slip-seen subsample, just 5.6 percent, reported zero nominal wage change. Set in a context of low
inflation rates—which averaged around 3 percent in Britain over Smith’s sample period—the
abundance of wage cuts and paucity of wage freezes is especially notable.
        At the time, Smith was at pains to acknowledge surprise at her results: “Some of the
results in this paper may seem difficult to believe – the quite common occurrence of nominal pay
cuts, for example. It may well be that the difficulty in believing them stems not from the weight
of contradictory evidence, but rather from conventional wisdom that has survived because of the
previous lack of evidence either way.” Since then, however, evidence has amassed from a
diverse range of sources that has served to vindicate Smith’s early findings.
        The first signs of this emerged from another British study. Inspired by Smith’s results,
Nickell and Quintini (2003) identified a further source of accurate wage data in the New
Earnings Survey (NES) for Great Britain. The NES comprises a 1 percent sample of income tax-

                                                 8
paying workers, defined by those whose National Insurance numbers end in a given pair of
digits. Because the same pair of digits has been used since the survey’s inception, the NES
naturally allows one to track the same individuals over time. In the spirit of Smith’s use of
reports from pay slips, the NES data are also thought to provide unusually accurate information
on individual earnings because the survey is administered to employers, who are legally required
to report such information from their payroll records for a reference week each April.
        But the NES data also come with additional methodological advantages over the BHPS.
Accompanying the data on weekly earnings are employer-reported payroll data on employee
work hours for the survey reference week, thereby permitting an analysis of hourly wages.
Moreover, the NES records separate measures of components of earnings and hours, most
notably those attributable to overtime. Since it is not obvious that, for example, reductions in
hourly earnings associated with reductions in overtime should be interpreted as wage cuts, an
advantage of the NES is that it allows one to focus on hourly wages exclusive of overtime.
Finally, because the NES is based on a 1 percent sample of income tax-paying workers in
Britain, the sample sizes it offers are large.
        Nickell and Quintini’s results dovetail reassuringly well with Smith’s earlier findings. For
the 1991-1996 period over which the two studies overlap, the NES data produce results that
mirror closely those for the BHPS respondents that checked their pay slips. Moreover, widening
their analysis to their full 1975-1999 sample period, Nickell and Quintini continued to find
substantial numbers of nominal wage cuts, and a relative scarcity of nominal wage freezes.
        Motivated by the onset and aftermath of the global financial crisis, our 2016 paper with
Donggyun Shin replicated Nickell and Quintini’s analysis, and provided an update through the
Great Recession to the year 2012. As summarized here in the second row of Table 1, our
measured percentages with nominal wage cuts ranged from a low of 4.9 in 1979-1980 (when
inflation was around 20 percent) to a high of 23.5 in the wake of the Great Recession in both
2009-2010 and 2011-2012. Strikingly, the latter is by no means an aberration: over the last 20
years of the sample period, when the inflation rate in Britain hovered around 3 percent, the
percentage of job stayers receiving nominal wage cuts was regularly close to 20 percent.
        Mirroring this impression of downward flexibility, the incidence of zero nominal wage
change is much smaller, varying from a low of 0.4 percent in the high-inflation period of 1979-

                                                 9
1980 to a high of 9.1 percent in 2011-2012, and remaining below 3 percent in most years of the
sample.
       Like Smith, we were intrigued by these findings, and they motivated us to question
whether similar studies might be feasible for other countries. As the remaining rows of Table 1
attest, it turns out that a large body of such studies now exists, albeit one that has accumulated
sporadically over a variety of journals spanning a range of fields of economics and that, in some
cases, has become available only very recently.

United States

       Of particular interest has been whether a similar study might be feasible for the United
States. For a long time, this ambition seemed futile: Although it is possible to access individual
earnings data from a few administrative sources in the United States, until recently it seemed that
none contained the requisite data on individual hours to permit an analysis of hourly wages.
       Thanks to the research of Kurmann, McEntarfer, and Spletzer (2016), however,
considerable progress has been made on this seeming impasse. Their starting point was that
employers are obliged to report payroll data to state unemployment insurance (UI) agencies in
order to determine their employees’ benefit entitlements in the event that they become
unemployed and file a UI claim. In most states, this requires employers to report the quarterly
earnings of their employees. The key discovery by Kurmann et al., however, was that a few
states—Minnesota, Rhode Island, and Washington—also require employer reports on their
employees’ quarterly hours of work. Among these, the case of Washington is especially useful
because UI benefit entitlement in that state depends on quarterly hours as well as quarterly
earnings, so the reports of both variables are thought to be especially accurate. And because
these data are a near-complete census of employees in the state, they allow a researcher to track
over time the wages of employees who remain with the same employer.
       Two research teams – Kurmann and McEntarfer (2017) and Jardim, Solon, and Vigdor
(2018) – have used the Washington data to study job stayers’ year-to-year changes in quarterly
average hourly earnings, and both have obtained results similar to those in the British studies.
The third row of Table 1 summarizes the results from Jardim et al., which are for the period



                                                  10
2005-2015. This period contains years before, during, and after the Great Recession, so although
inflation was moderate throughout the period, business cycle conditions were wildly variable.
       Even in the expansion periods, the percentage receiving nominal wage cuts was over 20
percent, with a minimum of 20.6 percent between the first quarters of 2006 and 2007. The
percentage rose even higher during the Great Recession, with a high of 33.1 percent between the
fourth quarters of 2008 and 2009. Mirroring this, the percentage receiving no nominal wage
change is regularly below 4 percent, and otherwise varies from a low of 2.5 percent between the
fourth quarters of 2006 and 2007, to a maximum of just 7.7 percent at the height of the recession
between the second quarters of 2009 and 2010. Once again, we are struck by the extent to which
these echo the British results summarized above.
       A contrast with the British NES studies, however, is that the NES studies were able to
adopt a wage measure that explicitly excludes overtime pay and hours. Since overtime cannot be
separated out in the Washington data, it is possible that some of the wage cuts measured for
Washington could reflect reductions in overtime. As we noted above, these arguably should not
be interpreted economically as wage reductions. Jardim et al. therefore redid their analysis for a
sub-sample that appeared to work 40 hours a week every week in each quarter. Even in this sub-
sample, the frequency of nominal wage cuts was striking, ranging from a low of 14.5 percent
between the third quarters of 2006 and 2007 to a high of 31.8 percent between the fourth quarters
of 2008 and 2009.

International Evidence from Other Countries

       The United States is somewhat of a latecomer to this type of research. As shown in the
remainder of Table 1, payroll records or pay slips have been used to study job stayers’ nominal
wage changes in many other countries. An Irish study included evidence similar to Smith’s pay-
slip-based evidence for Great Britain. In Portugal and South Korea, the data were generated by
government surveys of employers; and in Sweden, the employer surveys were conducted by an
employer association. As Table 1 documents, all of these studies allow an analysis of hourly
wages similar to those we have summarized above for Great Britain and the United States.
       In West Germany, Austria, Italy, Spain and Mexico, however, the data are taken from
employers’ reports to their countries’ social security systems. Since social security provisions

                                                11
typically do not require information on hours worked, most of these studies instead have focused
on measurement of a daily wage. In the German, Austrian, and Italian cases, this is computed as
the ratio of annual earnings to days worked at a given employer. For Mexico, the daily wage is
that measured on the last day of each quarter. Similarly, in the Spanish case, the wage measure is
based on monthly earnings for individuals who worked for the entire month. To allay concerns
that changes in measured daily wages reflect changes in hours worked per day, all but one of
these studies (the Mexican case) additionally focuses on individuals recorded as working full-
time in the administrative data.
       Not surprisingly, the patterns vary considerably across countries. We think it is a fair
summary, though, to say that, outside of conditions of very high price inflation, most of the
countries continue to show substantial minorities of job stayers receiving nominal wage cuts, and
much smaller minorities experiencing zero wage change.
       According to the Italian study by Devicienti, Maida, and Sestito (2007), for example, in
1988-89, when inflation was a relatively high 6.5 percent, the percentage receiving nominal
wage cuts was “only” 8 percent. In 1998-1999, when inflation was under 2 percent, the
percentage receiving wage cuts was 18 percent. Qualitatively similar results are reported for
West Germany by Bauer et al. (2007), and for Spain by OECD (2014), except that the percentage
receiving wage cuts runs somewhat higher, peaking at 25 percent in 1995-1996 for West
Germany, and at 31 percent in 2009-2010 in the aftermath of the especially severe Great
Recession in Spain. For all three countries, the percentage of job stayers recorded with no wage
change never rises much above 10 percent.
       The Austrian evidence, kindly prepared for this survey by Andreas Steinhauer and Josef
Zweimuller, again points to considerable prevalence of nominal wage cuts. Over a 2002-2012
sample period that rarely saw inflation rise above 3 percent, the percentage receiving nominal
wage cuts ranged from 13 to 19 percent. Strikingly, nominal wage freezes are exceedingly rare in
the Austrian data, affecting fewer than 2 percent of job stayers.
       Inflation plays a particularly important role in the Mexican results reported by
Castellanos, Garcia-Verdu, and Kaplan (2004). In the early part of their 1985-2001 sample
period, when inflation was astronomical (going as high as almost 160 percent!), nominal wage
cuts were extremely rare. At the end, when inflation was just starting to moderate to single

                                                12
digits, the percentage receiving wage cuts had risen to 11 percent. At the same time, aside from a
few periods in which rises in the nominal minimum wage were delayed, no more than 17 percent
of job stayers experienced no change in their nominal wage.
       The outliers in Table 1 are especially instructive. At one extreme are the results reported
by Doris, O’Neill, and Sweetman (2015) for Ireland, where the Great Recession hit especially
hard and involved a price deflation. In 2009-2010, the percentage of job stayers receiving
nominal wage cuts reached 50 percent! And, even in the depths of the crisis in Ireland, the
incidence of nominal wage freezes rose no higher than 15 percent.
       Park and Shin (2017) report a similarly extreme frequency of wage cuts in their results
for South Korea, which affected as much as 56 percent of job stayers in 2008-2009, when both
output growth and inflation were close to zero. An equally striking aspect of the South Korean
data, however, is that the fraction of job stayers experiencing zero change in their nominal wage
is negligible. The data for South Korea thus exhibit none of the empirical hallmarks of
downward nominal wage rigidity, in precisely the macroeconomic context in which one would
anticipate to find them.
       At the other extreme is Portugal, where Carneiro, Portugal, and Varejao (2014) report
that nominal wage cuts were “virtually non-existent” throughout the 1987-2009 period, affecting
no more than 6 percent of job stayers. This makes a lot of sense because Portugal has a national
law that explicitly prohibits such cuts. And, consistent with this, the incidence of nominal wage
freezes in Portugal rises to unparalleled levels in Portugal during the Great Recession, with as
many as three-quarters of job stayers recorded with zero change in their hourly pay.
       At first blush, the situation seems somewhat similar in Sweden. For blue-collar workers,
Ekberg (2004) reports that between 0.3 and 3.8 percent received hourly base wage cuts. He
explains that, “given the framework of the terms of employment, it is impossible for the
employers to cut wages unilaterally. Hence, a wage cut can only be achieved under mutual
consent,” and even then it cannot violate applicable collective bargaining agreements.
       In stark contrast to the Portuguese case, however, almost none of these Swedish job
stayers experiences a nominal pay freeze. Moreover, turning to white-collar Swedish workers,
although Ekberg reports very low percentages with wage cuts at the beginning of his sample
period (when inflation was in double digits and very few white-collar workers received any

                                                13
supplementary pay), by the end inflation was much lower, a majority of white-collar workers
received some supplementary pay, and the percentage receiving pay cuts rose as high as 10
percent.
       Thus, uniquely among the studies we survey, Portugal appears to be the canonical
example of Keynes’s premise that nominal wages cannot be cut. While nominal wage cuts also
appear to be rare in Sweden, there is little evidence there for an associated buildup of wage
freezes. Otherwise, the evidence accumulated from payroll records and pay slips suggests that
nominal wage cuts occur more commonly than most of us had thought.

Some Interesting Nuances

       Having found that nominal wage decreases occur with surprising frequency, we can
inquire further about how they are distributed throughout the labor market. Recent findings
suggest that the overall flexibility we report is still more pervasive, in two senses.
       First, Elsby, Shin, and Solon (2016) point out that the nominal wage cuts observed in the
British NES data “are remarkably pervasive across sub-groups of workers/jobs. For example, in
2011-12, when the overall proportion of job stayers experiencing cuts was 23.5%, the
proportions were 22% in the private sector and 26% in the public sector; 27% for union workers
and 22% for nonunion workers; at least 20% for every single-digit occupation; and 32% for
workers who received incentive pay in either 2011 or 2012 and 22% for workers who did not.”
The Washington State study by Jardim, Solon, and Vigdor (2018) also presents some
disaggregated analyses, and it similarly finds that the common occurrence of nominal wage cuts
is pervasive across both industries and firm sizes. For example, even in the utilities industry –
the industry that tends to show the fewest nominal wage cuts – the percentage receiving cuts was
almost always above 15 percent.
       Second, recent studies with access to rich employer-employee matched data have begun
to investigate whether firms cutting wages do so for nearly all their workers or target the cuts on
selected sub-groups. For example, if 20 percent of all the job stayers in a particular period show
wage cuts, this could happen because 20 percent of the stayers in every firm receive wage cuts.
Or it could happen because the cuts occur universally in firms that employ 20 percent of stayers,
and not at all in other firms. Where between these extremes does the reality lie? To explore this

                                                  14
question with the Washington State data, Jardim et al. created for each job stayer receiving a
wage cut the following variable – the percentage of that worker’s job-staying co-workers that
also received a wage cut in the same period. In every period studied, it turned out that the
majority of job stayers receiving nominal wage cuts worked for firms that cut the wages of
between 10 and 50 percent of their job stayers. Jardim et al. also noted a tendency for these
selective wage cuts to be more concentrated in the upper half of within-firm wage distributions.
       Likewise, Park and Shin (2017) have reported similar findings for South Korea, noting
that the prevalence of nominal wage cuts summarized in Table 1 stems from “a majority of
employers cutting a fraction of their workers’ wages fairly routinely.”
       We regard these details as promising points of departure for further research. They
suggest that nominal wage cuts are not only surprisingly common, but also broadly distributed
across sectors and firms.


Summary and Discussion

       For more than 80 years, many influential macroeconomic analyses of the labor market
have been premised on the assumption that nominal wages cannot be cut. Some classic studies
that used longitudinal household surveys to track job stayers from year to year measured a high
incidence of nominal wage cuts, but this evidence reasonably was discounted on the ground that
the measurement of frequent wage cuts could be an artifact of response error.
       The main point of the present article has been to synthesize a more recent international
collection of studies that have resorted to more accurate wage data from employers’ payroll
records and pay slips. Outside of circumstances where nominal wage cuts have been legally
prohibited or rendered irrelevant by very high price inflation, most of this evidence has
continued to show that nominal wage cuts occur more frequently than commonly has been
supposed.
       Most of us are surprised by this finding, not only because of the persistent influence of
Keynes’s contrary assumption in The General Theory, but also because introspection, casual
empiricism, and Bewley’s interviews tell us that workers really do dislike nominal wage cuts and
employers therefore are reluctant to impose them. But is this obvious aversion to wage cuts so


                                                15
extreme as to bind even when inefficient layoffs into unemployment are the alternative? The
accumulated international evidence showing that nominal wage cuts occur frequently should
inspire a reconsideration of the commonly invoked assumption that nominal wages cannot be cut
even when efficiency of allocation decisions is at stake.
       Of course, because the evidence reviewed here is based on longitudinal tracking of job
stayers, it pertains directly only to wage rigidity for incumbent workers. As discussed above, a
related question is how flexible wages are for the hiring of new workers. Some recent models
have assumed that wage rigidity for incumbents spills over into wage rigidity for new hires. In
that light, the evidence reported here is indirectly pertinent for hiring wages. If nominal wage
cuts are feasible for incumbent workers, why would they not be for hiring wages?
        The development of theoretically coherent and empirically relevant accounts of what
happens in the labor market over the business cycle remains a crucial mission for economic
research. We hope to support that effort by providing a more accurate picture of the frequency
and nature of nominal wage cuts.


References

Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, and George L. Perry. 1996. “The Macroeconomics of
       Low Inflation.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1996(1): 1-59.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Paul J. Devereux. 1999. “The Extent and Consequences of Downward
       Wage Rigidity.” NBER Working Paper 7236.
Barro, Robert J. 1977. “Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy.” Journal of
       Monetary Economics 3(3): 305-16.
Bauer, Thomas, Holger Bonin, Lorenz Goette, and Uwe Sunde. 2007. “Real and Nominal Wage
       Rigidities and the Rate of Inflation: Evidence from West German Micro Data.” Economic
       Journal 117(524): F508-29.
Becker, Gary S. 1962. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis.” Journal of
       Political Economy 70(5): S9-49.
Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Luca Antonio Ricci. 2011. “The Inflation-Output Tradeoff with
       Downward Wage Rigidities.” American Economic Review 101(4): 1436-66.

                                                16
Bewley, Truman F. 1999. Why Wages Don’t Fall during a Recession. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
       University Press.
Card, David, and Dean Hyslop. 1996. “Does Inflation ‘Grease the Wheels of the Labor
       Market?’” NBER Working Paper 5538.
Carneiro, Anabela, Pedro Portugal, and José Varejão. 2014. “Catastrophic Job Destruction
       during the Portuguese Economic Crisis.” Journal of Macroeconomics 39(B): 444-57.
Castellanos, Sara G., Rodrigo Garcia-Verdu, and David S. Kaplan. 2004. “Nominal Wage
       Rigidities in Mexico: Evidence from Social Security Records.” Journal of Development
       Economics 75(2): 507-33.
Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2014. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips
       Curve.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 46(S2): 51-93.
Devicienti, Francesco, Agata Maida, and Paolo Sestito. 2007. “Downward Wage Rigidity in
       Italy: Micro-Based Measures and Implications.” Economic Journal 117(524): F530-52.
Dickens, William T., Lorenz Goette, Erica L. Groshen, Steinar Holden, Julian Messina, Mark E.
       Schweitzer, Jarkko Turunen, and Melanie E. Ward. “How Wages Change: Micro
       Evidence from the International Wage Flexibility Project.” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 21(2): 195-214.
Doris, Aedin, Donal O’Neill, and Olive Sweetman. 2015. “Wage Flexibility and the Great
       Recession: The Response of the Irish Labour Market.” IZA Journal of European Labor
       Studies 4(18).
Dupraz, Stephane, Emi Nakamura, and Jon Steinsson. 2017. “A Plucking Model of Business
       Cycles.” Available at https://eml.berkeley.edu/~enakamura/papers/plucking.pdf.
Ekberg, John. 2004. “Nominal Wage Rigidity in the Swedish Labor Market.” Chap. 1 in Essays
       in Labor Economics, 13-56. Dissertations in Economics 2004:2, Department of
       Economics, Stockholm University.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Donggyun Shin, and Gary Solon. 2016. “Wage Adjustment in the Great
       Recession and Other Downturns: Evidence from the United States and Great Britain.”
       Journal of Labor Economics 34(1): S249-90.


                                              17
Gertler, Mark, and Antonella Trigari. 2009. “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash
       Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Political Economy 117(1): 38-86.
Hall, Robert E. 2005. “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness.” American
       Economic Review 95(1): 50-65.
Jardim, Ekaterina, Gary Solon, and Jacob Vigdor. 2018. “How Prevalent Is Downward Rigidity
       in Nominal Wages? Evidence from Payroll Records in Washington State.”
Kahn, Shulamit. 1997. “Evidence of Nominal Wage Stickiness from Micro-Data.” American
       Economic Review 87(5): 993-1008.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.
       London: Macmillan.
Kurmann, Andre, and Erika McEntarfer. 2017. “Downward Wage Rigidity in the United States:
       New Evidence from Administrative Data.” Available at this link.
Kurmann, Andre, Erika McEntarfer, and James Spletzer. 2016. “Downward Wage Rigidity in the
       U.S.: New Evidence from Worker-Firm Linked Data.” Available at this link.
Lebow, David E., Raven E. Saks, and Beth Anne Wilson. 2003. “Downward Nominal Wage
       Rigidity: Evidence from the Employment Cost Index.” Advances in Macroeconomics 3.
Malcomson, James M. 1997. “Contracts, Hold-Up, and Labor Markets.” Journal of Economic
       Literature 35(4): 1916-57.
McLaughlin, Kenneth. 1994. “Rigid Wages?” Journal of Monetary Economics 34(3): 383-414.
Nickell, Stephen, and Glenda Quintini. 2003. “Nominal Wage Rigidity and the Rate of
       Inflation.” Economic Journal 113(490): 762-81.
OECD. 2014. “Sharing the Pain Equally? Wage Adjustments during the Crisis and Recovery.”
       Chap. 2 in OECD Employment Outlook 2014, 43-78. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Park, Seonyoung, and Donggyun Shin. 2017. “The Extent and Nature of Downward Nominal
       Wage Flexibility: An Analysis of Longitudinal Worker/Establishment Data from Korea.”
       Labour Economics 48:67-86.




                                             18
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe. 2013. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity and the
      Case for Temporary Inflation in the Eurozone.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
      27(3):193-212.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe. 2016. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity,
      Currency Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment.” Journal of Political Economy
      124(5):1466-514.
Shimer, Robert. 2004. “The Consequences of Rigid Wages in Search Models.” Journal of the
      European Economic Association 2(2-3): 469-79.
Smith, Jennifer C. 2000. “Nominal Wage Rigidity in the United Kingdom.” Economic Journal
      110(462): C176-95.
Snell, Andy, and Jonathan P. Thomas. 2010. “Labor Contracts, Equal Treatment, and Wage-
      Unemployment Dynamics.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(3): 98-127.
Tobin, James. 1972. “Inflation and Unemployment.” American Economic Review 62(1-2): 1-18.




                                            19
                      Table 1. Percentages of Job Stayers a Receiving Year-to-Year Nominal Wage Cuts and Freezes

                                                                                                  Percentage Receiving   Percentage Receiving
Study                                    Data Source                     Wage Measure
                                                                                                       Wage Cuts            Wage Freezes
                                British Household Panel Study,      Usual weekly pay from
Smith (2000)                                                                                              17.8                    5.6
                                           1991-96                       recent pay slip
                                                                   Earnings/hours excluding
Elsby, Shin, and Solon          British New Earnings Survey,
                                                                  overtime for reference week         4.9 b to 23.5           0.4b to 9.1
(2016)                                   1975-2012
                                                                            in April
Jardim, Solon, and Vigdor      Washington State unemployment
                                                                   Quarterly earnings/hours           20.4 to 33.1            2.5 to 7.7
(2018)                            insurance records, 2005-15
                               W. German IABS-R from social       Annual earnings/work days
Bauer et al. (2007)            security records, 1975-76, 1980-     for full-time workers              9.4 to 24.9            3.9 to 11.2
                                        81, …, 2000-01               employed on July 1
                                                                  Annual earnings/work days
Courtesy of Steinhauer and         Austrian Social Security
                                                                    for full-time workers             13.0 to 18.6            0.1 to 1.5
Zweimuller (2018)                    Database, 2002-12
                                                                   employed on March 15
                              Worker History Italian Panel from
Devicienti, Maida, and                                            Annual earnings/work days
                               social security records, 1988-89                                       7.7 and 18.3           4.0 and 8.5
Sestito (2007)                                                      for full-time workers
                                         and 1998-99
OECD (2014), courtesy of        Spanish Muestra Continua de
                                                                   Monthly earnings for full-
Jansen, Jimenez and Garcia       Vidas Laborales from social                                          18.0 to 31.0            1.8 to 8.4
                                                                   time full-month workers
Pérez                             security records, 2007-10
Castellanos, Garcia-Verdu,    Mexican Social Security Institute   Daily comprehensive c wage
                                                                                                      0.2b to 10.7           3.9b to 16.5 d
and Kaplan (2004)                     records, 1985-2001             on last day of quarter
                                                                  Earnings/hours from recent
Doris, O’Neill, and             Irish EU Survey of Income and
                                                                   pay slip for full-time full-       24.5 to 50.1            3.3 to 14.2
Sweetman (2015)                   Living Conditions, 2006-11
                                                                         year workers e
                                  S. Korean Survey of Labor         Monthly earnings/hours
Park and Shin (2017)                Conditions by Type of           excluding overtime and            25.3 to 56.0            0.0 to 0.2
                                    Employment, 2008-13              incentive pay in June
                                                                  Monthly base wage/normal
Carneiro, Portugal, and        Portuguese Quadros de Pessoal,
                                                                  monthly hours for full-time          2.2 to 6.3             3.2 to 76.0
Varejao (2014)                  1986-89, 1991-2000, 2002-16
                                                                  workers in reference month f



                                                                     1
                                                                                    White-collar:
                                         Employer surveys by                       comprehensive g              White-collar: 0.1b to 10.0     White-collar: 0.2b to 6.0
    Ekberg (2004)                      Confederation of Swedish              earnings/hours in reference
                                    Enterprise, 1970-90 and 1995-99           month; blue-collar: hourly          Blue-collar: 0.3b to 3.9      Blue-collar: 0.0b to 0.3
                                                                             base wage in second quarter


a
  Job stayers are defined as workers staying with the same employer except that the British, Irish, Korean, and Swedish studies also require that the workers stay
in the same job within the firm.
b
  These data points correspond to periods of high inflation. The highlighted figures relate to 1979-80 for the Great Britain, when the inflation rate reached 20
percent; a period of hyperinflation in Mexico in the 1980s; and a period from the mid-1970s to the early 1980s in Sweden, when the inflation rate regularly
reached double digits.
c
  The Mexican wage measure “is a comprehensive measure of wages plus benefits, including payments made in cash, bonuses, premiums, room and board,
commissions, benefits in kind and any other amount paid or benefit received.”
d
  These exclude three outliers in 1991:4-1992:4, 1996:4-1997:4, and 1998:4-1999:4 when increases in nominal minimum wages were not synchronized with the
reporting dates. In each of these cases, the incidence of wage freezes exceeded 30 percent, at the expense of similar declines in the incidence of wage increases.
e
  The results from pay slips on earnings per hour are not reported in the published paper, but were kindly provided to us by Aedin Doris.
f
  Additional results not reported in the published paper were kindly provided to us by Pedro Portugal.
g
  The wage measure we cite for Swedish white-collar workers includes overtime, bonuses, and fringe benefits. Our reported percentage receiving wage cuts is a
weighted average of the percentages Ekberg reports for white-collar workers who do and do not receive such supplementary payments.




                                                                                 2
