                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            LIQUIDITY AND EXCHANGE RATES:
                              AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION

                                         Charles Engel
                                      Steve Pak Yeung Wu

                                       Working Paper 25397
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25397


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 2018, Revised May 2018




We would like to thank many scholars for useful comments, especially Luca Dedola, Harris
Dellas, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Zehao Li, Dmitry Mukhin, Maury Obstfeld, Alessandro
Rebucci, Andy Rose, and Hyun Song Shin. We thank Yucheng Yang for help in obtaining some
of the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Charles Engel and Steve Pak Yeung Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity and Exchange Rates: An Empirical Investigation
Charles Engel and Steve Pak Yeung Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 25397
December 2018, Revised May 2018
JEL No. F31,F41

                                         ABSTRACT

We find strong empirical evidence that economic fundamentals can well account for nominal
exchange rate movements. The important innovation is that we include the liquidity yield on
government bonds as an explanatory variable. We find impressive evidence that changes in the
liquidity yield are significant in explaining exchange rate changes for all of the G10 countries.
Moreover, after controlling for liquidity yields, traditional determinants of exchange rates –
adjustment toward purchasing power parity and monetary shocks – are also found to be
economically and statistically significant. We show how these relationships arise out of a
canonical two-country New Keynesian model with liquidity returns. Additionally, we find a role
for sovereign default risk and currency swap market frictions.


Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and CEPR
and also NBER
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu

Steve Pak Yeung Wu
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
steve.wu@wisc.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25397
1. Introduction


         The economics literature on foreign exchange rate determination has not had much success
linking exchange-rate movements to standard macroeconomic variables. This problem has come
to be known at the “exchange-rate disconnect” puzzle, as coined by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000).1
         Our tack is to look for the role of the liquidity return on government bonds in driving
exchange rates. Engel (2016) suggests that this return – the non-monetary return that government
short-term bonds provide because of their safety, the ease with which they can be sold, and their
value as collateral, which is sometimes referred to as the “convenience yield” – may be important
in understanding exchange rate puzzles.2
         Our study uses measures of the liquidity yield on government bonds, as constructed by Du,
et al. (2018a). These measures take the difference between a riskless market rate and the
government bond rate to quantify the implicit liquidity yield on the government bond. Moreover,
the Du, et al. measure “corrects” for frictions in foreign exchange forward markets and for
sovereign default risk.
         The liquidity yield can be associated with the deviation from uncovered interest parity that
is now introduced as a standard feature in open-economy New Keynesian models. It is usually
included so that the model can reproduce to some extent the observed volatility of real exchange
rates.3 Indeed, Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017) show that this deviation is key to being able to account
for the disconnect puzzle. These models inevitably treat the deviation as an unobserved variable.
One interpretation of our model and findings is that the uncovered interest parity deviation is partly
observable and can be well-measured by the relative liquidity yield on government bonds.
         The intuition for why the government bond convenience yield influences the exchange rate
is straightforward. The liquidity that these bonds provide is attractive to investors, and influences
their investment decisions as if the bonds were paying an unobserved convenience dividend. The
government bonds can pay a lower monetary return than other bonds with similar risk

1
  Engel (2014) provides a recent survey. Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017) is a recent attempt to build a model to account
for the disconnect. One notable determinant of nominal exchange rate movements is the lagged real exchange rate,
which arises from adjustment to real exchange rate disequilibrium. This point was made clearly by Mark (1995), and
has found strong recent support by Eichenbaum, et al. (2018).
2
  Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and Nagel (2016) study the convenience yield on U.S. Treasury assets.
Valchev (2017) also studies a model in which the convenience yield plays a role in accounting for exchange-rate
puzzles. del Negro et al. (2018) find that convenience yields account for the long-run drop in global real interest rates.
3
  See Kollmann (2002) for an early example.

                                                                                                                        2
characteristics, and still be desirable. An increase in the liquidity yield, as measured by the
difference between the private bond return and government bond return, will ceteris paribus lead
to a currency appreciation much in the same way that an increase in the interest rate would affect
the currency value. However, we note that in our equilibrium model, the liquidity return and the
interest rate play somewhat different roles arising from the fact that the monetary policy instrument
is the interest rate ex-convenience yield. Thus, the interest rate responds endogenously to inflation
in a way that the convenience yield does not.
        We find for each of the so-called G10 currencies that the relative liquidity yield (the home
country yield relative to foreign country yields) has significant explanatory power for exchange
rate movements.4 That is, the role of the liquidity yield in driving exchange rates is not limited to
the U.S., but is evident across all of the major currencies. Moreover, using guidance from a
standard New Keynesian model but augmented with a role for liquidity returns on government
bonds, we find that the “standard” determinants of exchange rate movements are statistically and
quantitatively important after controlling for the liquidity yields. In particular, interest rate
differentials and a lagged adjustment term for the real exchange rate (as in Eichenbaum, et al.
(2018)) are also important determinants of exchange rate movements. We subject our results to a
large number of robustness tests, but find the models perform consistently well. Additionally, we
undertake an instrumental variables specification to control for possible endogeneity of the relative
liquidity yields, and again find consistently strong support for the model. In an exercise in the spirit
of Meese and Rogoff (1983), we find our empirical model has a significantly better out-of-sample
fit than a random walk model.
        Our study is contemporaneous with Jiang, et al. (2018), but with the following differences:
Our empirical work finds strong evidence for the role of government liquidity yields, interest rates
and adjustment toward purchasing power parity for ten different currencies, while Jiang, et al. look
only at the U.S. dollar. We do numerous robustness checks, and include an instrumental variables
specification. And, using the decomposition of Du, et al. (2018a), we find additional explanatory
power arising from default risk and forward market frictions in a way that is compatible with our




4
 Namely, Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar
(NZD), Norwegian Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States
Dollar (USD).

                                                                                                         3
model.5 This latter is important because the premium on government bonds is influenced not only
by the liquidity yield, or “convenience yield”, of government bonds, but also by default risk and
frictions in forward markets for foreign exchange.6 Finally, our empirical specification is derived
from a simple theoretical general equilibrium model.7
         We think of the liquidity return or convenience yield as arising from the usefulness of some
government securities either as collateral for very short-term loans, or from the ease with which
they can be sold for cash. Nickolas (2018) defines liquid assets as: “cash on hand or an asset that
can be readily converted to cash. An asset that can readily be converted into cash is similar to cash
itself because the asset can be sold with little impact on its value.” But there is only a fine
distinction between liquidity so defined and “safety” as defined by Gorton (2017): “A safe asset is
an asset that is (almost always) valued at face value without expensive and prolonged analysis. By
design, there is no benefit to producing (private) information about its value, and this is common
knowledge.” From these definitions, it is clear that safe assets will be liquid, and liquid assets are
safe. The role of safe assets in the global economy has been studies extensively in recent literature.
In Caballero et al. (2008), Mendoza et al. (2009), Gourinchas and Rey (2011), Maggiori (2017),
and Farhi and Maggiori (2018), safe assets play a key role in accounting for global imbalances.
Caballero et al. (2015, 2017) explore the role of a shortage of safe assets and their role in the global
financial crisis. Gourinchas and Jeanne (2012) explore the consequences of a shortage of safe
assets for the stability of the global financial system.
         Liquidity and its role in exchange-rate determination has been explored from a variety of
angles. The aforementioned papers of Engel (2016) and Valchev (2017) offer models in which
certain assets have a convenience yield arising from their liquidity. Grilli and Roubini (1992) and
Engel (1992) are earlier, related works. Brunnermeier et al. (2009), Adrian et al. (2009) and Bruno
and Shin (2014) consider a liquidity effect on exchange rates arising from banks’ balance sheets.
One can identify the notions of liquidity in these studies with “funding” liquidity, as defined in


5
  A small bit of our preliminary findings were first reported at a conference at the Bank for International Settlements
on “International macro, price determination and policy cooperation” in September, 2017. The publicly available
slides for that lecture can be found at https://www.bis.org/events/confresearchnetwork1709/programme.htm
6
  In fact, Avdjiev, et al. (2018) document the role of deviations from covered interest parity for the value of the U.S.
dollar.
7
  Linnemann and Schabert (2015) also posit a relationship between liquidity returns and exchange rate behavior. Their
paper does not provide an empirical test of the relationship between the liquidity return and exchange rates. Their
model postulates a negative relationship between the liquidity yield and interest rates, contrary to the model of Nagel
(2016), Engel (2016), and this paper, and contrary to the evidence in Nagel (2016) and this paper.

                                                                                                                      4
Brunnermeier and Petersen (2009), but other work has looked at the role of “market” liquidity. A
prominent recent study is Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) that considers financial constraints that
prevent full liquidity to arbitrage international money markets. A related study is Pavlova and
Rigobon (2008) which investigates the role of portfolio constraints. Melvin and Taylor (2009),
Banti et al. (2012), and Mancini et al. (2013) empirically study of the role of liquidity in foreign
exchange markets.
       There is a long history of attributing a role to the “safe haven” effect on currency values.
Recently, Fatum and Yamamoto (2016), which looks at this phenomenon during the global
financial crisis, defines a safe currency as “a currency that increases its relative value against other
currencies as market uncertainty increases.” The idea of a safe haven effect is an old one – see, for
example, Dooley and Isard (1985), Isard and Stekler (1985) or Dornbusch (1986). Here we could
argue that one channel for the safe haven effect is through the demand for safe assets. During times
of global uncertainty, certain assets such as short-term government securities become more valued
for their liquidity. There certainly can be other channels through which the safe haven phenomenon
works. Farhi and Gabaix (2015) model safe haven currencies as ones that appreciate during times
of global downturns, a concept that has been tested empirically by Ranaldo and Söderlind (2010).
Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002) speak of risk more generally, which could encompass both the
liquidity channel and the hedging channel.
       Section 2, which guides our empirical work, presents an equilibrium New Keynesian model
in which government bonds pay a liquidity return. Section 3 presents the results of our empirical
investigation. Section 4 concludes.


2. Liquidity and Exchange Rates


       Following Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), Engel (2016), Nagel (2016), and
Jiang, et al. (2018), we posit that the ex ante excess return on short-term government bonds in one
country relative to another is attributable to an unobserved liquidity payoff.
       In particular, let it be the one-period interest rate in the “home” country government bonds

(we present the model in the context of two countries, “home” and “foreign”.) itm is the return on

a short-term, one-period market instrument. The liquidity premium represents the difference in


                                                                                                      5
these two rates:  t  itm  it . For now, we assume that there is no default risk on either instrument.

The empirical section will adjust the returns for default risk using credit default swap (CDS) data.
         Under this formulation, we should observe  t  0 , as long as the government bond is more

liquid. Investors are willing to hold the government bond instead of the market instrument, because
the government bond is more easily sold on markets, or is more readily accepted as collateral. It
may be the case that some agents in the economy have no need for liquidity, in which case their
holdings of the government bonds would be zero. In particular, it might be that foreign agents hold
no home government bonds because they do not value the liquidity of those assets. But private
agents cannot short government bonds – that is, private agents (in either economy) cannot borrow
at the rate it , because the assets they issue do not have the same liquidity as government bonds.

         Analogously, in the foreign country, there is a liquidity yield given by  t*  it*m  it* , where

the variables with the * superscript denote the foreign-country equivalents of the home-country
variables.
         We will assume that there is a deviation from uncovered interest parity for the market
instruments, rt , that is stochastic, exogenous and uncorrelated with the other shocks (monetary

and liquidity) in the model. We remain agnostic about the source of this deviation. rt could be a

foreign exchange risk premium, a deviation from rational expectations, or some other market
friction. In Jeanne and Rose (2002), Devereux and Engel (2002), and Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017),
this term arises because of the presence of noise traders. We assume that rt is uncorrelated with

other shocks introduced into the model, to the monetary policy rule and to the liquidity return.8


(1)      it*m  Et st 1  st  itm  rt ,


where st is the log of the exchange rate (expressed as the home currency price of the foreign

currency.)
         Let  t be defined as the liquidity return on home government bonds relative to foreign

government bonds:

8
 Because we do not actually give a structural interpretation to the coefficient estimates of the predictive equation we
derive, (18), we can assume something weaker than that the noise term is strictly uncorrelated with the other shocks.

                                                                                                                     6
(2)        t   t   t*   itm  it    itm*  it*    itm  itm*    it  it*  .


Then we can rewrite (1) as:


(3)         it*  Et st 1  st  it  t  rt .


That is, the expected excess return on foreign one-period government bonds (relative to home
bonds) is determined in part by the liquidity yield of home government bonds relative to foreign
bonds. When the home bonds are more liquid, the foreign bonds must pay a higher expected
monetary return.
           Now, iterate equation (3) forward, as in Campbell and Clarida (1987) and others:



                                                                                                                        
                                                                                        
(4)        st   Et  it  j  it* j  i  i*
                         j 0                                   j 0                     j 0
                                                                                                   k 
                                                                                                                    
                                                          Et  t  j     Et   rt  j  r   lim Et st  k  k s1  s .



We will assume that the interest differential, it  it* ; the liquidity return, t ;, and the u.i.p.

deviation, rt , are all stationary random variables, but st follows a unit root process. 9 The

unconditional mean difference in the home and foreign interest rate is denoted i  i* , the mean of
the relative liquidity return is  , and the mean of the interest parity deviation is r . Here,

                                  
lim Et st  k  k s1  s , which is a random variable when the exchange rate has a unit root, is the
k 


permanent component of the nominal exchange rate – in the sense that Beveridge and Nelson
(1981) use that term in their permanent-transitory decomposition. The term s1  s represents the
trend in the log of the nominal exchange rate.
           There is some consensus that nominal exchange rates among high-income countries
contain unit roots. For example, if monetary policy is set by a rule for money supplies, any



9
 Technically, we assume it  it* , t , and rt are square summable, which insures that the infinite sums converge.
Any finite order ARMA process, for example, is square summable.

                                                                                                                               7
permanent change in the money supply would lead to a permanent change in the nominal exchange
rate. If monetary policy is set by an interest-rate rule such as a Taylor rule, the exchange rate will
contain a unit root unless the interest rate rule targets the nominal exchange rate.10
                Equation (4) already points to the intuition of our empirical specification. It says that when
the infinite sum of the expected current and future home interest rates rises relative to the expected
infinite sum of current and future foreign interest rate, the home currency appreciates ( st falls.)
That is a well-known channel of influence, which is at work in, for example, the famous Dornbusch
(1976) model.
                However, this comparative statics exercise is made holding the permanent component of
the exchange rate constant. All nominal interest rate changes may not be the same. For example,
in a traditional monetarist model of exchange rates, a permanent one-time increase in the monetary
growth rate in the home country would immediately raise inflation, and therefore raise the inflation
premium incorporated in the nominal interest rate. it  j  it* j would increase for all time periods,

but that also implies an increase in the unconditional mean of the relative interest rates, i  i* . In
that case, there would be no change in the first term on the right hand side of equation (4):

                          would be unaffected. However, this change would lead to an increase in
     
Et  it  j  it* j  i  i*
     j 0


the permanent component of the exchange rate. The size of the increase is model-dependent, but a
classic result is that an increase in the growth rate of x percent leads to an immediate permanent
depreciation of greater than x percent, which the literature referred to as the “magnification
effect”.11 The conclusion is that equation (4) by itself, which represents the international financial
market equilibrium condition, is not sufficient to determine the exchange rate. In order to
determine the exchange rate, we need a model of the determination of interest rates, and of the
permanent component of the nominal exchange rate.12
                Before proceeding to close the model, we note that a higher relative liquidity return on
home government bonds also leads to an appreciation of the domestic currency. In this equation,
the liquidity return and the interest rate are just two components of the return on government bonds,


10
   See Benigno and Benigno (2008).
11
   See, for example, Frenkel (1976).
12
   Here we differ from Jiang, et al. (2018), who take nominal interest rates as exogenous and assume the nominal
exchange rate is stationary.

                                                                                                                   8
and so their impact on the exchange rate is identical. In the model that we now present, the interest
rates are the monetary policy instruments, and are endogenously determined.
        As a first step, we incorporate the model from Engel (2016), based in turn on Nagel (2016),
in which the liquidity return on the home bond is positively related to the interest rate:


(5)     t    it  it*   vt ,   0 .


Appendix A1 derives this equation, extending the analysis of Engel (2016). The positive
relationship between the relative liquidity return and the interest differential arises as in Nagel
(2016). Specifically, when the monetary authority tightens monetary policy by reducing the supply
of money and raising interest rates, liquid assets that can substitute for money become more valued
for their liquidity services and so pay a higher liquidity return.
        The remainder of the model adopts a New Keynesian framework. First, we assume that
nominal prices in each country are sticky in nominal terms. In particular, we posit that there is
local-currency pricing, so that each firm, in both countries, sets two prices – one in home currency
for sale in the home country, and one in foreign currency for sale in the foreign currency.
        We modify the standard Calvo-pricing equation in two ways. First, we assume that nominal
prices must be set one period in advance. We make this assumption because, in practice, the
response of nominal prices to current period shocks is so small relative to the response of nominal
exchange rates, that a model with predetermined prices better represents reality in an open-
economy framework. A fraction of firms,  , are allowed to change their prices optimally each
period, but the price they set at time t  1 is for the time t period. Let ptr , H be the price for firms

that reset their prices (which is identical for all such firms, because as in the standard New
Keynesian framework, they face identical costs and demand functions.)
        The remaining firms do not change their price optimally, but we assume that these firms
build in an automatic price adjustment. We do not specify the trend term, but impose a particular
consistency restriction below. We let  tH be the trend adjustment for home prices in the home

country (set at time t  1 .) The firms that adjust their price optimally take into account any current
disequilibrium in prices in planning their price increase, while the other firms simply adjust the
price at the trend rate.


                                                                                                       9
         We have:


(6)      ptH  ptH1    ptr , H  ptH1   1    tH .13


         The foreign currency price of home goods is set in a similar way:


         pt* H  pt*H1    pt*r , H  pt*H1   1    t* H


We now make two simplifying assumptions about the price setting process. The first is that firms,
when they reset their price, set prices in such a way that there is no expected pricing to market:
 pt*r , H  ptr , H  Et 1st . We can justify that assumption on the grounds that it is too costly for firms

to calculate reset prices for each market they serve. As in the producer currency pricing model, we
assume that firms calculate a single reset price, but then translate that price into the currency of
each market they service. The local-currency price then remains unchanged until the next
opportunity for price resetting. The second assumption is that, while we are agnostic about the
process by which firms set the trend adjustment of their prices, we impose the following
consistency requirement:  t* H   tH  Et 1st  st 1 . That is, firms form a forecast of the exchange

rate change, and then align their trend adjustments so that they are expected to be consistent, when
expressed in a common currency, in the home and foreign market. These assumptions imply:


(7)      pt* H  pt*H1    ptr , H  Et 1st  pt*H1   1     tH   Et 1st  st 1   .


Subtracting (7) from (6), we find:


(8)      Et 1st  st 1  pt* H  pt*H1   ptH  ptH1     ptH1  st 1  pt*H1  .




13
   See Engel (2019) for a study of the relationship of the price setting behavior in this model compared to the more
standard Calvo pricing framework.

                                                                                                                   10
The expected change in the pricing to market arises from the adjustments of the fraction  of firms
that reset their prices each period.
        An analogous equation can be derived for the prices set by the foreign firm: pt*F in foreign

currency for sale in the foreign country, and ptF in home currency for sale in the home country:


(9)     Et 1st  st 1  pt* F  pt*F1   ptF  ptF1     ptF1  st 1  pt*F1  .


        We assume that consumption preferences over the two goods are identical so that the real
exchange rate is driven entirely by the deviations from the law of one price that arise from pricing
to market. The log of the consumer price basket in each country is a weighted average of the logs
of the prices of foreign-produced and home-produced goods. Taking the weighted average of
equations (8) and (9), we arrive at:


(10)     t   t*   qt 1  Et 1st  st 1 .


In this equation, qt 1 is the log of the real exchange rate (the price of the consumer basket in the

foreign country relative to the home country),  t is home consumer price inflation between t  1

and t, and  t* is foreign consumer price inflation. Note that because prices are set one period in

advance, the inflation rates,  t and  t* , are observable at time t  1 . Under this specification of

price adjustment, the real exchange rate is a stationary random variable and long-run purchasing
power parity holds. The pricing to market disequilibria are expected to dissipate over time.
        These small modifications to the standard open-economy Phillips curve are introduced here
in order to motivate our empirical model of the exchange rate in an intuitive way. In particular, as
is well-known from Benigno (2004), price stickiness would not matter at all for the adjustment of
the real exchange rate with a standard Calvo-pricing equation, unless interest-rate smoothing is
introduced into the monetary policy rule. Engel (2019) shows how the Phillips curve here, along
with serially correlated errors in the monetary policy rule produces very similar real exchange rate
behavior as the Calvo pricing model with interest rate smoothing, but this model is more
analytically convenient.

                                                                                                    11
       The final component of the model is the characterization of monetary policy behavior. We
model this as a very simple Taylor rule. In the home country:


(11)    it   t  ut .


We impose the so-called Taylor condition,   1 , which is a stability condition in our model. ut

is a deviation from the monetary policy rule. There is an analogous equation in the foreign country,
which targets consumer price inflation in that country. Subtracting the foreign Taylor rule from
the home Taylor rule gives us:


(12)    it  it*    t   t*   ut  ut* .


We assume that the relative error terms in the monetary rules follow a first-order autoregressive
process:
(13)    ut  ut*    ut 1  ut*1   t ,     0   1


where  t is a mean-zero, i.i.d. random variable.

       Equations (3), (5), (10) and (12) – the international financial market equilibrium condition,
the model of the liquidity premium, the (relative home to foreign) open economy Phillips curve,
and the (home relative to foreign) monetary policy rule – give us a complete dynamic system for
the real exchange rate, inflation and interest rates. The model incorporates slow adjustment of the
real exchange rate because of nominal price stickiness, governed by the parameter  , the fraction
of the firms that reset their price optimally each period. As Eichenbaum, et al. (2018) have recently
emphasized, empirically almost all of the adjustment of real exchange rate comes through
adjustment by the nominal exchange rate. That is, inflation rates in each currency play little role
in the expected convergence of the real exchange rate to its unconditional mean (which is
normalized to zero, meaning the deviations from the law of one price are expected to disappear in
the long run.) Eichenbaum, et al. (2018) demonstrate that this empirical regularity can be captured
in a New Keynesian model with strong inflation targeting (large value of  ). When inflation
targeting is strong, inflation has a low variance even if the variance of the real exchange rate is

                                                                                                  12
large. If inflation does not move enough to achieve real exchange rate adjustment, that role is left
to the nominal exchange rate.
       The sources of shocks in this simplified model are monetary shocks (in equation (12)), the
uncovered interest parity shocks in equation (1), and liquidity shocks in equation (5). We have
already noted that monetary shocks are assumed to be follow an AR(1) process. We assume that
there is persistence in liquidity, and that vt also follows a first-order autoregressive process:


(14)    vt   vt 1   t ,


where  t is mean-zero, i.i.d., and 0    1 . Furthermore, we assume that the deviation from

uncovered interest parity also follows an autoregressive process given by:


(15)    rt   rt 1  t ,    0    1.


       The model can be solved by hand. For the real exchange rate, we find:


                 1       1                   1     1       1 
        qt                         t   t                                    ut  ut* 
                                               *

                                                           1            
                                                                                      
(16)                                                                                                   .
               1       1           1       1 
                                 v                          r
                1        t        1        t
                                                              


The inflation variables at time t are predetermined, so (16) expresses the real exchange rate in
terms of predetermined and exogenous variables. A relative monetary tightening in the home
country (an increase in ut  ut* ) causes a real appreciation of the home currency. Similarly, an
increase in the liquidity yield on home government bonds leads to a real appreciation. Note that as
inflation targeting becomes more stringent, so  is larger, the real exchange rate reacts more to
monetary policy shocks if   1   . If   1   , a larger  increases the response of the real
exchange rate to changes in the relative liquidity return. We assume in all following discussion
that both of the preceding inequalities are satisfied. Also, the greater price stickiness (smaller  ),


                                                                                                           13
the larger the response of the real exchange rate to monetary policy shocks and the relative liquidity
returns.
         We note that the nominal interest differential is simply a linear combination of the
predetermined relative inflation rates and the exogenous errors in the monetary policy rules, as
given by equation (12). It is intuitive to replace the monetary errors, using (12), with


           ut  ut*  it  it*    t   t*  .


Then with some rearranging, we can write the solution for the real exchange rate in terms of
relative inflation, the nominal interest rate differential, and the liquidity shock:


                   1       1                   1     1       1 
           qt                            t   t*                                    it  it* 
                   1                                   1            
                                                                                        
(17)                                                                                                      .
                  1       1         1       1 
                                    v                            r
                   1        t    1        t
                                                                   


In this equation, tighter monetary policy is represented by higher nominal interest rates, which
imply a currency appreciation.
         Our empirical analysis aims at explaining movements in the log of the nominal exchange
rate, st  st 1 . With some manipulation, using equations (5), (10), and (17), we derive:



(18)                                                                                
           st  st 1  1qt 1   2 t t 1   3 it  it*   it 1  it*1   4t 1  5  it 1  it*1   z j ,t

where



1 
           1  1     0                   1       1                  1       1 
                                         , 2                          0 , 3                        0
           1                                  1                        1       
                                                                                                          

           1  1     1  1             1       1
4                                                                                   ,
                             1        1      


                                                                                                                                 14
            1  1     1
 5                                  0 , and,
              1      

         1     1   
zt                         t 
                                     1     1         1    r
          1                         1      
                                                                                t 1
                            

         Our empirical specification for the depreciation of the exchange rate includes, first, an error
correction term as the nominal exchange rate adjusts to disequilibrium in the real exchange rate.
Second, the change in the interest differential affects the exchange rate as in standard New
Keynesian models. Third, the change in the relative liquidity return on government bonds plays a
role in influencing the exchange rate. Lagged levels of the relative interest differentials and
liquidity returns capture the dynamic adjustment. Under the parameter restrictions of the model –
  1 ,   0 , 0    1 , 0    1 , and   1   – ceteris paribus, an increase in qt 1 , and

increase in it  it*   it 1  it*1  , and an increase in t  t 1 all lead to a decline in st  st 1 . That is,

the home currency appreciates to correct for a real undervaluation, and it appreciates in response
to a relative increase in either the home interest rate or the home liquidity return. The error term,
zt , is a function of the dynamics of the deviation from uncovered interest parity, which is assumed

not to be observable by the econometrician. It is by construction uncorrelated with the explanatory
variables in the regression. The derivation implies that there may be serial correlation in the
regression error, but in practice we find very little evidence of that – which is consistent with the
model under a particular configuration of parameters.
         Before turning to the data, we note a few features of our empirical specification based on
(18). As in our model, we follow convention and treat nominal exchange rates as non-stationary
random variables. In light of much evidence, from Mark (1995) to more recent empirical evidence
in Engel (2016) and Eichenbaum, et al. (2018), the real exchange rate is stationary and the nominal
exchange rate adjusts in the direction of restoring purchasing power parity. Relative interest rates
and relative liquidity returns are stationary. We allow dynamics by including contemporaneous
and lagged values of these variables. Because these variables are serially correlated, we enter them
in the specification as in (18) with the first difference in the returns and the lagged level of the
returns. This reduces the multicollinearity that would be present if these variables were included
in contemporaneous and lagged levels, and gives us the natural interpretation that changes in

                                                                                                                   15
relative interest rates and changes in relative liquidity yields influence changes in the log of the
nominal exchange rate.
         It is important to note that 3 measures the impact of monetary policy shocks, ut  ut* , on

st , while  2 quantifies the effect of shocks to the relative liquidity yield, vt , on the log of the

exchange rate. To see this, first observe from the relative Taylor rules, (12), that the home relative
to foreign interest rate differential depends on relative inflation and the monetary policy shocks.
However, from equations (10) and (3), we see that relative inflation,  t   t* is predetermined and

a function of the lagged interest rate differential and liquidity yield, it 1  it*1 and t 1 .14 Because

these latter two variables are controlled for in (18), the independent effect of it  it* arises only

from the monetary policy shocks. Equation (5) finds t is a function of the interest rate differential

as well as the independent shocks to liquidity. Since the regression equation controls for it  it* , the

independent effects of the shocks to liquidity are measured by the coefficient on t .


3.       Empirical Investigation of Government Bond Liquidity and Exchange Rates


         In this section, we present our empirical results. We first describe how we construct the
measure of government bond liquidity in 3.1. Subsection 3.2 presents our baseline result that the
change in the relative government bond liquidity returns is strongly correlated with exchange rate
movements. We show our results are robust to controlling for certain market frictions and we
estimate instrumental variable regressions in subsection 3.3. In subsection 3.4, we further confirm
that country-specific government bond liquidity matters. Finally, in subsection 3.5, we conduct an
out-of-sample fit exercise a la Meese and Rogoff (1983) and find that our model’s prediction
significantly outperforms a random walk model.
         Throughout the section, we denote the foreign variable as X t* if the context is not country

j specific. For example, we use it* for the foreign interest rate on a government bond. Whenever




14
   Relative inflation would also be a function of lagged r, but we have already argued that because serial correlation
is essentially zero in our regressions, the impact of lagged r as a “left out” variable in our regressions is minimal.

                                                                                                                    16
needed, we denote the variables of a foreign country j as X *j ,t , for example, i*j ,t for the interest rate

of a government bond for the foreign country j.


3.1. Construction of Liquidity Measure


           The word “liquidity” appears in different economic contexts with different meanings. Here,
it refers to a non-observable non-pecuniary return that investors enjoy when holding the asset. We
measure the term itm  itm* in equation (1) by using the foreign exchange forward minus spot rate

spread, ft ,t 1  st :15



(19)       t   itm  it    itm*  it*   f t ,t 1  st  it*  it


where ft ,t 1 is the log of forward rate and st is the log of the spot exchange rate, both expressed

in home currency price of a foreign currency.
           There are two ways to interpret t . First, as the term (itm  it )  (itm*  it* ) suggests, it is a

relative measure of difference between marketable securities and government bond yield in the
home and foreign country. This interpretation comes directly from the model. Second, as described
by ft ,t 1  st  it*  it , the first three terms can be understood as the payoff of a synthetic home

government bond that is constructed by buying the foreign government bond, and eliminating
exchange rate risk by entering a forward contract. Since the home government bond and the
synthetic home government bond pay equivalent pecuniary returns, the difference between the two
gives a measure of the relative difference in liquidity services the home and foreign government
bonds provide.
           In the case where the U.S. is assumed to be the home country, Du, et al. (2018a) denotes
the t term here as the U.S. Treasury Premium,  j ,n ,t , which is the n-year deviation from covered

interest parity between government bond yields in the United States and country j. Jiang, et al.




15
     We address the issue of deviation of covered interest parity in subsection 3.3.

                                                                                                             17
(2018) take the U.S. as the home country, and define t as a cross-country average over nine

large markets relative to the dollar.
        We employ the procedure developed by Du, et al. (2018a) to obtain  t for any pair of home

currency i and foreign currency j (90 pairs in total) for the G-10 currencies. To give a sense of how
this liquidity measure behaves, we plot the liquidity measure against the nominal exchange rate of
each home currency i and foreign currency j in Figure 1. For each time period, we take a simple
average across foreign currency j to improve visual representation. It is interesting to see that there
is already a negative relationship between the mean exchange rate and mean liquidity measure,
meaning a higher government bond liquidity relative to the rest of the G10 currency country is
associated with a strong currency contemporaneously. In Table 1, we report the correlation
coefficient between the liquidity measure and interest rate differential for each home currency i
and foreign currency j. The correlation coefficients are positive for each currency i. This verifies
the positive relationship between the relative liquidity return and the interest differential in (5),
and is consistent with the empirical findings of Nagel (2016) for the U.S..
        Unless otherwise specified, our study uses end-of-month monthly data from January 1999
to December 2017.16 We use exchange rates and forward rates from Thomson Reuters Datastream.
The consumer price indexes and unemployment rates are from the IMF IFS. The government yield
data is obtained from Bloomberg, Datastream and central banks. The LIBOR swap rates are from
Bloomberg. The Credit Default Swap data is from Bloomberg and IHS Markit. The gold price,
VIX index and unemployment rates are from FRED and the government debt to GDP data is from
the BIS credit to the non-financial sector dataset (nominal value). We provide the data source
details in Appendix A2 and summary statistics for the variables we used in Appendix A3.
Supplementary Appendix A4 reports a large number of robustness checks. We employ panel fixed
effect regression in all the reported estimates to make use of cross-country time series information
but at the same time allow for time-invariant heterogeneity. To account for the possibility of cross-
sectional correlated estimation errors, we report standard errors that allow for non-diagonal
covariance of the error terms. We estimate the regression using ordinary least squares (OLS). The
error terms estimated from the OLS are then used to construct estimates of the variance-covariance



16
  Whenever needed, we linearly interpolate the quarterly variable to monthly variable. For example, we interpolate
the Australia and New Zealand CPI to obtain monthly real exchange rates.

                                                                                                                18
matrix of the error term. Consistent statistical inference (for example, significance) can be
conducted using this estimated variance-covariance matrix.


3.2 Baseline Results


         To investigate the empirical relationship between government bond liquidity and exchange
rates for the G10 countries, we estimate the following panel monthly fixed effect regression from
equation (18):


(20)     s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1   2   j ,t   3  i Rj ,t   4 j ,t 1  5i Rj ,t 1  u j ,t ,



where itR  it  it* , X t  X t  X t 1 for any variable X.

         Table 2A reports the regression coefficient estimates of (20).17 Each row of the table
represents the estimation results that take the country of the currency in the first column as the
home country and rest of the nine countries as the foreign countries. When constructing the
variables, we use one-year forward rates and one-year government yields.18 The real exchange
rates are constructed using consumer price levels.
         First, consistent with our theoretical prediction and the empirical results of Eichenbaum, et
al (2018), the coefficient estimates for q j ,t 1 are all negatively significant, implying that real

exchange rates adjust through nominal exchange rates. The average coefficient estimate is
approximately -0.023, implying a 2.3% adjustment of the nominal exchange rate in the direction
of the long-run real exchange rate, per month. It is interesting to note that the estimated adjustment
of the dollar exchange rate is around half the size of the average (across currencies) adjustment
coefficient, suggesting a more persistent real exchange rate.
         Second, we find that a positive change in the relative interest rate (home minus foreign)
drives a contemporaneous home currency appreciation, which matches the traditional interest rate
and exchange rate relationship. While almost all monetary, sticky-price models of exchange rates
predict such a relationship, empirical support for even a contemporaneous relationship between

17
   To keep the table visibly clear, we only report the main coefficient estimates of interest and refer readers to the
supplementary appendix for the full regression tables.
18
   See the discussion and robustness below for the choice of one-year tenor.

                                                                                                                         19
interest rates and exchange rates has not been universally strong in previous studies.19 It may be
that the importance of the interest rate channel requires controlling for the error-correction term
and liquidity yields, as in our specification. We find the interest rate effect is strongly statistically
significant for all ten currencies. The average coefficients, across the currencies, is -5.07, which
means that a 100 basis point increase in the annualized interest rate in the home currency relative
to the foreign country leads on average to a 5.07 percent appreciation from the previous month.
           Our main novel results concern the effects of the liquidity yield on exchange rates. The
coefficient estimates for  j ,t are all negative and statistically significant at the 1% level, with a

range from -2.32 to -6.64. This indicates a 2.32% to 6.64% home currency appreciation in a month
when there is a positive change of 100 basis points (annualized rate) in relative liquidity. The
statistical significance and economic significance of these coefficient estimates are striking given
the well-known exchange rate disconnect puzzle. We find that the relative government bond
liquidity exhibits a very strong relationship with exchange rate movements for all the G-10
countries.
           Table 2A points to two important aspects of the impact of the liquidity yield. First, it is not
just a U.S. dollar phenomenon. While a great deal of attention has been paid to the convenience
yield on U.S. government bonds, our regression results show that the relative liquidity yield is an
important factor in explaining exchange rate changes for all of the G10 currencies. Further results
reported in section 3.4 emphasize this point.
           However, secondly, the U.S. is still a special case in the sense that the impact of the relative
convenience yields on the exchange rate is largest in the U.S. The estimated coefficient on the
liquidity yield is largest in absolute value for the U.S., and the size of that impact is substantially
larger than for all currencies excepting the Australian dollar and New Zealand dollar.


Omitting the liquidity return
           For comparison, we also conduct the regression (20) but excluding the liquidity yield
variables. That is:


(21)        s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1   2 (i Rj ,t )  3 (i Rj ,t 1 )  u j ,t ,


19
     See Engel (2014) for a recent survey.

                                                                                                        20
           The regression estimates are reported in Table 2B. The coefficient estimates on lagged real
exchange rates and change in interest rate differential remain negatively significant for all country
pairs. However, the within R-squared for this specification are universally much lower compared
to Table 2A.20 This indicates including relative government bond liquidity returns brings strong
explanatory power to exchange rate determination, in addition to and independent of the traditional
factors.
           The statistical significance of the effect of  j ,t in our baseline regression, as well as the

large drop in R-squared values when this variable is omitted, points to the fact that there is variation
in  j ,t that is independent of variation in i Rj,t , and important in explaining exchange rate

changes. Appendix A.3 shows that while the standard deviation of  j ,t is small relative to the

standard deviation of i Rj,t (on average across the ten currencies, the relative liquidity yields have

standard deviations less than 20 percent of the relative interest rates), that is much less true for
 j ,t and i Rj,t . The average over the currencies of the standard deviation of  j ,t is about 80

percent of the standard deviation of i Rj,t . It might be tempting to simply add together the liquidity

yield and the interest payments as two components of the return on investments in a country, but
our results show that would be a mistaken approach because those two different returns are not
highly correlated and have separate effects on exchange rates.


Estimation on sub-samples
           Next, we investigate whether the relationship between government bond liquidity and
exchange rates are driven by the Global Financial Crisis or the post-crisis period. In Table 2C, we
re-estimate (20) but split the sample period into two periods, pre-2008 and post (and including)-
2008. We see that the contemporaneous relationship between the change of the liquidity measure
and the change of exchange rates holds in both time periods. As in the full sample, all of the
estimated coefficients on the impact of the estimated government liquidity return are negative.
They are all individually statistically significant at the one percent level in the post-crisis period.


20
  The average R-squared in the baseline regression is 0.150, but only 0.081 in the regressions that omit the liquidity
yield.

                                                                                                                   21
In the pre-crisis data, the p-values for these coefficients are all less than 0.01 except for Japan and
Switzerland but both of them are still with a negative coefficient. The coefficient estimates in all
cases have larger values in absolute terms after 2008, ranging from -2.86 to -7.11. In addition to
the significant and larger coefficients, the post-2008 R 2 are markedly improved, with a maximum

of 33%, reflecting the importance of the relationship between the government bond liquidity and
exchange rate determination.21
           This set of results provides evidence that government bond liquidity at the individual
country level plays an important role in exchange rate determination. This contrasts to the belief
that there is a special role of the USD or the U.S. Treasury bond. We find that individual country
government bond liquidity other than the U.S. is also important in understanding exchange rate
fluctuations.


One-month forward rates
           As we have noted, in our baseline regressions we use one-year forward rates and one-year
government yields as regressors, while the regressions are conducted in monthly frequency. The
choice of one-year tenor is a tradeoff between model consistency and data availability. Ideally, for
model consistency, we would use one-month forward rates and government yields to construct the
variables. However, the data availability of one-month government yields is rather limited for
some of the sample countries. In addition, in section 3.3, we use credit default swap (CDS) data to
make an adjustment for the probability of non-repayment of government debt. The CDS data is
more extensively available only for tenors of one year or above. Therefore, we use one-year
forward rates and one-year government yields to construct the variables in our analysis. To be fully
consistent with the model, investors would need to have no uncertainty about the one-month own-
currency return on one-year bonds, but the variation in that return (annualized) relative to the one-
year interest rate is very small relative to changes in exchange rate. The monthly correlation of
one-year and one-month interest rates is over 0.90 in our sample for all countries.
           Nevertheless, to make sure our result is robust to the choice of tenor, we report in Table
2D the regression coefficient estimates of equation (20), using one-month forward rates and one-



21                                                                                                   2
     In an country by country estimation of (20) reported in the Supplementary Appendix, the maximum R is 49%,
which is the AUD – JPY pair.

                                                                                                                 22
month government yield data. 22 The empirical relationship between the change of nominal
exchange rate and the independent variables are largely consistent with the result we discussed in
Table 2A, which use one-year forward rates and one-year government yields data. In light of this,
to make our empirical results comparable across different specifications, we use one-year forward
rates and one-year government yields throughout the analysis.


3.3 Decomposing the Liquidity Measure


         Up to this point, we have maintained the assumption that markets are frictionless, so we
have t  ft ,t 1  st  it*  it to serve as a measure of relative government bond liquidity. In this

subsection, we discuss some frictions that could possibly drive the movement of  t other than the

liquidity of government bonds. As we have noted,  t can be interpreted as the difference of a

synthetic home government bond ft ,t 1  st  it* and a home government bond it . There are two

possible frictions to consider – sovereign default risk and a currency derivative market friction.
These frictions are important in the recent literature in international finance, and there are readily
available prices that can be used to quantify these frictions.23
         First, investors might not be able to construct the synthetic home government bond as we
have posited because of some distortions in currency derivative markets. If covered interest parity
held for market returns, we should find ft ,t 1  st  IRSt*  IRSt , where IRSt ( IRSt* ) refers to the

home (foreign) return on LIBOR swaps. Baba et al. (2008), Baba and Packer (2009), and Griffoli
and Ranaldo (2011) attribute the failure of covered interest arbitrage in the years immediately
following the global financial crisis to both a liquidity and a default factor. In particular, there
appeared to be profitable arbitrage opportunities that involved borrowing in dollars and making
covered investments in foreign interest-earning assets. These papers provide evidence that
investors were reluctant to take advantage of such opportunities both because of counterparty risk,
and because there was a global demand for liquid dollar assets. Du, et al. (2018b) find that in recent


22
   Norway is excluded in this exercise as a home country and foreign country due to lack of Norway one-month
government yield data.
23
   See Della Corte, et al. (2018) for the effects of sovereign default on exchange rates. Du, et al. (2018b) investigate
deviations from covered interest parity and Ajdiev, et al. (2018) consider the relationship between the currency swap
friction and the exchange rate.

                                                                                                                     23
years, for some currencies (particularly, when the U.S. dollar is the home currency),
IRSt  ft ,t 1  st  IRSt* , but financial institutions do not undertake the arbitrage that would result

in riskless profits. In order to earn those profits, banks would need to go short in dollars, and
purchase the foreign currency on the spot market and go long in foreign currency (which they sell
forward.) Such an arbitrage investment, while risk free, expands the size of the financial
institutions’ balance sheets, and may cause them to run afoul of regulatory constraints. Financial
institutions that held home assets could sell those and acquire synthetic home assets, but they might
be unwilling to do so if they value the home assets for non-pecuniary reasons. Hence, when home
assets are especially valued, then  t  ft ,t 1  st  IRSt*  IRSt will be high, and the home currency

will be strong. The same relationship could arise if there were default risk on LIBOR rates, as
might have been the case in 2008 during the global financial crisis. When foreign LIBOR is
considered risky,  t is high, and the home currency is strong. We note that Cerutti, et al. (2019)

associate the failure of covered interest parity for the U.S. dollar with periods of a strong dollar.
This opens the question of the channel of causality, which we address in the next section.
         Furthermore, even if the currency derivative markets are frictionless, the government bond
yields might include expected default risk. If the home government bond is regarded as default-
free (say, the U.S. Treasury bond), but the foreign government bond is expected to default with
some probability (say, the Japanese Government Bond, due to its high debt to GDP ratio), then the
difference between the synthetic home government bond and home government bond could be
different not just because of the difference in government bond liquidity but also the difference in
default premium. We define l Rj,t as the home minus foreign country j expected default loss on

government bonds, so that the expected relative return on home government bonds is it  i*j ,t  l Rj ,t .

To measure the term l Rj,t , we make use of the information from the credit default swap (CDS)

market. A CDS contract insures the buyer from credit event. In the case of sovereign default, the
CDS sellers make payments to the buyers to compensate for the loss in the credit event. Buyers of
CDS pay premium to CDS sellers for getting the insurance. Therefore, the CDS premium quote is
an appropriate instrument to reflect the market implied expected default loss. We take the home
minus foreign difference of CDS premium quotes as the measure for the expected default loss
term, i.e. l Rj,t  CDSt  CDS *j ,t .


                                                                                                       24
            To adjust for these frictions, as in Du, et al. (2018a), we can write  j ,t as a sum of three

components:


(22)         j ,t   j ,t  l Rj ,t   j ,t ,


where  j ,t is a residual term. In the frictionless scenario above, we will have  j ,t  l Rj,t  0 so

 j ,t   j ,t . That is,  can be understood as the relative government bond liquidity, after adjusting
                                   j ,t



for the currency derivative market friction and credit default risk.
            We below summarize the components of  j ,t introduced in this subsection: 24


(23)         j ,t  ft ,t 1  st  IRS *j ,t  IRSt , l Rj ,t  CDSt  CDS *j ,t ,  j ,t   j ,t   j ,t  l Rj ,t


In all cases, we use IRS and CDS data with one-year tenor as the CDS data is extensively available
only for tenors of one-year or above.
            With these decomposed components on hand, we modify the baseline regression by putting
each of the components into the equation. Specifically,


                          s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1   2  j ,t  3  j ,t   4 l jR,t  5 i Rj ,t
(24)
                                      6  j ,t 1   7 j ,t 1  8l Rj ,t 1  9i Rj ,t 1  u j ,t


As discussed above, we expect to find a negative estimate of  3 , because a larger  j ,t indicates

an unwillingness to sell home assets to buy the foreign currency, which appreciates the home
currency. The estimated  4 should be positive, since a larger l Rj,t means there is a greater default

risk for home government bonds.  j ,t is the residual measure of the change in the home relative

to foreign liquidity yields, and for that we posit a negative value of  2 . As in our model, we should

also find negative values for the estimates of 1 and  5 .


24
     Details of the full derivation of these expressions are available at Du, et al. (2018a).

                                                                                                                          25
             We estimate the regression in two ways. First, since CDS data for many of the sample
countries are only available after 2008, we start the sample from 2008M1 and estimate (24).
Second, to make use of the full sample information and test whether the adjusted liquidity measure
is important in explaining the change of exchange rates throughout the sample, we estimate the
regression from 1999M1, but excluding the CDS data (dropping l Rj,t and l Rj,t 1 ).25

             In Table 3A, the coefficient estimates on i ,t , which represents the effect of changes in

government bond liquidity after adjusting for credit risk and derivative market friction, are still
significantly negative in all cases. The range of coefficient is from -3.04 to -8.91 for the left panel,
indicating a monthly 3.04% to 8.91% immediate home currency appreciation when there is a
monthly positive change of 100 basis points (annualized rate) in relative liquidity. These
coefficients are also larger than the coefficients of i ,t estimated in Table 2A or Table 2C. These

results reaffirm our baseline result that there is a strong linkage between government bond liquidity
and exchange rates.
             In many cases, we also see that credit risk variation and derivative market frictions are
important variables in explaining the change of exchange rates.26 The positive coefficient on l Rj,t 1

indicates that an increase in home default risk relative to foreign default risk is associated with an
immediate home currency depreciation. Holding the nominal government bond interest rate fixed,
an increase in default risk implies the default risk adjusted nominal interest rate goes down,
resulting in a home currency depreciation.
             There are two ways we could interpret the negative coefficient on  j ,t . First, the channel

could go through the change in IRS *j ,t  IRSt . If there is default risk in the IRS contract an increase

in the home IRS rate drives a home currency depreciation. Second, the channel could go through
the change in ft ,t 1  st . In the case in which  j ,t is positive, market conditions are now more

favorable to borrow in home currency and construct a synthetic home market bond than before.
As explained by Du, et al. (2018b), this could be the case that when there is excess international
demand for both the home assets and forward contracts to hedge exchange rate risk in investing in


25
     In the second case, the  j ,t is effectively  j ,t   j ,t
26
   See Della Corte, et al. (2018) who find similar findings of the relationship between exchange rate and sovereign
risk.

                                                                                                                  26
home assets, therefore the financial intermediaries have to mark up the forward rate ft ,t 1 , as

issuing a forward contract is costly for them. This mark-up of the forward rate then goes hand in
hand with a strong home currency that is driven by excess international demand.
        To confirm our results are robust to different specifications, we conduct the estimation in
(24) by including one or two sub-components at a time. The results are reported at Table 3B. Once
again, we find the regression coefficients for  j ,t are significantly negative in all cases.

        How much of the variation of  t is driven by each of the sub-components? We can answer

this with a variance decomposition. Table 3C reports the decomposition given by:


           var(t ) var( t ) var(ltR )    cov(t ,  t )    cov( t , ltR )    cov(ltR , t )
(25) 1                                  2                  2                   2
           var(t ) var(t ) var(t )        var(t )           var(t )            var(t )


For most of the countries, the variation of t contributes a large share of variation of t .

However, the sums of the variance shares of t ,  t , and ltR are greater than one. This arises

because ltR is positively correlated with t (and ltR enters the expression for t with a

negative sign in equation (22)), and because t and  t are negatively correlated for most

countries. Because all three components contribute to the variation in t , it is important to clarify

the role of each in driving changes in currency values. In this section, we have seen that even
controlling for default and swap-market frictions, the liquidity yield is still a significant
determinant of exchange rates.


Instrumental variable regressions
        The empirical analysis above shows a strong relation between relative government bond
liquidity and the exchange rate. In this subsection, we instrument for the liquidity returns, which
allows us to give a causal interpretation – that a change in the relative government bond liquidity
leads to a change in the bilateral exchange rates.
        As we have already discussed in the introduction, government bonds are more valuable
than similar marketable securities because of their safety and liquidity. Our first set of instruments
are measures of changes in global uncertainty. In the face of this uncertainty, there may be a safe-

                                                                                                          27
haven demand of government bonds which is reflected in the relative liquidity return. We use
several different measures of global uncertainty: the log of VIX, log of the gold price, G10 cross-
country average square inflation rates, G10 cross-country average unemployment rates, G10 cross-
country average square of change in bilateral exchange rates and G10 cross-country average
absolute change of bilateral exchange rates. The VIX and gold price are well-known measures for
global uncertainty. The other four variables are meant to capture the fact that when global
uncertainty is high, inflation, unemployment and exchange rate volatility tend to be high as well.
We posit that these cross-country instruments are exogenous to bilateral exchange rate movements
because of their “global” nature. That is, we hypothesize that the channel through which global
uncertainty affects the value of one currency relative to another is the relative government bond
premium.
            Our second set of instruments gauges the scarcity of liquid assets available in an economy.
We adopt general government debt to GDP for each country as an instrument. The smaller general
government debt, the more valued at the margin those instruments are for their liquidity services,
hence they pay a higher liquidity yield. Our underlying assumption is that the general government
debt to GDP ratio influences exchange rate movements only through their liquidity effect. The
sample of countries we considered are developed economies with independent fiscal policy and
monetary policy, so it is not the case that there is fiscal dominance that determines inflation and
currency values.
           Specifically, we conducted the same panel fixed-effect regressions as in (20) and (24) but
we instrument the variables  j ,t ,  j ,t 1 in (20) and  j ,t ,  j ,t 1 in (24) by the level and the

change of the instruments discussed above.27 We present three different specifications in Table
4A to 4C. In table 4A, the variable  j ,t ,  j ,t 1 in (20) are instrumented. The lagged real

exchange rates and change in interest rate differential are universally negatively significant, which
is consistent with what we found earlier. The instrumented change of government bond liquidity
has a negative coefficient in 8 out of the 10 regressions and significantly negative in 7 of them.
           In table 4B and 4C, the variables  j ,t ,  j ,t 1 in (24) are instrumented. For the same

reason discussed above for estimating (24), we estimate the regression in two ways. We estimate



27
     Whenever needed, we linear interpolate the instruments in the first stage regressions.

                                                                                                         28
the regression from 1999M1 in table 4B, but excluding the CDS data (dropping l Rj,t and l Rj,t 1 )

and we estimate (24) from 2008M1 in table 4C, with the CDS adjustments. The instrumented
change of government bond liquidity are negatively significant in 7 out of the 10 and 9 out of the
10 countries respectively. Overall, we find that the instrumental variable regressions are consistent
with what we find in the baseline result and offer empirical support of the causal relationship that
a change in relative government bond liquidity causes exchange rate movements.


3.4 Country-specific Government Bond Liquidity


            So far, we have conducted all our analysis with different measures of bilateral relative
government bond liquidity. However, the impact of the own-country liquidity service and the
aggregate foreign country liquidity service might have different effects on the home exchange rate.
            We measure the home and foreign liquidity returns on government bonds as  t  IRSt  it

and  *j ,t  IRSt*  it* . Motivated by the decomposition above, we will include also the currency

derivative market friction,  j ,t . We have then that  j ,t used in our baseline regressions can be

decomposed as:


(26)         j ,t   j ,t   t   *j ,t


We estimate the following equation with the country specific liquidity measures, controlling for
the derivative market friction:


(27)


s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1   2  j ,t  3 t   4  *j ,t  5 i Rj ,t   6 t 1   7 t 1  8 *j ,t 1  9i Rj ,t 1  u j ,t


Estimates of  3 and  4 in (27) show how the change of country-specific government bond

liquidity affects exchange rate movements. We expect a negative sign for  3 and a positive sign

for  4 .

                                                                                                                                                 29
        Table 5A presents the estimation results for the country specific government bond liquidity.
The second column gives the coefficient estimates for the change in government bond liquidity for
all the foreign currencies. The coefficient estimates are all significantly positive, indicating an
increase in government bond liquidity of the foreign country is associated with a depreciation of
the home currency, which is consistent with our theory and the empirical finding above. All the
coefficient estimates of the home government bond liquidity,  t , term are significantly negative

with the exception of the Japanese Yen and Swiss Franc. Both estimates are negative but with
smaller absolute size compared to others.
        These results then show that our findings regarding the effect of the relative liquidity
returns on exchange rates are, for each country, driven at least in part by the liquidity return of that
country. That is, the effects on exchange rates of the relative liquidity returns are not all determined
by liquidity returns in one or a few larger countries.
        We provide further evidence that our findings are not driven by one or a few countries by
performing our baseline regression (20) country-by-country. Table 5B provides a summary of
those regression results. (We report all 45 country-by-country regressions in the Supplementary
Appendix.) For the analysis that uses the entire 1999-2017 sample, among the 45 country pairs,
37 country pairs have coefficients on t that are negatively statistically different from zero at the

10% level. We find that 42 of the 45 pairs have a negatively significant coefficient on itR at the
1% level. This evidence makes manifest that our results are not driven by a single country.
Country-by-country regressions also allow the coefficients to be unconstrained and leave room for
higher explanatory power. While the median adjusted R-squared of the full sample regressions
(17%) is close to the average R-squared of the panel regressions, the maximum adjusted R-squared
is 33% for the full sample and 49% post-2008 (in both cases for the AUD-JPY pair).


3.5 Out-of-sample fit


        The influential work by Meese and Rogoff (1983) shows that standard macroeconomic
exchange rate models, even with the aid of ex post data on the fundamentals, forecast exchange
rates at short to medium horizons no better than a random walk. In this subsection, we conduct an




                                                                                                     30
out-of-sample forecasting exercise as in Meese and Rogoff (1983) and find that our empirical
model significantly outperforms the random walk prediction.
         We estimate (21), the model with only interest rate differential and the lagged real
exchange rate as explanatory variables, and (20), the empirical model that also includes the
liquidity return, using a rolling regression approach.28 We first use the sample from 1999M1 to
2007M12 for the estimation of regression coefficients. The rolling window is therefore 108 months
and the forecast horizon is one month. The first prediction is 2008M1 and the last prediction is
2017M12. We then compare the root-mean-square-error (RMSE) of these models verse the RMSE
of a random walk no change prediction ( sˆ RW
                                            j ,t  0 ). As in the Meese-Rogoff exercise, we use


actual realized values of the right-hand-side variables to generate the forecasts.
         Table 6 reports the RMSEs of the predictions of models (20), (21) and the random walk
prediction. The RMSEs of forecasts from (20) and (21) are lower than the RMSEs of the random
walk prediction in 9 out of the 10 countries. We are also interested in testing whether these
differences in RMSEs are statistically significant. We adopt the test statistics by Diebold and
Mariano (1995) and West (1996) (DMW) which tests the following three null hypothesis: A)
mean-square-error (MSE) of the prediction model (21) and the random walk model are equal, B)
MSE of the prediction model (20) and the random walk model are equal and C) MSE of the
prediction model (21) and MSE of the prediction model (20) are equal. The DMW statistics are
reported in column (5)-(7) in Table 6. Since model (20) nests model (21) and the random walk
model, Clark and West (2006) shows that the DMW test statistic should be corrected to account
for the fact the regression coefficients are estimated. The Clark-West adjusted test statistic (CW
statistics) is asymptotically standard normal and suitable for usual statistics inference. We report
the CW statistics and the corresponding p-value of the one-sided alternative test in columns (8)-
(14). We find that the prediction model (21), which includes only the lagged real exchange rate
and the interest-rate differential, performs significantly better than random walk in 9 out of the 10
cases (p-values in column (9).) We find the baseline model with liquidity returns, (20),
outperforms the random walk model in all cases (p values in column (12).) In all cases, we find
that the MSE of model (20) are significantly lower than model (21) (p-values in column (14).)



28
  We also estimate using a recursive regression approach. The results are robustness to the recursive specification
and are reported in the Supplementary Appendix.

                                                                                                                  31
Thus, the random-walk model and the model that does not include liquidity returns are rejected in
favor of our baseline model for all currencies using the Meese-Rogoff criterion.


Switzerland, January 2015
         The model with the liquidity yield included significantly outperforms the random walk
model and the traditional model for all currencies, but the RMSE for both the liquidity model and
the traditional model are higher than the random walk for the single exception of Switzerland.29 If
we eliminate one month from the Swiss sample, January 2015, the models also have lower RMSEs
than the random walk.
         Until that month, the Swiss National Bank had been trying to keep the Swiss franc from
appreciating, setting very low interest rates and engaging in massive foreign exchange intervention
to keep a ceiling on the value of the franc of CHF1.20 per euro. The SNB lifted the cap in January
2015, which led to a very large franc appreciation that month, despite the low Swiss interest rates.
The model performs poorly in that month because the low interest rates should have led to a
depreciation of the franc, as the SNB desired.30
         In fact, all of our results reported in previous table are improved, sometimes markedly, for
the Swiss franc if that one month is eliminated from the sample. It is an extreme outlier. The
absolute value of the change in the log of the exchange rate during that month is much greater than
for any currency during any month, and it is also a month in which Swiss interest rates were at
extremely low values. In particular, in a few of the regressions reported above, the sign on the
interest differential was positive rather than negative for Switzerland, but that anomaly disappears
when January, 2015 is dropped from the sample.


4. Conclusions


         Our empirical findings are good news for macroeconomic models of exchange rates. The
government liquidity yield is the “missing link” in exchange rate determination. Not only do we
find that liquidity yields are a significant determinant of exchange rate movements for all of the


29
   Note that because the CW statistic takes into account estimation error, both models are found to have a significantly
better fit than the random walk, even including January 2015, even though their RMSEs are higher than the random
walk model’s RMSE.
30
   In the Supplementary Appendix, we report the results with the extreme outlier in January 2015 dropped.

                                                                                                                    32
largest countries, but we also find that with these included, traditional determinants of exchange
rate movements are also important. Our simple regressions have high R-squared values, so can
account for a large fraction of exchange rate movements. In short, exchange rates are not so
disconnected after all.




                                                                                               33
References

Adrian, Tobias; Erkko Etula; and, Hyun Song Shin. 2009. “Risk Appetite and Exchange Rates.”
       Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report no. 361.

Avdjiev, Stefan; Wenxin Du; Cathérine Koch; and, Hyun Song Shin. 2018. “The Dollar, Bank
       Leverage and Deviations from Covered Interest Parity.” American Economic Review:
       Insights, forthcoming.

Baba, Naohiko; Frank Packer; and, Teppei Nagano. 2008. “The Spillover of Money Market
      Turbulence to FX Swap and Cross-Currency Swap Markets.” BIS Quarterly Review
      March, 73-86.

Baba, Naohiko, and Frank Packer. 2009. “Interpreting Deviations from Covered Interest Parity
      during the Financial Market Turmoil of 2007-2008.” Journal of Banking and Finance
      33, 1953-1962.

Banti, Chiara; Kate Phylaktis; and, Lucio Sarno. 2012. “Global Liquidity Risk in the Foreign
       Exchange Market.” Journal of International Money and Finance 31, 267-291.

Benigno, Gianluca. 2004. “Real Exchange Rate Persistence and Monetary Policy Rules.” Journal
      of Monetary Economics 51, 473-502

Benigno, Gianluca; and Pierpaolo Benigno. 2008. "Exchange rate determination under interest rate
      rules." Journal of International Money and Finance 27, 971-993.

Beveridge, Stephen; and Charles R. Nelson. 1981. “A New Approach to Decomposition of
       Economic Time Series into Permanent and Transitory Components with Particular
       Attention to Measurement of the ‘Business Cycle.’” Journal of Monetary Economics 7,
       151–74.

Brunnermeier, Markus K.; Stefan Nagel; and, Lasse H. Pedersen. 2009. “Carry Trades and
      Currency Crashes.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 23, 313-347.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2009. “Market Liquidity and Funding
      Liquidity.” The Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.

Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2014. “Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of
       Monetary Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 71, 119-132.

Caballero, Ricardo; Emmanuel Farhi; and, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas.2008. “An Equilibrium
       Model of ‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates.” American Economic Review 98,
       358-393.




                                                                                             34
Caballero, Ricardo; Emmanuel Farhi; and, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2015. “Global Imbalances
       and Currency Wars at the ZLB.” National Bureau of Economics Research, working paper
       no. 21670.

Caballero, Ricardo; Emmanuel Farhi; and, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas.2017. “The Safe Assets
       Shortage Conundrum.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 31, 29-46.

Campbell, John Y.; and Richard H. Clarida. 1987. “The Dollar and Real Interest Rates.” Carnegie-
     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 27, 103-140.

Cerutti, Eugenio; Maurice Obstfeld; and, Haonan Zhu. 2019. “Covered Interest Parity Deviations:
        Macrofinancial Determinants.” International Monetary Fund, IMF Working Paper
        WP/19/14.

Clark, Todd E., and Kenneth D. West. 2006. “Using Out-of-Sample Mean Squared Prediction
       Errors to Test the Martingale Difference Hypothesis.” Journal of Econometrics 135, 155-
       186.

Della Corte, Pasquale; Lucio Sarno; Maik Schmeling; and Christian Wagner. 2018. “Exchange
       Rates and Sovereign Risk.” Working paper, Imperial College London.

del Negro, Marco; Domenico Giannone; Marc P. Giannoni; and, Andrea Tambalotti. 2018.
      “Global Trends in Interest Rates.” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel. 2002. “Exchange-Rate Pass-Through, Exchange-Rate
      Volatility, and Exchange-Rate Disconnect.” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 913-
      940.

Diebold, Francis; Roberto Mariano. 1995. “Comparing predictive accuracy.” Journal of Business
       and Economics Statistics, 13, 253-265

Dooley, Michael P., and Peter Isard, 1985. "The Appreciation of the Dollar: An Analysis of the
      Safe Haven Phenomenon," Working paper, International Monetary Fund, DM/85/20.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1976. “Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics.” Journal of Political
      Economy 84, 1161–76.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1986. “Flexible Exchange Rates and Excess Capital Mobility.” Brookings
      Papers on Economic Activity 1986:1, 209-226.

Du, Wenxin; Joanne Im; and Jesse Schreger. 2018a. “US Treasury Premium.” Journal of
     International Economics 112, 167-181.

Du, Wenxin; Alexander Tepper; and, Adrien Verdelhan. 2018b. “Deviations from Covered Interest
      Rate Parity.” Journal of Finance 73, 915-957.



                                                                                             35
Engel, Charles. 1992. “The Risk Premium and the Liquidity Premium in Foreign Exchange
       Markets.” International Economic Review 33, 871-879.

Engel, Charles, 2014, “Exchange Rates and Interest Parity.” in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman
       and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, vol. 4 (Elsevier), 453-
       522.

Engel, Charles. 2016. “Interest Rates, Exchange Rates and the Risk Premium.” American
       Economic Review 106, 436-474.

Engel, Charles. 2019. “Real Exchange Rate Convergence: The Roles of Price Stickiness and
       Monetary Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 103, .

Eichenbaum, Martin; Benjamin K. Johannsen; and Sergio Rebelo. 2018. “Monetary Policy and the
      Predictability of Nominal Exchange Rates.” NBER Working Paper No.23158.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix. 2015. “Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates.” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 131, 1-52.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Matteo Maggiori. 2018. “A Model of the International Monetary
       System.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 295-355.

Fatum, Rasmus, and Yohei Yamamoto. 2016. “Intra-Safe Haven Currency Behavior during the
       Global Financial Crisis.” Journal of International Money and Finance 66, 49-64.

Frenkel, Jacob A.. 1976. “A monetary approach to the exchange rate: Doctrinal aspects and
       empirical evidence.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78, 200-224.

Gabaix, Xavier, and Matteo Maggiori.2015. “International Liquidity and Exchange Rate
      Dynamics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1369-1420.

Gorton, Gary. 2017. “The History and Economics of Safe Assets.” Annual Review of Economics
       9, 547-586.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2012. “Global Safe Assets.” Bank for International
      Settlements, working paper no. 399.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey. 2011. “Global Imbalances and Global Liquidity,” in
      Asia’s Role in the Post Crisis Global Economy, Asia Economic Policy Conference, San
      Francisco Federal Reserve, M. Spiegel and R. Glick eds.

Griffoli, Tommaso Mancini, and Angelo Ranaldo. 2011. “Limits to Arbitrage during the Crisis:
        Funding Liquidity Constraints and Covered Interest Parity.” Working paper, Swiss
        National Bank.



                                                                                               36
Grilli, Vittorio and Nouriel Roubini. 1992. “Liquidity and Exchange Rates.” Journal of
        International Economics 32, 339-352.

Isard, Peter, and Lois Stekler. 1985. “U.S. International Capital Flows and the Dollar.” Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity 1985:1, 219-236.

Itskhoki, Oleg; and Dmitry Mukhin. 2017. “Exchange Rate Disconnect in General Equilibrium.”
       NBER Working Paper No.23401.

Jeanne, Olivier, and Andrew K. Rose. 2002. “Noise Trading and Exchange-Rate Regimes.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 537-569.

Jiang, Zhengyang; Arvind Krishnamurthy; and Hanno N Lustig. 2018. “Foreign Safe Asset
       Demand and the Dollar Exchange Rate.” Stanford University Graduate School of Business
       Research Paper No. 18-16.

Kollmann, Robert. 2002. “Monetary Policy Rules in the Open Economy: Effects on Welfare and
      the Business Cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 989-1015.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind; and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012. “The Aggregate Demand for
       Treasury Debt.” Journal of Political Economy 120, 233-267.

Linnemann, Ludger, and Andreas Schabert. 2015. “Liquidity Premia and Interest Rate Parity.”
      Journal of International Economics 57, 178-192.

Mancini, Loriano; Angelo Ranaldo; and, Jan Wrampelmeyer. 2013. “Liquidity in the Foreign
      Exchange Market: Measurement, Commonality, and Risk Premiums.” Journal of Finance
      68, 1805-1841.

Mark, Nelson. 1995. “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long-Run Predictability.”
      American Economic Review 85, 201-218.

Maggiori, Matteo. 2017. “Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and Reserve
      Currencies.” American Economic Review 107, 3038-3071.

Meese, Richard A., Kenneth Rogoff. 1983. “Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: do
       they fit out of sample?” Journal of International Economics 14, 3–24.

Melvin, Michael, and Mark P. Taylor. 2009. “The Crisis in the Foreign Exchange Market.”
      Journal of International Money and Finance 28, 1317-1330.

Mendoza, Enrique; Vincenzo Quadrini; and, Victor Rios-Rull. 2009. “Financial Integration,
     Financial Development, and Global Imbalances.” Journal of Political Economy 117, 371-
     416.




                                                                                               37
Nagel, Stefan. 2016. “The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 131, 1927-1971.

Nickolas, Steven. 2018. “What Investments are Considered Liquid Assets?” Investopedia.
       https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/032715/what-items-are-considered-liquid-
       assets.asp (Updated April 3, 2018.)

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in International
       Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000,
       339–390.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2002. “Risk and Exchange Rates.” In Elhanan Helpman
       and Efraim Sadka, eds., Contemporary Economic Policy: Essays in Honor of Assaf
       Razin (Cambridge).

Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon. 2008. “The Role of Portfolio Constraints in the International
      Propagation of Shocks.” Review of Economic Studies 75, 1215-1256.

Ranaldo, Angelo, and Paul Söderlind. 2010. “Safe Haven Currencies.” Review of Finance 14,
      385-407.

Valchev, Rosen. 2017. “Bond Convenience Yields and Exchange-Rate Dynamics.” Department of
      Economics, Boston College.

West, Kenneth D., 1996. “Asymptotic inference about predictive ability.” Econometrica 64,
      1067–1084.




                                                                                              38
Figure 1:




(Figure 1 continued)




                       39
Figure 1 continue




Table 1:
Correlation of t and it  it
                                  *


                  Home Currency                                                   Correlation of t and it  it
                                                                                                                    *


                              AUD                                                            0.4637
                              CAD                                                            0.5054
                              EUR                                                            0.4841
                              JPY                                                            0.1284
                              NZD                                                            0.3894
                              NOK                                                            0.5089
                              SEK                                                            0.4673
                              CHF                                                            0.1977
                              GBP                                                            0.4269
                              USD                                                            0.5202
The 10 currencies used are Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar (NZD),
Norwegian Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar (USD). The correlation is
calculated for each home currency i and foreign currency j. The sample period is 1999M1-2017M12. Germany government interest rate is used for
EUR case.



                                                                                                                                         40
Table 2A:
Estimation result of s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1  2 j ,t  3i j ,t  4 j ,t 1  5i j ,t 1  u j ,t
                                                                    R                        R


      Home                      qi,t1                  j ,t                 i Rj,t          Observations             Within R2
     Currency
       (1)                      (2)                    (3)                     (4)                     (5)                    (6)
      AUD                  -0.0284***             -5.2710***              -5.7441***                  2052                  0.1891
                             (0.0071)               (0.7181)                (0.5356)
        CAD                -0.0267***             -4.6086***              -5.4603***                  2052                  0.1723
                             (0.0062)               (0.6238)                (0.4910)
        EUR                -0.0203***             -4.6406***              -5.0187***                  2052                  0.1434
                             (0.0059)               (0.5179)                (0.4103)
        JPY                -0.0400***             -4.3863***              -6.3171***                  2052                  0.1692
                             (0.0102)               (0.9532)                (0.7367)
        NZD                -0.0276***             -6.2906***              -6.0200***                  2052                  0.1955
                             (0.0082)               (0.7275)                (0.6082)
       NOK                 -0.0190***             -4.0106***              -4.8711***                  2052                  0.1537
                             (0.0068)               (0.6138)                (0.4877)
        SEK                -0.0226***             -4.5193***              -4.5991***                  2052                  0.1315
                             (0.0062)               (0.5796)                (0.4631)
        CHF                 -0.0129**             -2.3197***              -2.7587***                  2052                  0.0509
                             (0.0065)               (0.7129)                (0.5557)
        GBP                -0.0227***             -3.3495***              -5.2385***                  2052                  0.1283
                             (0.0067)               (0.6655)                (0.5212)
        USD                  -0.0113*             -6.4388***              -4.7717***                  2052                  0.1689
                             (0.0068)               (0.7198)                (0.5691)
The table reports the OLS estimates of the coefficient of the panel fixed effect regression listed above. The 10 currencies used are
Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar (NZD), Norwegian
Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar (USD). Each row
represents a regression estimation using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the other 9 currencies as foreign currency
j. , is the nominal exchange rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home currency price of foreign currency, , is
the real exchange rate. t is the measure of government bond liquidity, , is the home minus foreign interest rates. is a difference
operator. The sample period is 1999M1-2017M12. Germany government interest rate is used for EUR case.
Standard errors in parentheses are standard errors adjusted for cross-sectional correlation. *, **, and *** indicate that the alternative
model significantly different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively, based on standard normal critical
values for the two-sided test. *, **, and *** for , is based on critical values from distribution for Augmented Dickey Fuller test
with a constant.
The table only reports the coefficient estimates of interest. A table that reports all coefficient estimates is available in the
supplementary appendix.




                                                                                                                                     41
Table 2B:
Estimation result of s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1  2i j ,t  3i j ,t 1  u j ,t
                                                        R          R


    Home                      qi,t1                  i Rj,t                  iRj,t            Observations              Within R2
   Currency
     (1)                     (2)                      (3)                     (4)                      (5)                    (6)
    AUD                 -0.0316***               -4.0715***              -0.2823***                   2052                  0.1134
                          (0.0074)                 (0.5134)                (0.1087)
      CAD               -0.0276***               -4.5353***               -0.2493**                   2052                  0.1166
                          (0.0064)                 (0.4682)                (0.0985)
      EUR               -0.0226***               -3.8297***               -0.1958**                   2052                  0.0895
                          (0.0060)                 (0.3850)                (0.0909)
       JPY              -0.0340***               -5.3243***                -0.1493                    2052                  0.1000
                          (0.0105)                 (0.7255)                (0.1294)
      NZD               -0.0308***               -2.6695***                -0.0946                    2052                  0.0563
                          (0.0093)                 (0.5950)                (0.1333)
      NOK                -0.0177**               -3.4970***                -0.1255                    2052                  0.0820
                          (0.0070)                 (0.4693)                (0.0951)
       SEK              -0.0267***               -3.2092***                -0.1359                    2052                  0.0711
                          (0.0063)                 (0.4350)                (0.0983)
      CHF                  -0.0097               -2.0012***               -0.2245**                   2052                  0.0239
                          (0.0061)                 (0.5164)                (0.1026)
      GBP               -0.0225***               -3.7205***              -0.3344***                   2052                  0.0856
                          (0.0068)                 (0.4902)                (0.0994)
      USD                 -0.0141*               -3.6842***                -0.1376                    2052                  0.0684
                          (0.0075)                 (0.5813)                (0.1122)
The table reports the OLS estimates of the coefficient of the panel fixed effect regression listed above. The 10 currencies used are
Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar (NZD), Norwegian
Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar (USD). Each row
represents a regression estimation using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the other 9 currencies as foreign currency
j. , is the nominal exchange rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home currency price of foreign currency, , is
the real exchange rate. , is the home minus foreign interest rates. is a difference operator. The sample period is 1999M1-
2017M12. Germany government interest rate is used for EUR case.
Standard errors in parentheses are standard errors adjusted for cross-sectional correlation. *, **, and *** indicate that the alternative
model significantly different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively, based on standard normal critical
values for the two-sided test. *, **, and *** for , is based on critical values from distribution for Augmented Dickey Fuller test
with a constant.
The table only reports the coefficient estimates of interest. A table that reports all coefficient estimates is available in the
supplementary appendix.




                                                                                                                                     42
Table 2C:
Estimation result of s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1  2 j ,t  3i j ,t  4 j ,t 1  5i j ,t 1  u j ,t
                                                                    R                        R



  Home Currency                       j ,t       Within R2                                 j ,t      Within R2
       (1)                            (2)             (3)                                   (4)             (5)
                                        1999M1-2007M12                                        2008M1-2017M12
         AUD                     -3.7828***         0.0860                             -6.0254***         0.2958
                                   (1.2048)                                              (0.8766)
         CAD                      -2.7138**         0.0899                             -5.7275***         0.2921
                                   (1.0860)                                              (0.7300)
          EUR                    -2.8935***         0.0463                             -5.2961***         0.2587
                                   (0.8520)                                              (0.6488)
          JPY                      -1.1698          0.0413                             -5.7308***         0.3300
                                   (1.3160)                                              (1.2351)
          NZD                    -4.4680***         0.0987                             -6.9225***         0.3205
                                   (1.1189)                                              (0.9474)
         NOK                     -3.5820***         0.0890                             -4.8783***         0.2584
                                   (0.9969)                                              (0.7696)
          SEK                    -2.9760***         0.0743                             -5.6023***         0.2276
                                   (0.9147)                                              (0.7307)
          CHF                      -1.1317          0.0262                             -2.8630***         0.0918
                                   (1.0144)                                              (1.0104)
          GBP                    -4.1039***         0.0988                             -3.4219***         0.2086
                                   (0.8843)                                              (0.9195)
          USD                    -3.9766***         0.0791                             -7.1136***         0.3262
                                   (1.1134)                                              (0.8594)

The table reports the OLS estimates of the coefficient of the panel fixed effect regression listed above. The 10 currencies used are
Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar (NZD), Norwegian
Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar (USD). Each row
represents a regression estimation using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the other 9 currencies as foreign currency
j. , is the nominal exchange rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home currency price of foreign currency, , is
the real exchange rate. t is the measure of government bond liquidity, , is the home minus foreign interest rates. is a difference
operator. The sample period is 1999M1-2007M12 and 2008M1-2017M12. Germany government interest rate is used for EUR case.
Standard errors in parentheses are standard errors adjusted for cross-sectional correlation. *, **, and *** indicate that the alternative
model significantly different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively, based on standard normal critical
values for the two-sided test. *, **, and *** for , is based on critical values from distribution for Augmented Dickey Fuller test
with a constant.
The table only reports the coefficient estimates of interest. A table that reports all coefficient estimates is available in the
supplementary appendix.




                                                                                                                                     43
Table 2D:
Estimation result of s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1  2 j ,t  3i j ,t  4 j ,t 1  5i j ,t 1  u j ,t
                                                                    R                        R


using one-month forward rates and one-month government yields
  Home Currency                       qi,t1                     j ,t                      i Rj,t              Observations
       (1)                            (2)                        (3)                        (4)                         (5)
     AUD                          -0.0543**                   -7.2292                   -22.9042                        360
                                   (0.0259)                  (10.5997)                  (14.9001)
         CAD                     -0.0299***                -12.7346***                -29.1263***                      1228
                                   (0.0099)                   (4.6383)                   (7.2838)
          EUR                    -0.0826***                 -18.6085**                 -20.0382**                       609
                                   (0.0167)                   (7.4739)                   (9.0270)
          JPY                    -0.1023***                 -23.3412**                  -11.6606                        462
                                   (0.0237)                  (10.1332)                  (11.6918)
          NZD                    -0.0331***                -18.7123***                -28.5861***                      1228
                                   (0.0103)                   (4.8520)                   (6.9774)
          SEK                    -0.0332***                -14.9686***                -17.2230***                      1228
                                   (0.0085)                   (3.8834)                   (5.6090)
          CHF                    -0.0572***                  -10.8859                     9.7523                        731
                                   (0.0138)                   (8.9118)                   (8.5222)
          GBP                      -0.0221*                  -8.1728*                 -19.2894***                      1228
                                   (0.0115)                   (4.9056)                   (7.0342)
          USD                    -0.0254***                -17.1716***                 -15.1574**                      1228
                                   (0.0088)                   (3.9433)                   (6.1518)
The table reports the OLS estimates of the coefficient of the panel fixed effect regression listed above. The 10 currencies used are
Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar (NZD), Swedish Krona
(SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar (USD). Each row represents a regression estimation
using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the other 9 currencies as foreign currency j. , is the nominal exchange
rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home currency price of foreign currency, , is the real exchange rate. t is
the measure of government bond liquidity, , is the home minus foreign interest rates. is a difference operator. The sample
period is 1999M1-2017M12. Germany government interest rate is used for EUR case.
Standard errors in parentheses are standard errors adjusted for cross-sectional correlation. *, **, and *** indicate that the alternative
model significantly different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively, based on standard normal critical
values for the two-sided test. *, **, and *** for , is based on critical values from distribution for Augmented Dickey Fuller test
with a constant.
The table only reports the coefficient estimates of interest. A table that reports all coefficient estimates is available in the
supplementary appendix.




                                                                                                                                     44
Table 3A:
Estimation result of
s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1  2 j ,t  3 j ,t  4l Rj ,t  5i Rj ,t  6 j ,t 1  7 j ,t 1  8l Rj ,t 1  9i Rj ,t 1  u j ,t
     Home
    Currency                     i,t                   i,t                    i,t                   i,t                    li ,t
      (1)                       (2)             (3)                                (4)          (5)              (6)
                           Full sample, no default risk                             Post 2008, with default risk
       AUD                 -6.1475***       -2.9797**                       -7.0027***      -3.1133**       14.3663***
                             (0.7910)        (1.2262)                         (1.1219)       (1.5396)         (2.3547)
       CAD                 -4.6021***      -5.2004***                       -8.8567***     -6.8906***        8.3213***
                             (0.7235)        (1.1252)                         (1.5154)       (1.7969)         (2.5681)
       EUR                 -4.6613***      -4.9050***                       -6.0993***     -3.9164***        8.2139***
                             (0.5684)        (0.8672)                         (0.7990)       (0.9455)         (1.6760)
        JPY                -4.1648***      -4.9939***                       -6.7890***      -4.4253**       10.1977***
                             (1.0016)        (1.5866)                         (1.3763)       (1.8491)         (3.1745)
       NZD                 -6.6165***      -5.7714***                       -7.7871***     -5.8429***       12.2542***
                             (0.7968)        (1.2968)                         (1.1415)       (1.4849)         (2.5075)
       NOK                 -3.8436***      -5.0816***                       -5.1123***     -5.7420***         4.0843**
                             (0.6526)        (1.0437)                         (0.8095)       (1.2013)         (1.9590)
        SEK                -4.4583***      -5.0234***                       -5.5565***     -4.1789***        7.4308***
                             (0.6435)        (0.9849)                         (0.8854)       (1.1469)         (1.9029)
        CHF                -3.0442***        -1.1689                         -3.2384**       -1.1997          5.6024**
                             (0.7725)        (1.1966)                         (1.4895)       (1.8080)         (2.6065)
        GBP                -4.1890***        -1.4009                        -6.1288***       -0.4453          5.6119**
                             (0.7457)        (1.1224)                         (1.1158)       (1.4105)         (2.3529)
       USD                 -6.3166***      -6.7369***                       -8.9086***      -3.2019**       12.5574***
                             (0.8213)        (1.1889)                         (1.1126)       (1.2482)         (2.1570)

The table reports the OLS estimates of the coefficient of the panel fixed effect regression listed above. The 10 currencies used are
Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar (NZD), Norwegian
Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar (USD). Each row
represents a regression estimation using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the other 9 currencies as foreign currency
j. , is the nominal exchange rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home currency price of foreign currency, , is
the real exchange rate.  j , t is the measure of currency derivative friction, l Rj, t is the measure of home minus foreign default risk,
 j ,t is the measure of the government bond liquidity after adjusting for derivative market friction and default risk,            ,   is the home

minus foreign interest rates. is a difference operator. The sample period is 1999M1-2017M12 (column (2) and (3)) and 2008M1-
2017M12 (column (4) to (6)). Germany government interest rate and default risk are used for EUR case.
Standard errors in parentheses are standard errors adjusted for cross-sectional correlation. *, **, and *** indicate that the alternative
model significantly different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively, based on standard normal critical
values for the two-sided test.
The table only reports the coefficient estimates of interest. A table that reports all coefficient estimates is available in the
supplementary appendix.




                                                                                                                                               45
Table 3B
Estimation result of s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1  2X j ,t  3i j ,t  4 X j ,t 1  5i j ,t 1  u j ,t
                                                                    R                         R


where X j ,t is the column head variable
   Home                  j ,t              j ,t             l Rj,t           l R               j ,t        l R 
                                                                                              j ,t                                     j ,t
  Currency

     (1)                (2)                 (3)                  (4)                (5)                   (6)                (7)
    AUD            -4.3320***            -1.4191            9.9450***          -4.2517***            -5.8403***         -4.6466***
                     (1.0848)            (1.2782)            (2.2182)            (0.9598)              (0.7792)           (1.3055)
    CAD            -3.6265***          -4.3619***              0.7547          -5.2887***            -3.6792***            -1.8207
                     (1.3326)            (1.1244)            (2.2708)            (1.2257)              (0.7446)           (1.4376)
     EUR           -3.1217***          -3.1629***              2.0777          -3.7550***            -3.5247***         -2.3862***
                     (0.7396)            (0.8745)            (1.5476)            (0.6173)              (0.5774)           (0.8126)
     JPY           -4.8998***          -5.8142***              4.5740          -4.5229***            -4.1970***         -6.1640***
                     (1.3625)            (1.6352)            (3.1035)            (1.1374)              (1.0210)           (1.6355)
    NZD            -4.9252***          -4.0584***            4.5388*           -5.1871***            -6.0615***         -5.2129***
                     (1.1290)            (1.4135)            (2.5778)            (0.9127)              (0.8071)           (1.3696)
    NOK            -4.1387***          -3.0231***             -1.2069          -4.7337***            -2.8878***         -3.3848***
                     (0.7748)            (1.0557)            (1.9480)            (0.6652)              (0.6514)           (1.0826)
     SEK           -4.0382***          -4.3694***            3.0840*           -4.1673***            -4.2018***         -3.7094***
                     (0.8195)            (0.9940)            (1.8008)            (0.6806)              (0.6442)           (0.9927)
     CHF             -1.7916             -1.4794               2.4456            -1.5402             -3.1277***           -2.0616
                     (1.3227)            (1.2040)            (2.2902)            (1.0703)              (0.7759)           (1.4542)
     GBP           -5.0370***            -0.6742               0.7847          -3.3605***            -4.0860***           -0.4514
                     (1.0264)            (1.1406)            (2.2277)            (0.8669)              (0.7353)           (1.2028)
     USD           -5.1253***          -6.1304***            5.1429**          -4.5722***            -6.0432***         -4.6762***
                     (1.1080)            (1.2345)            (2.1134)            (0.8519)              (0.8433)           (1.1607)
The table reports the OLS estimates of the coefficient of change of liquidity measure of the regression listed above. The 10
currencies used are Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar
(NZD), Norwegian Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar
(USD). Each row represents a regression estimation using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the other 9 currencies
as foreign currency j. , is the nominal exchange rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home currency price of
foreign currency, , is the real exchange rate.  j , t is the measure of currency derivative friction, l Rj, t is the measure of home
minus foreign default risk,  j ,t is the measure of the government bond liquidity after adjusting for derivative market friction and

default risk, , is the home minus foreign interest rates. is a difference operator. The sample period is 1999M1-2017M12.
Regressions involving default risk l Rj, t are only estimated through 2008M1-2017M12 period (column (2), (4), (5),(7)). Germany
default risk is used for EUR case.
Standard errors in parentheses are standard errors adjusted for cross-sectional correlation. *, **, and *** indicate that the alternative
model significantly different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively, based on standard normal critical
values for the two-sided test.
The table only reports the coefficient estimates of interest. A table that reports all coefficient estimates is available in the
supplementary appendix.




                                                                                                                                     46
Table 3C

   var(t ) var( t ) var(ltR )     cov(t ,  t )    cov( t , ltR )    cov(ltR , t )
1                                2                  2                   2
   var(t ) var(t ) var(t )         var(t )           var(t )            var(t )
Variance share of each of the terms above:

   Home            var(t )          var( t )        var( ltR ) 2cov(t , t )           2 cov( t , ltR ) 2cov(ltR , t )
  Currency         var(t )          var(t )                       var(t )
                                                        var(  t )                               var(t )          var(t )

      (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                 (5)                    (6)                    (7)
     AUD               73%               36%              13%                 -7%                     -4%                   19%
     CAD              139%               55%              56%                -46%                     -6%                   109%
     EUR              119%               54%              22%                -50%                     -7%                   53%
     JPY               64%               37%              15%                12%                      1%                    27%
     NZD               80%               39%              12%                 -5%                     1%                    26%
     NOK               96%               25%               9%                -10%                     2%                    17%
     SEK               87%               26%              14%                 0%                      -3%                   32%
     CHF               67%               42%              18%                 12%                     1%                    38%
     GBP               80%               36%              16%                 -6%                      1%                    26%
     USD               73%               39%              25%                 4%                      0%                    41%

The 10 currencies used are Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand
Dollar (NZD), Norwegian Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar
(USD). Each row represents the variance and covariance using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the other 9
currencies as foreign currency j. t is the measure of government bond liquidity,  j , t is the measure of currency derivative friction,
l Rj, t is the measure of home minus foreign default risk,  j , t is the measure of the government bond liquidity after adjusting for

derivative market friction and default risk, , is the home minus foreign interest rates. is a difference operator. The sample period
is 2008M1-2017M12. Germany default risk and government interest rate are used for EUR case.




                                                                                                                                     47
Table 4A:
IV Estimation result of s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1  2  IV
                                                            j ,t  3i j ,t   4 j ,t 1  5i j ,t 1  u j ,t
                                                                        R           IV            R



  Home Currency                      q j ,t 1                   IV
                                                                   j ,t                      i Rj,t              Observations
       (1)                            (2)                         (3)                       (4)                       (5)
     AUD                          -0.0200**                -16.8727***                 -8.8118***                    1974
                                   (0.0084)                   (3.8681)                   (1.1869)
         CAD                     -0.0281***                   -7.0227*                 -6.1355***                      1974
                                   (0.0070)                   (3.7557)                   (0.8876)
          EUR                    -0.0261***                     2.7898                 -3.8749***                      1890
                                   (0.0073)                   (4.3529)                   (0.9843)
          JPY                    -0.0429***                -10.3487***                 -7.6512***                      1974
                                   (0.0113)                   (2.5929)                   (0.8700)
          NZD                    -0.0258***                  -6.9143**                 -6.9147***                      1974
                                   (0.0085)                   (3.0244)                   (1.5137)
         NOK                     -0.0283***                  -3.2652**                 -5.3720***                      1890
                                   (0.0082)                   (1.4336)                   (0.6522)
          SEK                    -0.0186***                 -9.7381***                 -6.2327***                      1974
                                   (0.0069)                   (2.5794)                   (0.9620)
          CHF                    -0.0244***                     0.0340                 -2.4110***                      1974
                                   (0.0074)                   (2.2601)                   (0.8263)
          GBP                    -0.0324***                    -1.7451                 -6.0530***                      1890
                                   (0.0088)                   (3.2336)                   (1.2756)
          USD                      -0.0133*                 -9.0688***                 -4.8457***                      1974
                                   (0.0072)                   (2.3354)                   (0.7826)

The table reports the OLS estimates of the coefficient of the panel fixed effect regression listed above. The 10 currencies used are
Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar (NZD), Norwegian
Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar (USD). Each row
represents a regression estimation using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the other 9 currencies as foreign currency
j. , is the nominal exchange rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home currency price of foreign currency, , is
the real exchange rate.  IV
                          j , t is the instrumented measure of government bond liquidity, , is the home minus foreign interest rates.

 is a difference operator. The instruments for government bond liquidity are change and the level of log of general government
debt to GDP for home country and each foreign country j, log of the VIX index, log of the gold price, G10 cross-country average
square inflation rates, G10 cross-country average unemployment rates, G10 cross-country average square of change in bilateral
exchange rates and G10 cross-country average absolute change of bilateral exchange rates.. The sample period is 1999M1-
2017M12. Germany government interest rate and debt to GDP are used for EUR case.
Standard errors in parentheses are standard errors adjusted for cross-sectional correlation. *, **, and *** indicate that the alternative
model significantly different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively, based on standard normal critical
values for the two-sided test. *, **, and *** for , is based on critical values from distribution for Augmented Dickey Fuller test
with a constant.
The table only reports the coefficient estimates of interest. A table that reports all coefficient estimates is available in the
supplementary appendix.




                                                                                                                                     48
Table 4B:
IV Estimation result of
s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1  2 jIV,t  3i Rj ,t  4  j ,t  5 jIV,t 1  6i Rj ,t 1  7 j ,t 1  u j ,t

  Home Currency                         q j ,t 1                      jIV,t                       i Rj,t              Observations
       (1)                              (2)                           (3)                           (4)                       (5)
     AUD                             -0.0134                    -24.4061***                    -9.8132***                    1950
                                     (0.0091)                      (4.8670)                      (1.2647)
          CAD                      -0.0333***                       1.6306                     -5.1841***                       1797
                                     (0.0079)                      (6.0219)                      (1.2146)
           EUR                     -0.0188***                   -12.9225***                    -7.3831***                       1879
                                     (0.0069)                      (4.9583)                      (1.3063)
           JPY                     -0.0463***                   -13.1779***                    -8.2092***                       1950
                                     (0.0110)                      (3.9153)                      (1.0604)
          NZD                      -0.0282***                      -4.7995                     -6.0322***                       1950
                                     (0.0082)                      (3.3147)                      (1.5542)
          NOK                      -0.0275***                     -3.3757**                    -5.4678***                       1879
                                     (0.0079)                      (1.4260)                      (0.6378)
           SEK                     -0.0193***                    -8.7994***                    -5.9130***                       1950
                                     (0.0068)                      (2.8957)                      (1.0111)
           CHF                     -0.0193***                      -3.4301                     -3.4869***                       1950
                                     (0.0070)                      (3.6665)                      (1.2207)
           GBP                     -0.0269***                   -13.1736***                    -9.8183***                       1879
                                     (0.0088)                      (4.5239)                      (1.6896)
           USD                      -0.0139*                    -13.1999***                    -5.7265***                       1950
                                     (0.0074)                      (3.1698)                      (0.9184)

The table reports the OLS estimates of the coefficient of the panel fixed effect regression listed above. The 10 currencies used are
Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar (NZD), Norwegian
Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar (USD). Each row
represents a regression estimation using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the other 9 currencies as foreign currency
j. , is the nominal exchange rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home currency price of foreign currency, , is
the real exchange rate.  jIV,t is the instrumented measure of government bond liquidity,           ,   is the home minus foreign interest rates.
 is a difference operator. The instruments for government bond liquidity are change and the level of log of general government
debt to GDP for home country and each foreign country j, log of the VIX index, log of the gold price, G10 cross-country average
square inflation rates, G10 cross-country average unemployment rates, G10 cross-country average square of change in bilateral
exchange rates and G10 cross-country average absolute change of bilateral exchange rates.. The sample period is 1999M1-
2017M12. Germany government interest rate and debt to GDP are used for EUR case.
Standard errors in parentheses are standard errors adjusted for cross-sectional correlation. *, **, and *** indicate that the alternative
model significantly different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively, based on standard normal critical
values for the two-sided test. *, **, and *** for , is based on critical values from distribution for Augmented Dickey Fuller test
with a constant.
The table only reports the coefficient estimates of interest. A table that reports all coefficient estimates is available in the
supplementary appendix.




                                                                                                                                             49
Table 4C:
IV Estimation result of
s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1  2 jIV,t  3 j ,t  4l Rj ,t  5i Rj ,t  6 jIV,t 1  7 j ,t 1  8l Rj ,t 1  9i Rj ,t 1  u j ,t

  Home Currency                         q j ,t 1                      jIV,t                       i Rj,t                Observations
       (1)                               (2)                          (3)                           (4)                         (5)
     AUD                            -0.0483***                  -13.3167***                    -8.4066***                       919
                                      (0.0170)                     (4.1661)                      (1.1406)
          CAD                          -0.0233                   -20.8018**                   -11.6756***                          363
                                      (0.0165)                     (9.1085)                      (2.4103)
           EUR                      -0.0513***                   -10.7230**                    -9.3994***                          930
                                      (0.0120)                     (4.3001)                      (1.5282)
           JPY                      -0.0685***                   -10.0351**                   -11.8043***                          930
                                      (0.0181)                     (4.1793)                      (1.3937)
          NZD                       -0.0431***                   -8.0727***                    -8.2882***                          907
                                      (0.0146)                     (3.0272)                      (1.0831)
          NOK                       -0.0453***                   -4.4598***                    -7.2484***                          930
                                      (0.0115)                     (1.3558)                      (0.9580)
           SEK                      -0.0455***                  -10.5546***                    -7.7481***                          930
                                      (0.0121)                     (3.4225)                      (1.3410)
           CHF                       -0.0260*                     13.1020**                     4.4559**                           852
                                      (0.0134)                     (5.2932)                      (2.0139)
           GBP                      -0.0441***                  -12.7855***                   -12.2036***                          930
                                      (0.0157)                     (4.2513)                      (2.0675)
           USD                      -0.0585***                  -18.3097***                   -12.4256***                          777
                                      (0.0155)                     (3.4373)                      (1.2397)

The table reports the OLS estimates of the coefficient of the panel fixed effect regression listed above. The 10 currencies used are
Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar (NZD), Norwegian
Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar (USD). Each row
represents a regression estimation using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the other 9 currencies as foreign currency
j. , is the nominal exchange rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home currency price of foreign currency, , is
the real exchange rate.  IV
                          j ,t is the instrumented measure of government bond liquidity, , is the home minus foreign interest rates.

 is a difference operator. The instruments for government bond liquidity are change and the level of log of general government
debt to GDP for home country and each foreign country j, log of the VIX index, log of the gold price, G10 cross-country average
square inflation rates, G10 cross-country average unemployment rates, G10 cross-country average square of change in bilateral
exchange rates and G10 cross-country average absolute change of bilateral exchange rates.. The sample period is 2008M1-
2017M12. Germany government interest rate and debt to GDP are used for EUR case.
Standard errors in parentheses are standard errors adjusted for cross-sectional correlation. *, **, and *** indicate that the alternative
model significantly different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively, based on standard normal critical
values for the two-sided test. *, **, and *** for , is based on critical values from distribution for Augmented Dickey Fuller test
with a constant.
The table only reports the coefficient estimates of interest. A table that reports all coefficient estimates is available in the
supplementary appendix.




                                                                                                                                                 50
Table 5A:
Estimation result of
s j ,t   j  1q j ,t 1   2  j ,t  3 t   4  *j ,t  5 i Rj ,t   6 t 1   7 t 1  8 *j ,t 1  9i Rj ,t 1  u j ,t

  Home Currency                      *j ,t                j ,t                 j ,t            Within R2              Observations
       (1)                          (2)                      (3)                   (4)                  (5)                     (5)
     AUD                        5.4814***              -6.7622***              -2.7406**              0.2016                   2028
                                 (0.6856)                (1.2114)               (1.2096)
          CAD                   4.4218***              -5.9115***             -5.2253***                0.2078                    1836
                                 (0.6851)                (1.9789)               (1.1260)
          EUR                   4.5771***              -4.9551***             -5.0824***                0.1472                    2028
                                 (0.5595)                (1.0948)               (0.9051)
           JPY                  4.2658***                 -2.0942             -4.8186***                0.1737                    2028
                                 (0.9865)                (5.1736)               (1.5829)
          NZD                   6.1084***              -6.7754***             -5.5521***                0.2082                    2028
                                 (0.8609)                (0.8970)               (1.2860)
          NOK                   5.5907***              -3.3078***             -5.0194***                0.1640                    2028
                                 (0.7336)                (0.7600)               (1.0395)
          SEK                   4.7890***              -4.0441***             -5.0347***                0.1342                    2028
                                 (0.6331)                (1.2212)               (0.9868)
          CHF                   3.0852***                 -2.7329               -1.2225                 0.0562                    2028
                                 (0.7469)                (1.8882)               (1.1921)
          GBP                   4.7472***              -3.6829***                -1.1670                0.1385                    2028
                                 (0.7047)                (1.0823)               (1.1121)
          USD                   6.2173***              -5.8436***             -6.4704***                0.1875                    2028
                                 (0.8044)                (1.3712)               (1.2023)

The table reports the OLS estimates of the coefficient of the panel fixed effect regression listed above. The 10 currencies used are
Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand Dollar (NZD), Norwegian
Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar (USD). Each row
represents a regression estimation using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the other 9 currencies as foreign currency
j. , is the nominal exchange rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home currency price of foreign currency, , is
the real exchange rate.  j , t is the measure of currency derivative friction, ∗, is the measure of foreign government bond

liquidity, , is the measure of the home government bond liquidity, , is the home minus foreign interest rates. is a difference
operator. The sample period is 1999M1-2017M12. Germany government interest rate is used for EUR case.
Standard errors in parentheses are standard errors adjusted for cross-sectional correlation. *, **, and *** indicate that the alternative
model significantly different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% significance level, respectively, based on standard normal critical
values for the two-sided test.
The table only reports the coefficient estimates of interest. A table that reports all coefficient estimates is available in the
supplementary appendix.




                                                                                                                                                 51
Table 5B:
Summary of country by country estimation of
st    1qt 1   2 t  3itR   4t 1  5itR1  ut
                                             qt 1          t                             itR            Adjusted R
                                                                                                                       2


                                             (1)            (2)                             (3)                 (4)
                                         Whole sample: 1999M1-2017M12
              Max                          -0.003          1.714                           0.250                 0.334
              Min                          -0.116         -9.985                          -9.208                 0.003
             Median                        -0.031         -4.160                          -5.151                 0.170
             Mean                          -0.038         -4.398                          -4.956                 0.160

 Pairs that are negatively
      significant at:
           10%                                   29                    37                    42
            5%                                   25                    33                    42
            1%                                   13                    29                    42

                                                   2008M1-2017M12
              Max                             -0.011          2.905                        0.767                 0.487
              Min                             -0.198        -11.860                      -14.336                 0.012
             Median                           -0.069         -5.251                       -6.993                 0.281
             Mean                             -0.070         -5.393                       -7.616                 0.267

 Pairs that are negatively
      significant at:
           10%                                   31                    38                    41
            5%                                   25                    36                    40
            1%                                   11                    26                    39

Total number of country pair is 45 (9*10/2). , is the nominal exchange rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home
currency price of foreign currency, , is the real exchange rate. t is the measure of government bond liquidity, , is the home
minus foreign interest rates.      is a difference operator. A table that reports all coefficient estimates is available in the
supplementary appendix.




                                                                                                                            52
Table 6: Out-of-sample fit comparison of different models
Model (20): Rolling window prediction error of regression with liquidity return:
sˆ j ,t  ˆ j  ˆ1q j ,t 1  ˆ2 j ,t  ˆ3i Rj ,t  ˆ4 j ,t 1  ˆ5i Rj ,t 1
Model (21): Rolling window prediction error of regression without liquidity return:
sˆ j ,t  ˆ j  ˆ1q j ,t 1  ˆ2i Rj ,t  ˆ3i Rj ,t 1
and random walk (RW) model: sˆ RW
                                j ,t  0

                                                                                              DMW             DMW             DMW
  Home                  RMSE of                RMSE of              RMSE of
                                                                                           statistics of   statistics of   statistics of
 Currency                RW                    model (21)           model (20)
                                                                                           (21) vs RW      (20) vs RW      (20) vs (21)
      (1)                   (2)                     (3)                   (4)                   (5)             (6)             (7)
     AUD                  0.0333                  0.0311                0.0295                 5.144           4.953          3.029
     CAD                  0.0305                  0.0281                0.0268                 6.291           6.090          4.203
     EUR                  0.0285                  0.0269                0.0259                 5.137           4.106          4.126
     JPY                  0.0428                  0.0404                0.0395                5.888           4.868           3.183
     NZD                  0.0311                  0.0298                0.0282                 4.502           3.956          3.015
     NOK                  0.0363                  0.0349                0.0316                 5.837           3.739          5.493
     SEK                  0.0296                  0.0287                0.0276                 3.992           2.616          3.700
     CHF                  0.0328                  0.0333                0.0332                -0.748          -1.368          0.480
     GBP                  0.0332                  0.0317                0.0313                 4.241           3.991          1.341
     USD                  0.0349                  0.0336                0.0312                 7.068           4.217          5.834

  Home                     CW                  p-value of                CW                 p-value of     CW               p-value of
 Currency             statistics of             CW test             statistics of            CW test   statistics of          CW test
                      (21) vs RW              (21) vs RW            (20) vs RW             (20) vs RW (20) vs (21)         (20) vs (21)
                           (8)                    (9)                    (10)                  (12)        (13)                 (14)
     AUD                 10.270                0.000***                10.064               0.000***      5.357              0.000***
     CAD                 10.995                0.000***                10.671               0.000***      6.300              0.000***
     EUR                  7.880                0.000***                 9.189               0.000***      6.341              0.000***
     JPY                 9.460                 0.000***                10.675               0.000***      6.550              0.000***
     NZD                 8.170                 0.000***                 8.016               0.000***      5.051              0.000***
     NOK                  7.858                0.000***                11.076               0.000***      9.007              0.000***
     SEK                 6.409                 0.000***                 8.290               0.000***      6.465              0.000***
     CHF                 0.809                   0.209                  2.014                0.022**      2.647              0.004***
     GBP                 7.299                 0.000***                 8.305               0.000***      3.829              0.000***
     USD                 8.585                 0.000***                11.873               0.000***      9.371              0.000***
The 10 currencies used are Australian Dollar (AUD), Canadian Dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen (JPY), New Zealand
Dollar (NZD), Norwegian Krone (NOK), Swedish Krona (SEK), Swiss Franc (CHF), British Pound (GBP) and United States Dollar
(USD). Each row represents a rolling window predictive regression using the column (1) currency as the home currency and the
other 9 currencies as foreign currency j. , is the nominal exchange rate between home and foreign country j, defined as home
currency price of foreign currency, , is the real exchange rate. t is the measure of government bond liquidity, , is the home
minus foreign interest rates.  is a difference operator. The rolling window is 108 months. The first estimated coefficient uses
sample from 1999M1 to 2007M12. Germany government interest rate is used for EUR case. DMW stands for Diebold and Mariano
(1995) and West (1996) and CW stands for Clark and West (2007)
The null hypotheses are that the models MSE are equal. The alternative hypotheses are that the larger models MSE are smaller than
the nested models. *, **, and *** indicate that the alternative model significantly outperforms the smaller nested model at 10%,
5%, and 1% significance level, respectively, based on standard normal critical values for the one-sided test.

                                                                                                                                     53
Appendix
A1 Derivation of Model of Liquidity Returns

A2 Data Source
includes:
    i)    generic data source table,
    ii)   specific data ticker table and
    iii)  data period table

A3 Summary Statistics

                      Appendix A1 Derivation of Model of Liquidity Returns
        Consider first the problem of the home-country investor. As in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2012), Nagel (2016) and Engel (2016), we take a very simple approach to modeling
the liquidity service of some assets, by including them in the utility function. In particular, we
assume home households maximize:


            t             M H ,t BH ,t St BH* ,t     
(A.28) E0   u  ct   v                              .
                              P , P , P
            t 0          t        t       t          


There are six assets in the world economy:


M t - home country money

M t* - foreign country money

Bt - home country government bonds

Bt* - foreign country government bonds

Btm- home country “market” bonds

 Bt*m - foreign country “market” bonds


The H subscript in the asset holdings refers to home country holdings of each asset, while F will

denote foreign country holdings.      ct ( ct* ) is home (foreign) country consumption.


                                                                                               54
         The utility function for the home household shows that it may get liquidity services from
home money, home government bonds and foreign government bonds. Below we will specify that
holdings of each of these assets must be weakly positive. We will assume that the supplies of the
assets and the parameterization of the utility function is such that the home household will always
hold home money and government bonds and get liquidity services from those assets, but it may

hold a zero amount of foreign government bonds in equilibrium. The utility function v . is

assumed to be strictly concave, but Inada conditions do not hold for the foreign government bond,
so its holdings may be zero. An example of such a utility function, which we will use illustratively
below is:


                                                                                                                                     1 
                                                                                                                          1
                                                                    1                 1
                                                                                                                                      1
           M H ,t BH ,t St BH* ,t           1        M H ,t            B                  St BH* ,t          
                                                                                                                                
(A.29) v                                                                H ,t                           
                                                       P 
                  ,     ,
                                                                                                                                
            Pt     Pt      Pt             1        t                  Pt                 Pt                         


where we assume   1 ,   0 , 0    1 , 0    1 ,   0 .
         This specification is a slight generalization of that of Nagel (2016) because we assume that
there are two non-money assets that might deliver liquidity services. In addition, Nagel assumes
that the liquidity from money and domestic government bonds are perfect substitutes (though
bonds provide less liquidity per currency unit), while we allow imperfect substitution.
         The period-by-period budget constraint is given by


          t t  M H ,t  BH ,t  BH ,t  S t BH ,t  St BH ,t
                                  m           *          *m
         Pc
(A.30)
          Pt yt  M H ,t 1  1  it 1  BH ,t 1  1  itm1  BHm ,t 1  St 1  it*1  BH* ,t 1  St 1  it*m1  BH*m,t 1



         Households maximize (A.28) subject to (A.30), and to the constraints MH,t  0 , BH ,t  0

and BH ,t  0 . These latter constraints mean that households are unable to issue securities with the
     *



same liquidity properties as government securities.
         We will assume, for convenience, that as in the New Keynesian model in the paper, goods
prices in each currency are known one period in advance. The first-order conditions are given by:

                                                                                                                                               55
                                              1  M H ,t BH ,t St BH ,t 
                                                                    *
        1             1
(A.31)  u  ct          Et u  ct 1   vM     ,     ,         0
        Pt           Pt 1                    Pt  Pt     Pt      Pt 

                    1  it                   1  M H ,t BH ,t St BH ,t 
                                                                   *
        1
(A.32)  u  ct  
                           Et u  ct 1   vB 
                                                      ,     ,         0
        Pt           Pt 1                   Pt  Pt     Pt      Pt 

            1              1  itm
(A.33)        u  ct            Et u  ct 1   0
            Pt              Pt 1

                     1 it*                         St  M H ,t BH ,t St BH ,t 
                                                                           *
        St
(A.34)  u  ct           Et St 1u  ct 1   vB*     ,     ,         0
        Pt            Pt 1                         Pt  Pt      Pt      Pt 

        St           1  it*m
(A.35)  u  ct             Et St 1u  ct 1   0
        Pt             Pt 1


         The foreign household’s problem is symmetric. For convenience, we assume they have the
same utility function for consumption as home households. The utility function for liquidity is
symmetric to the home household’s, with foreign assets taking the place of home assets. In the
example we will use later:


                                                                                                                                          1 
                                                                        1                      1                           1
                                                                                                                                          1
           *     *      1
        * M F ,t BF ,t St BF ,t
                                            1         M F ,t
                                                           *
                                                                                 B*                   S 1B           
                                                                                                                                      
(A.36) v  * , * ,                                                          *F ,t                 t * F ,t   
                                                     P*                                                                                     .
           Pt   Pt       Pt*             1       t                        Pt                     Pt                      


The first-order conditions for the foreign household are:


                                             1 *  M F ,t BF ,t St BF ,t 
                                                         *  *     1

(A.37)  * u  ct   *  Et u  ct 1   * vM *  * , * ,
         1             1
                                                                           0
                 *                  *
                                                                       *
        Pt            Pt 1                 Pt        Pt  Pt      P t    

                                           1 *  M F ,t BF ,t St BF ,t 
                                                                1
                     1 it*
                                                      *  *

(A.38)  * u  ct   *  Et u  ct 1   * vB*  * , * ,
         1
               *
                                 *
                                                                       0
        Pt            Pt 1               Pt       Pt  Pt       Pt* 



                                                                                                                                                        56
                                  1  it*m
(A.39) 
                1
               Pt *
                    u   ct
                            *
                                     *
                                    Pt 1
                                            Et u  ct*1   0


                                               St1 *  M F ,t BF ,t St BF ,t 
                                                                       1
        St1         1 it
                                                          *     *

(A.40)  * u  ct   *  Et St 1u  ct 1   * vB  * , * ,
                                  
                               1
                                                                              0
                *                      *

        Pt            Pt 1                    Pt      Pt     Pt       Pt* 

              St1              1  itm
(A.41) 
              Pt *
                   u   ct 
                           *
                                  *
                                 Pt 1
                                         Et St11u  ct*1   0



            Equations (A.33) and (A.35) imply the relationship:

            1 i  E u  c   1 i  E SS u  c   0 .
                     t
                      m
                           t      t 1
                                                 *m
                                                 t     t
                                                            t 1
                                                                   t 1
                                                             t

If we maintain the assumption of rational expectations and no market frictions, then the assumption
that the conditional distribution of exchange rates and consumption is jointly lognormal, we can
derive


            it*m  Et st 1  st  itm   12 vart  st 1   covt  mt 1, st 1 


                  u  ct 1  
where mt 1  ln                . If markets are complete, we have st 1  st  mt 1  mt 1 , where
                                                                                   *

                  t 1 
                      P

               u  ct*1  
m *
  t 1    ln                . Using this relationship, we can write
               Pt *1 
                            


(A.42)                    it*m  Et st 1  st  itm  rt


where rt        1
                 2    var  m
                           t     t 1     vart  mt*1   . As noted in the text, we do not insist that   rt be interpreted

as a time-varying risk premium. It may arise for other reasons as well, such as financial market or
expectational frictions, or from the presence of noise traders. While we derived (A.42) from (A.33)




                                                                                                                           57
and (A.35), it is straightforward to check that equations (A.39) and (A.41) imply the same
relationship.31
           Assume equations (A.31) and (A.32) hold with equality, so that the home agent holds
positive amounts of home money and home government bonds. (A.33) implies:


                      1                              1
(A.43)                      Et u   ct 1                u  c  .
                     Pt 1                      1  itm  Pt t

Substitute this into (A.32), and cancel terms to get:


                                 M       B       S B* 
                              vB  H , t , H , t , t H , t 
                     1  it        Pt       Pt      Pt 
(A.44)                                                      1.
                     1  itm
                                        u  ct 


Similarly, substituting (A.43) into (A.31) gives us:


                          M H ,t BH ,t St BH* ,t     
                      vM         ,        ,          
               1           Pt        Pt     Pt         1.
                    
            1  itm              u  ct 


Rearranging these two equations, we find:


                                   M H ,t BH ,t St BH* ,t 
                              vB         ,      ,         
                                     Pt     Pt      Pt 
(A.45) it  it 
         m
                                                                                    it .
                    M      B       S B*          M        B   S B*           
                 vM  H ,t , H ,t , t H ,t   vB  H ,t , H ,t , t H ,t        
                     Pt     Pt       Pt           Pt       Pt   Pt           


The model in the text approximates this equation around a steady state in which                     it  0 , to arrive
at

31
     These relationships are well-known in the literature. See the survey of Engel (2014) for example.

                                                                                                                   58
          itm  it  it


We will have   0 if                  vM  vB in the steady state, so the liquidity value of money exceeds that of
home government bonds. Taking the analogous set of relationships for the foreign country, and
                        vB         v **
assuming                     * B * (the overbar indicates the functions are evaluated at the steady
                      vM  v B vM *  v B*

state levels of the assets) we find:


          it
             m
                  it    itm*  it*  =   it  it*  .


If we had added a shock to liquidity preferences as in Engel (2016), we would then, using (A.42)
arrive exactly at the model given in the text, in which


          it*  Et st 1  st  it  t  rt ,


where t   itm  it    itm*  it*     it  it*   vt .

          Note that if the home household holds the foreign government bond, we have:


                                   M H ,t BH ,t St BH* ,t 
                             v B*         ,         ,     
          1  it*  St 1          Pt         Pt     Pt 
                 Et                                       1.
          1  itm  St                   u   ct 


Together with equation (A.44), we find:


                                                                      M      B       S B*                 M H ,t BH ,t St BH* ,t 
                                                                   vB  H ,t , H , t , t H , t     
                                                                                                  B* v           ,     ,          
                                                                     Pt     Pt       Pt                    P      P       Pt 
          1  i  E  SS
                  *
                  t     t
                                t 1
                                         1  it   1  it 
                                                              m                                  
                                                                                                 u  ct 
                                                                                                            t        t

                                t     



                                                                                                                                        59
Our model implies that if home households hold both government bonds, the difference in the
expected rates of return reflects the difference in the liquidity services that the two bonds provide
to home households. If the foreign government bond pays a higher monetary return, it must provide
a lower liquidity return to the home household in equilibrium.
       For the utility function given in (A.29), we can derive that the liquidity premium from the
right-hand-side of equation (A.45) is given by:


                         M        B      S B*                                                          1
                     vB  H ,t , H ,t , t H ,t                                                  1

                          Pt       Pt      Pt 
                                                                      it 
                                                                                     M  
                                                                                          H ,t
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                  i.
                                                                                                               1 t
           M             S B*          M             S B*                         1                     1
                   B                             B
        vM  H ,t , H ,t , t H ,t   vB  H ,t , H ,t , t H ,t             B
                                                                              H ,t     
                                                                                        M   
                                                                                                     H ,t
            Pt     Pt      Pt           Pt     Pt      Pt      


As     ,   so the liquidity services provided by government bonds are simply a diminished
                                                                                                 
service identical to that provided by money, the liquidity return goes to                               it .
                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                       60
Appendix A2: Data source

Generic data source table
 Data                       Data source
 Spot Exchange rates        Datastream (DS)
 1Y Forward rates           Datastream (DS)
 1M Forward rates           Datastream (DS)
 1Y Government bond yield   Datastream (DS), Bloomberg (BBG), central banks
 1M Government bond yield   Datastream (DS), Bloomberg (BBG), central banks
 1Y Interest Rate Swap      Bloomberg (BBG)
 1Y Credit Default Swap     Bloomberg (BBG), Markit (MK)
 Consumer Price Index       IMF IFS
 Unemployment rates         IMF IFS, FRED for New Zealand
 Gold price                 FRED
 VIX index                  FRED
 General Govt Debt to GDP   BIS Credit to the non-financial sector dataset




                                                                              61
Specific data ticker table
All the variables are created by filling the missing value in the order reported. For exchange rates and forward rates, we do a trilateral cross to get the non-US related exchange
rates. For example, the AUD per CAD exchange rate is constructed by log(           /    )- log(    /   ). Germany government yield, debt to GDP and CDS are used for EUR.
 Data                  AUD             CAD             EUR              JPY             NZD              NOK             SEK             CHF              GBP             USD
 Spot exchange         AUSTDO$         CNDOLL$         USEURSP          JAPAYE$         NZDOLL$          NORKRO$         SWEKRO$         SWISSF$          USDOLLR         -
 rates
 1Y forward rates      USAUDYF         USCADYF         USEURYF          USJPYYF         USNZDYF          USNOKYF         USSEKYF         USCHFYF          USGBPYF         -
 1M forward rates      USAUD1F         USCAD1F         USEUR1F          USJPY1F         USNZD1F          -               USSEK1F         USCHF1F          USGBP1F         -
 1Y government         BBG:GTAU        DS:CNTBB1       BBG:GTDE         BBG:GTJPY       BBG:GTNZ         BBG:ST3XY       Sveriges        Swiss            BBG:GTGB        BBG:GB12
 bond yield            D1Y Govt        Y               M1Y Govt         1Y Govt         D1Y Govt         Index           Riksbank        National         P1Y Govt        Govt
                       BBG:            BBG:            BBG:             BBG:            DS:NZGBY1                        website,        Bank, spot                       FRED
                       C1271Y          C1011Y          C9101Y           C1051Y          Y                BBG:            Treasury        interest rate                    BBG:
                       INDEX           INDEX           INDEX            INDEX           BBG:             C2661Y          bills SE12M     for 1Y govt                      C0821Y
                                                                                        C2501Y           INDEX           BBG:BV010       bond                             INDEX
                                                                                        INDEX                            259 Index       BBG:
                                                                                                                         BBG:            C2561Y
                                                                                                                         C2591Y          INDEX
                                                                                                                         INDEX
 1M government         DS:TRAU1        DS:TRCN1        DS:TRBD1         DS:TRJP1M       DS:TRNZ1                         DS:TRSD1M       DS:TRSW1         DS:TRUK1        DS:TRUS1M
 bond yield            MT              MT              MT               T               MT                               T               MT               MT              T
                       BBG:            BBG:            BBG:                             BBG:                                                              BBG:            BBG: GB1M
                       AUTE1MYL        FMSTTB1M        GETB1M                           NDTB1M                                                            UKGTB1M         Index
                       Index           Index           Index                            Curncy                                                            Index
 1Y Interest Rate      BBG:ADSW        BBG:CDSW        BBG:EUSW         BBG:JYSW1       BBG:NDSW         BBG:NKSW        BBG:SKSW        BBG:SFSW1        BBG:BPSW        BBG:USSW
 Swap*                 AP1Q            1 CURNCY        1V3              CURNCY          AP1              1 CURNCY        1 CURNCY        V3               1V3             1 CURNCY
                       CURNCY                          CURNCY                           CURNCY                                           CURNCY           CURNCY
                       BBG:ADSW                        BBG:EUSA1                                                                         BBG:SFSW1        BBG:BPSW
                       AP1                             CURNCY                                                                            CURNCY           1 CURNCY
                       CURNCY
 1Y Credit Default     BBG:AUST        BBG:CANP        BBG:GERM         BBG:JGB         BBG:NZ           BBG:NORW        BBG:SWED        BBG:SWISS        BBG:UK          BBG:US
 Swap                  LA CDS          AC CDS          AN CDS           CDS USD         CDS USD          AY CDS          CDS USD         CDS USD          CDS USD         CDS USD
                       USD SR 1Y       USD SR 1Y       USD SR 1Y        SR 1Y D14       SR 1Y D14        USD SR 1Y       SR 1Y D14       SR 1Y D14        SR 1Y D14       SR 1Y D14
                       D14 Corp        D14 Corp        D14 Corp         Corp            Corp             D14 Corp        Corp            Corp             Corp            Corp
                       MK:QS973P       MK:27CBJG       MK:3AB549        MK:4B818G       MK:6B5178        MK:6CFB55       MK:8F7220       MK:HPBCI         MK:9A17DE       MK:9A3AA
                                                                                                                                         O                                A
 General govt debt     Q:AU:G:A:N      Q:CA:G:A:N      Q:DE:G:A:N       Q:JP:G:A:N:     Q:NZ:G:A:N       Q:NO:G:A:N      Q:SE:G:A:N:     Q:CH:G:A:N       Q:GB:G:A:N      Q:US:G:A:N
 to GDP                :770:A          :770:A          :770:A           770:A           :770:A           :770:A          770:A           :770:A           :770:A          :770:A
*See the data appendix of Du, et al 2018a for the detail of the construction, available at: https://sites.google.com/site/wenxindu/data/govt-cip?authuser=0




                                                                                                                                                                                      62
Data period
 Data                           AUD            CAD       EUR      JPY      NZD       NOK     SEK     CHF     GBP      USD
 Spot exchange rates            99M1-          99M1-     99M1-    99M1-    99M1-     99M1-   99M1-   99M1-   99M1-    99M1-
                                17M12          17M12     17M12    17M12    17M12     17M12   17M12   17M12   17M12    17M12
 1Y forward rates               99M1-          99M1-     99M1-    99M1-    99M1-     99M1-   99M1-   99M1-   99M1-    99M1-
                                17M12          17M12     17M12    17M12    17M12     17M12   17M12   17M12   17M12    17M12
 1M forward rates               99M1-          99M1-     99M1-    99M1-    99M1-     99M1-   99M1-   99M1-   99M1-    99M1-
                                17M12          17M12     17M12    17M12    17M12     17M12   17M12   17M12   17M12    17M12
 1Y government bond yield       99M11-         99M1-     99M11-   99M11-   99M1-     99M1-   99M1-   99M1-   99M11-   99M1-
                                17M12          17M12     17M12    17M12    17M12     17M12   17M12   17M12   17M12    17M12
 1M government bond yield       99M1-          99M1-     10M11-   12M8-    99M1-     NA      99M1-   09M1-   99M1-    99M1-
                                00M6,          17M12     17M12    17M12    17M12             17M12   17M12   17M12    17M12
                                00M9,
                                00M12,
                                01M3,
                                09M11-
                                13M3
 1Y Interest Rate Swap          99M1-          01M2-     99M1-    99M1-    99M1-     99M1-   99M1-   99M1-   99M1-    99M1-
                                17M12          17M12     17M12    17M12    17M12     17M12   17M12   17M12   17M12    17M12
 1Y Credit Default Swap         08M3-          09M4-     08M1-    08M1-    08M2-     08M1-   08M1-   09M1-   08M1-    08M1-
                                17M12          17M12*    17M12    17M12    17M12**   17M12   17M12   17M12   17M12    17M12
 Consumer Price Index           99Q1-          99M1-     99M1-    99M1-    99Q1-     99M1-   99M1-   99M1-   99M1-    99M1-
                                17Q4           17M12     17M12    17M12    17Q4      17M12   17M12   17M12   17M12    17M12
 Unemployment rates             99M1-          99M1-     99M1-    99M1-    99Q1-     99M1-   99M1-   99M1-   99M1-    99M1-
                                17M12          17M12     17M12    17M12    17Q4      17M12   17M12   17M12   17M12    17M12
 Gold price                     NA             NA        NA       NA       NA        NA      NA      NA      NA       99M1-
                                                                                                                      17M12
 VIX                            NA             NA        NA       NA       NA        NA      NA      NA      NA       99M1-
                                                                                                                      17M12
 General govt debt to GDP       99Q1-           99Q1-    00Q1-    99Q1-    99Q1-     00Q1-   99Q1-   99Q1-   00Q1-    99Q1-
                                17Q4            17Q4     17Q4     17Q4     17Q4      17Q4    17Q4    17Q4    17Q4     17Q4
*there are multiple missing values in different months
**there are missing values at 2008m3-m4




                                                                                                                              63
Appendix A3: Summary statistics
All the summary statistics scaled by 100 to improve visibility. For example, i of 4.06 represents 4.06% annualized interest rate.
Interest rates and forward rates reported are with 1-year tenor.


                                            AUD                                                         CAD
                        Obs         Mean          SD         Min        Max         Obs       Mean        SD       Min           Max
  (ln(S))
  s                    2052       -0.7022      1.5554      -4.671      1.091       2052     -0.7807     1.5499     -4.799       0.933
  s (%)               2052       -0.0657      3.0878     -13.335     25.511       2052     -0.0435     2.9058    -13.775      21.062
 q(ln(Q))              2052       -0.7345      1.5707      -4.766      1.018       2052     -0.7791     1.5681     -4.855       0.962
  i
      R
           (%)         2052        1.9442      1.5960       -2.489     6.076       2052     0.0470      1.6446      -4.146      5.848

   i R (%)            2052        0.0013      0.2357       -1.279     1.408       2052     -0.0003     0.2021      -1.226      1.034
  f  s (%)            2052        2.1930      1.7595       -2.474     7.001       2052     -0.0033     1.8152      -5.420      6.112
  (%)                 2052        0.2488      0.3070       -0.990     1.605       2052     -0.0502     0.3008      -1.576      1.126
   (%)               2052        0.0008      0.1725       -1.256     1.207       2052      0.0007     0.1432      -1.308      1.156
  (%)                 2029        0.1580      0.2037       -0.381     1.123       1845     0.0770      0.2021      -0.528      1.252
      R
  l (%)                1121        0.0314      0.1163       -0.264     0.603        530     0.0322      0.1368      -0.474      0.381
  (%)                 1121        0.0853      0.3060       -1.027     1.304        530     -0.0272     0.3185      -1.280      0.642
    (%)             2029        0.0901      0.3009       -1.109     1.303       1845     -0.1169     0.3048      -1.510      0.603
 i (%)                 2052        4.0617      1.4967        1.502     6.682       2052      2.3542     1.6275       0.409      6.062
 IRS (%)               2052        4.4784      1.6936        1.637     7.984       1845     2.2344      1.3400      0.461       5.720
 Govt debt to           684      18.9197       9.0569        8.100    37.500        684    64.7149      7.5029     48.800      80.300
 GDP (%)

                                            EUR                                                         JPY
                       Obs       Mean          SD          Min          Max        Obs      Mean          SD        Min          Max
  (ln(S))
  s                   2052     -1.2008      1.5229       -5.128        0.541       2052     4.1758      0.8535      2.378       5.513
  s (%)              2052      0.0129      2.5820      -15.628       17.877       2052     0.0272      3.7519    -25.511      14.005
 q(ln(Q))             2052     -1.1907      1.5421       -5.165        0.581       2052     4.2362      0.8590      2.338       5.595
  i
      R
           (%)        2052     -0.6449       1.5885       -4.241       4.642       2052     -2.4247     1.9632      -6.993      0.973

  i  (%)
           R          2052     -0.0020       0.1883       -1.212       1.135       2052     0.0126      0.2052      -1.376      1.279
  f  s (%)           2052     -0.7570       1.7470       -4.810       4.826       2052     -2.7403     2.0239      -7.911      1.069
  (%)                2052     -0.1121       0.2893       -1.497       1.071       2052     -0.3157     0.3010      -2.026      0.982
           (%)      2052      0.0001       0.1381       -1.259       1.723       2052     -0.0008     0.1619      -1.353      2.464
         (%)         2029     -0.1032       0.2149       -1.340       0.451       2029     -0.0890     0.2343      -0.959      0.743
      R
  l (%)               1177     -0.0400       0.1169       -0.726       0.513       1184      0.0210     0.1191      -0.703      0.512
  (%)                1177      0.0293       0.3150       -1.444       1.521       1184     -0.1862     0.3071      -1.890      0.658
    (%)            2029     -0.0100       0.3118       -1.310       1.385       2029     -0.2285     0.2853      -1.784      0.539
 i (%)                2052      1.7316       1.7475       -0.919       5.043       2052      0.1298     0.2253      -0.328      0.782
 IRS (%)              2052      2.0567       1.7446       -0.329       5.381       2052     0.2583      0.2718      -0.140      1.081
 Govt debt to          642     68.4822       6.9507      57.200       81.100        684     159.23      31.082     95.700      201.50
 GDP (%)




                                                                                                                                64
                                   NZD                                          NOK
                   Obs        Mean        SD        Min Max        Obs     Mean      SD    Min       Max
s(ln(S))         2052    -0.5271   1.5634     -4.558    1.297   2052   1.1395   1.5287  -3.063      2.639
 s (%)          2052    -0.0971   3.3520    -14.005   21.551   2052   0.0671   2.8650 -15.512     20.633
q(ln(Q))         2052    -0.5587   1.5787     -4.650    1.238   2052   1.1310   1.5486  -3.156      2.634
i
    R
         (%)     2052     2.2993   1.5487    -2.206     6.957   2052    0.8790   1.8196   -4.090    6.993

 i R (%)        2052     0.0012   0.2579    -1.217     1.388   2052   -0.0078   0.2229   -1.408    1.083
 f  s (%)       2052     2.6107   1.7379    -2.157     7.911   2052    0.8600   2.0219   -4.660    7.268
       (%)      2052     0.3113   0.3896    -1.379     2.001   2052   -0.0190   0.3524   -2.142    1.513
  (%)          2052     0.0018   0.2379    -1.420     1.366   2052   -0.0017   0.1873   -2.464    0.994
 (%)            2029     0.1424   0.2328    -0.545     1.365   2029   -0.1095   0.1901   -1.101    0.532
    R
l (%)            1073     0.0857   0.1387    -0.248     0.817   1054   -0.0923   0.1333   -0.846    0.126
 (%)            1073     0.0873   0.3512    -0.909     1.890   1054    0.0169   0.3631   -1.807    1.630
   (%)        2029     0.1691   0.4290    -1.292     1.784   2029    0.0878   0.3519   -1.602    1.752
i (%)            2052     4.3813   1.7397     1.773     7.739   2052    3.1031   2.0423    0.419    7.018
IRS (%)          2052     4.8693   2.0617     1.985     8.853   2052    3.5178   2.1694    0.779    7.695
Govt debt to      684    26.9570   5.7796    15.600    36.800    642   36.2771   7.5183   22.700   51.900
GDP (%)

                                   SEK                                         CHF
                   Obs        Mean        SD       Min Max         Obs    Mean      SD    Min        Max
s(ln(S))         2052     1.2677   1.5173    -2.897    2.752    2052 -0.8396   1.5517  -4.879       0.990
 s (%)          2052     0.0610   2.7145    -9.570   18.786    2052 -0.1483   2.9065 -19.718      11.893
q(ln(Q))         2052     1.2761   1.5349    -2.939     2.817   2052   -0.8329   1.5769   -4.933    1.101
i
    R
         (%)     2052    -0.4376   1.6605    -4.723     4.672   2052   -1.5843   1.5653   -5.656    3.556

i   (%)
         R       2052    -0.0042   0.2018    -1.388     0.978   2052    0.0046   0.1997   -1.372    0.926
 f  s (%)       2052    -0.4171   1.8478    -5.328     4.760   2052   -1.9686   1.6655   -6.185    3.662
 (%)            2052     0.0205   0.3461    -1.473     1.576   2052   -0.3843   0.3382   -2.057    0.676
         (%)   2052     0.0010   0.1652    -1.245     1.762   2052   -0.0014   0.1766   -1.244    2.189
       (%)      2029    -0.0894   0.1750    -1.164     0.636   2029   -0.0589   0.2067   -0.925    0.668
    R
l (%)            1129    -0.0195   0.1165    -0.423     0.589    905   -0.0136   0.1262   -0.416    0.846
 (%)            1129     0.1797   0.3249    -1.515     1.540    905   -0.3814   0.2741   -1.630    0.860
   (%)        2029     0.1099   0.3304    -1.370     1.379   2029   -0.3284   0.2796   -1.752    0.479
i (%)            2052     1.9181   1.7212    -0.909     4.684   2052    0.8861   1.2324   -0.984    3.827
IRS (%)          2052     2.3506   1.7635    -0.560     5.458   2052    0.9260   1.3310   -1.055    4.030
Govt debt to     642     44.7232   6.8896    35.000    65.733    684   37.5618   7.4843   29.000   48.733
GDP (%)




                                                                                                      65
                                GBP                                          USD
                Obs      Mean        SD     Min   Max        Obs     Mean      SD      Min        Max
s(ln(S))       2052   -1.5305   1.4984  -5.513  -0.034     2052    -1.0022   1.5424    -4.897    0.731
 s (%)        2052    0.1283   2.9243 -14.482  19.718     2052     0.0580   3.1381   -17.865   13.209
q(ln(Q))       2052   -1.5332   1.5196  -5.595  -0.028     2052    -1.0142   1.5623    -5.114    0.761
i
    R
        (%)    2052    0.3190   1.7716   -4.241    6.068   2052    -0.3970   1.8370    -5.299    5.930

 i R (%)      2052   -0.0081   0.2145   -1.286    1.187   2052    0.0027    0.2067    -1.228    1.217
 f  s (%)     2052    0.4246   1.9223   -4.440    6.384   2052    -0.2021   2.0335    -6.144    7.129
       (%)    2052    0.1057   0.3061   -1.091    1.619   2052     0.1949   0.3381    -1.161    2.142
  (%)        2052    0.0006   0.1769   -1.366    2.123   2052    -0.0011   0.1670    -1.336    1.409
 (%)          2029   -0.0312   0.1957   -1.365    0.988   2029     0.1109   0.1845    -0.387    1.217
    R
l (%)           995    0.0305   0.1315   -0.461    0.663    940    -0.0221   0.1480    -0.641    0.423
 (%)           995    0.1345   0.3218   -0.728    1.807    940    0.0018    0.3078    -1.428    1.478
   (%)      2029    0.1362   0.3043   -1.052    1.602   2029    0.0801    0.3160    -1.282    1.486
i (%)          2052    2.5990   2.1680   -0.003    6.195   2052    1.9546    1.9134     0.086    6.057
IRS (%)        2052    3.0572   2.2969    0.310    6.830   2052    2.3655    2.1001    0.261     7.500
Govt debt to    642   59.1850   22.260   33.700   87.900    684    72.226    19.277   46.900    98.700
GDP (%)




                                                                                                    66
