NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DYNAMIC TREATMENT EFFECTS OF JOB TRAINING
Jorge Rodríguez
Fernando Saltiel
Sergio S. Urzúa
Working Paper 25408
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25408

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

We thank Matias Cattaneo, Xavier D'Haultfoeuille, Claudio Ferraz, Maurice Kugler, Lance
Lochner, Oscar Mitnik, Gabriel Ulyssea for useful comments and suggestions. We are indebted to
seminar participants at IZA/CREST/OECD Conference on Labor Market Policy Evaluation
(2018), George Mason University (2018), Latin American Meeting of the Econometric Society
(2017), RIDGE Impact Evaluation of Labor Market Policies Conference (2017), PUC-Chile
(2017), Banco de Desarrollo de America Latina (2016), PUC-Rio (2016), and LACEA-LAMES
(2016). We thank the Ministry of Finance of Chile for providing us access to the data used in this
paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Jorge Rodríguez, Fernando Saltiel, and Sergio S. Urzúa. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Dynamic Treatment Effects of Job Training
Jorge Rodríguez, Fernando Saltiel, and Sergio S. Urzúa
NBER Working Paper No. 25408
December 2018
JEL No. C31,C32,J24
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates the dynamic returns to job training. We posit a dynamic-discrete choice
model of sequential training participation, where choices and earnings depend on observed and
unobserved characteristics. We define treatment effects, including policy relevant parameters, and
link them to continuation values. The empirical analysis is carried out using data combining job
training records, matched employee-employer information, and pre-labor market ability
measures from Chile. We document small positive average returns, large unobserved
heterogeneity in responses, and dynamic substitutability of training investments. Our policy
relevant treatment effects vary across dynamic response types, highlighting the relevance of our
framework.
Jorge Rodríguez
Universidad de los Andes
San Carlos de Apoquindo 2200
Santiago
Chile
jrodriguezo@uandes.cl
Fernando Saltiel
University of Maryland
Tydings Hall, 3114 Preinkert Dr.
College Park, MD 20742
saltiel@econ.umd.edu

Sergio S. Urzúa
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3115J Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
urzua@econ.umd.edu

1

Introduction

The evolving complexity and uncertainty in the demand for skills in a changing labor market
induces workers to constantly change their human capital investment decisions. Recent research
has documented workers may posses different sets of competencies vis-á-vis those required in the
workplace.1 In this context, understanding the dynamics of training decisions and their associated
returns has gained prominence over the past years: as fast technological progress shifts the set of
skills that jobs demand, workers may participate in on- or off-the-job training multiple times in
their careers.2
This paper estimates the returns to job training in a context of dynamic training choices and
labor market outcomes. We use our framework to provide new insights into the static and dynamic
effects of job training on earnings, including the identification of heterogeneous responses across
different groups as well as an empirical assessment of dynamic complementary (substitutability)
arising from repeated training participation.3 Ultimately, we not only document who benefits from
training but also how the timing and sequence of the training decisions define potential and actual
gains (and losses).
We posit a tractable dynamic-discrete choice model of job training. In the model, a worker must
decide whether or not to take part in a training course across multiple periods, and workers may
participate in training on multiple occasions. For a given training history, and conditional on firm
characteristics, the agent chooses to participate in a job training course if the perceived net benefits
are positive.4 Individual choices and outcomes depend on observed characteristics as well as on
unobserved heterogeneity, which we interpret as the initial stock of skills. Using a measurement
system of pre-labor market test scores, we are able to nonparametrically identify the distribution of
1
Guvenen et al. (2015), Postel-Vinay and Lise (2015), Lise et al. (2016), Buhrmann (2017), and Saltiel et al.
(2018) discuss skill (mis)match in the labor market.
2
See Autor et al. (2003), SpitzOener (2006), Ingram and Neumann (2006), Acemoglu and Autor (2011), and
Sanders and Taber (2012) for a literature on the changing returns to specific skills.
3
Anticipating our analysis, if we let Yt be earnings at the end of period t, the production function of Yt exhibits
dynamic complementarity (substitutability) if the return to It (training during present period) is higher (lower)
2
t
≥ (≤)0. We note that this result is captured by the same
conditional on prior training participation, i.e. ∂I∂t−1Y∂I
t
2

t
, yet it is defined as a dynamic complementarity in the case of higher returns and as dynamic
parameter, ∂I∂t−1Y∂I
t
substitutability with lower returns to present training (Cunha and Heckman, 2006).
4
Besides the index threshold-crossing property that determines the decision process, we do not model preferences
and budget sets, thereby abstracting from strong assumptions about behavior and uncertainty—ubiquitous elements
in the structural dynamic literature (Keane et al., 2011). Instead, we approximate choices and outcomes processes
jointly, accounting for self-selection into program participation at each decision node.

2

latent skills and use it to identify the joint distribution of counterfactual earnings across potential
training choices.5
We exploit a large-scale training program in Chile called “Franquicia Tributaria” (FT). FT fully
subsidizes training courses at off-site providers for workers who are employed in a formal-sector firm.
In the program, a worker can participate in a training course on multiple occasions, and a significant
number of workers do so.6 We take advantage of administrative data on job training records for
the population of workers and combine it with matched employee-employer data on labor market
outcomes. We augment these data with measures on workers’ pre-labor market abilities coming
from college admission test scores. We analyze the earnings returns to training for first-time labor
market entrants, focusing on their first two years in the labor market.7,8
Following the estimated model parameters, we document static and dynamic treatment effects
of job training. In particular, we examine the effects of training on workers’ earnings in the first
two years in the labor force. The static returns to training indicate that program participation in
the first year raises average monthly earnings by 1.7%. While second-year participation positively
impacts subsequent earnings, we find significant heterogeneity across first-period decisions, as this
event increases earnings by 3.4% for workers not previously trained, while the equivalent effect
for early trainees is smaller than 1%. The dynamic returns to training, meanwhile, capture the
impact of first-period training on the present value of earnings in the first two periods in the labor
market. The dynamic average treatment effect (DATE) indicates that first-period training increases
the present value of earnings by 3.6%. We examine the mechanisms through which early training
delivers positive medium-term impacts by decomposing the DATE parameter into the direct effect
of training and its continuation value, which links human capital investment decisions and potential
gains over time. We find that while the short- and medium-term direct effects are positive and
5
We follow the models of Heckman and Navarro (2007) and Heckman et al. (2016), adapting them to the context of job training participation. We extend their analysis by considering the importance of dynamic complementarity/substitutability of human capital investments (training) and estimating dynamic policy relevant treatment
effects.
6
For workers in our estimation sample, 46% of those who take-up first period job training choose to do so again
in their second year.
7
We study training choices for labor market entrants to focus on workers with no prior job training experience.
Furthermore, workers may find it especially valuable to take up job training as there is a longer time period over
which they can capture the returns to training (Mincer, 1974).
8
We measure earnings as the worker’s average monthly earnings in the first quarter of the year following the
training event. The results are robust to other earnings measures. We note that we do not analyze two potential
sources of gains from training: non-pecuniary benefits and effects on firm productivity which are not passed through
onto wages.

3

significant, the continuation value is not statistically different from zero.9 We further analyze
the factors driving the estimated continuation value by exploring the relationship between this
parameter and dynamic complementarity (substitutability) of training decisions.10 In this context,
we find evidence of dynamic substitutability, as training in the first period reduces the earnings
returns to training in the second period. Furthermore, dynamic substitutability is stronger for
high-skilled workers. We note that dynamic substitutability may be explained by the structure of
the job training courses examined in this paper, or more generally by the production function of
post-schooling human capital accumulation.11
To examine the policy implications arising from these results, we estimate the effect of an
increase in local course-hour availability. As this policy may affect workers’ choices in both years,
we define dynamic response types, defined by the responses to the policy change in each time period.
For instance, we can identify a group of workers who are induced to participate in training in both
time periods due to the policy change, despite being baseline never-participants. In this context,
we contribute to the treatment effects literature by presenting and estimating dynamic policyrelevant treatment effects. We find that a 10% increase in course availability would increase the
medium-term earnings of affected workers by 3%, with largely homogeneous effects across the skill
distribution. Moreover, we find similar-sized impacts for larger program expansions, yet document
that the effects are heterogeneous across dynamic response types, as workers induced to participate
in both periods would enjoy the largest gains from the policy change.
Our paper contributes to an extensive literature on the effect of training programs on labor
market outcomes. In a non-experimental context, the inherent identification challenge follows from
potential self-selection into training.12 To deal with this concern, various papers have relied on individual fixed effect estimators to account for unobserved individual heterogeneity.13 While Heckman
9

This result stands in contrast with the positive continuation value of high school and college completion found
by Heckman et al. (2016).
10
In Section 5.3, we examine the difference between continuation values and dynamic complementarity (substitutability). We note that while the latter is informative about the production function of human capital of training
across multiple periods, continuation values include workers’ endogenous second-period participation decisions.
11
These results indicate that the post-school human capital production function differs from that of school-age
children, for whom dynamic substitutability is positive (Cunha et al., 2006)
12
An extensive literature has identified the short-term effects of training through experimental variation (Attanasio
et al. (2011), Card et al. (2011), Alzúa et al. (2014), Attanasio et al. (2015), Ibarrarán et al. (2015), among others).
However, sample sizes in this literature tend to be small and the external validity of empirical estimates debatable.
13
In the meta-analysis of Card et al. (2010), 51% of the studies implement some version of the fixed-effect estimator.
See also Ashenfelter (1978), Lynch (1992), Booth (1993), Veum (1997), and Lengermann (1999).

4

et al. (1998, 1999) show that the standard fixed-effect estimator can effectively remove selection
bias, this estimation strategy does not account for dynamic selection into training or estimate heterogeneous returns.14 As a result, we first contribute to this literature by considering dynamic
sorting into job training participation.15 Moreover, we estimate heterogeneous returns to training
across workers’ unobserved ability and allow for the effects to vary across training histories and
time periods, noting these parameters have not been previously estimated in the job training literature. We additionally present the first estimates of the dynamic returns to training for employed
workers and decompose the effect into direct effects and continuation values, while exploring the
difference between continuation values and dynamic complementarity (substitutability).16 Lastly,
we contribute to a growing literature exploring policy relevant treatment effects by defining dynamic response types and estimating the heterogeneous impacts of a policy change across each
group (Heckman and Vytlacil, 2001; Carneiro et al., 2010; Mogstad et al., 2018; Mogstad and
Torgovitsky, 2018).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model of sequential training participation with unobserved heterogeneity. Section 3 describes the institutional setup, data
sources, sample characteristics and presents reduced-form estimates. Section 4 presents the estimated model parameters, considers goodness of fit, and documents the implied patterns of selection
on unobservables. Section 5 defines the static and dynamic treatment parameters and presents evidence on the returns to job training. Section 6 discusses the simulated policy intervention, defines
and identifies dynamic response types and presents evidence on the returns to the policy change.
We conclude in Section 7.

14

Many of the commonly-used reduced-form estimators are unable to identify meaningful, or policy-relevant, causal
parameters in dynamic contexts. See Callaway and Sant’Anna (2018), de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille (2018),
and Goodman-Bacon (2018) for analyses showing how differences-in-differences estimators fail to identify treatment
effects parameters in the dynamic context.
15
Abbring and van den Berg (2003) establishes non-parametric identification of a duration model where training
occurs randomly in time. However, their identification result is established assuming individuals do not anticipate
(and thus do not act on) the treatment timing. Our framework does not rely in this no-anticipation assumption as
individuals are allowed to choose when to participate in training. Abbring and Heckman (2007) and Lechner (2009)
also discuss identification in the context of dynamic program participation.
16
We note that Abbring and van den Berg (2003); Fitzenberger and Völter (2007); Fredriksson and Johansson
(2008); Fitzenberger et al. (2016) have previously estimated dynamic returns to training for unemployed workers.
However, analyzing the dynamic returns to training for employed workers is of particular interest to labor economists,
as existing theoretical models show that both firms and workers should benefit from programs which provide employees
with a broad set of skills required to perform the job (Acemoglu and Pischke, 1999).

5

2

Dynamic Discrete Choice Model

In this section, we introduce a conceptual framework characterizing the dynamics of training decisions and labor market outcomes. The model follows Heckman and Navarro (2007) and Heckman
et al. (2016), yet it is adapted to the context of job training decisions. It allows earnings counterfactuals to vary freely across all potential histories of training choices. As discussed below, its
non-parametric identification is secured through the combination of a matching-on-unobservables
assumption and exclusion restrictions. We start this section by presenting the theoretical model
and continue with its identification and estimation.

2.1

Model

The essence of the model involves an agent making training choices for many periods and earnings,
which directly depend on training decisions. In any period t, potential earnings depend on her
current training decision as well as on the entire history of training activities.17 In period t, the
agent makes her optimal decision by potentially taking into account past, present, and future
training decisions and associated labor market outcomes.18 The agent is allowed to participate in
job training as frequently as desired.
We model the dynamic training decision as a tree of sequential binary decisions, where the
individual chooses training in each stage t ∈ T ≡ {1, ..., T }. Figure 1 depicts this decision tree for
our case, where T = 2. We define Ht as the set of all possible training decisions histories up through
time t. An element in that set, ht ∈ Ht , represents a specific training path. For instance, in period
t = 2, H2 = {0, 1}, where h2 = 1 if the agent was trained in t = 1 and 0 otherwise. Likewise,
H3 = {(0, 0), (1, 0), (1, 0), (1, 1)}, where each element ht ≡ (i, j) denotes the training decision in
period t = 1 (first component) and t = 2 (second component).19
At each choice node, agent i solves a simple benefit-cost analysis to make her next training
17
We focus on training choices for workers who do not fall into unemployment. We thus abstract from modeling the
employment decision, which could affect the probability of training. We note the model could generally accommodate
unemployment as an outcome variable, however.
18
As we explain below, we do not explicitly specify individual preferences and expectations formation. Hence,
forward-looking behavior is not imposed in the model.
19
At this point, we depart from Heckman and Navarro (2007) and Heckman et al. (2016). In these models, a
particular education path restricts the choice set (for example, getting a GED implies that the individual cannot
attain the high school graduate node). In contrast, our model allows for the option of training independently of
previous decisions.

6

choice. Let Dit (ht ) be her training decision in period t, for history ht ∈ Ht . Dit (ht ) equals one if
she decides to participate in a training program and zero otherwise. Her optimal choice is given
by:

Dit (ht ) =




1

if Iit (ht ) ≥ 0



0

otherwise

ht ∈ Ht , t ∈ T

(1)

where Iit (ht ) denotes the net value of training in period t for a given history ht ∈ Ht . Iit (ht )
could incorporate non-pecuniary benefits and costs of training. In principle, expression 1 provides
a general framework. It can accommodate, for example, forward-looking agents anticipating and
acting based on present and future benefits of training in period t, who are uncertain with respect
to the true model that generates counterfactual earnings. We model the decision process using a
linear-in-the-parameters equation to approximate the individual net benefit of training:

Iit (ht ) = XiI β I (ht ) + θi λI (ht ) + εIit (ht )

ht ∈ H, t ∈ T ,

(2)

where XiI is a vector of individual characteristics (observed by the econometrician and the agent),
θi (with E(θi ) = 0) represents a fixed, latent ability endowment known by the agent but not
the econometrician, and εIit (ht ) is an unobserved measurement error term. The effects of observed
characteristics and unobserved ability on the value of training vary across time periods and training
histories.20
The agent progresses through each node after making training choices, and for each possible
choice and training history, there is an associated labor market outcome. Let Yit (ht , j) be potential
earnings for a training decision j ∈ {0, 1} made by worker i at time t with history ht . Following
Heckman et al. (2016), the potential outcome associated with j ∈ {0, 1} and ht ∈ Ht is given by:
Yit (ht , j) = XiY β Y (ht , j) + λY (ht , j)θi + Yit (ht , j)

j ∈ {0, 1}, ht ∈ H, t ∈ T ,

(3)

where XiY is a vector of observed characteristics. λY (ht , j)θi + Yit (ht , j) is latent productivity,
20

This specification can accommodate any type of preferences. For example, it can be considered as an approximation of the value function of a forward-looking agent looking to maximize the present value of the earnings streams
(Heckman et al., 2016).

7

which is unobserved by the econometrician. This unobserved component is separable into an
ability component known by the agent at all times (θi ) and an idiosyncratic shock to productivity
that the agent cannot anticipate (Yit (ht , j)). As with the training choice equation, the parameters
of the earnings equation are allowed to vary with training counterfactual choices.
Equations (2) and (3) imply that a common (and constant) factor, θi , drives the endogeneity
of choices and outcomes. The rest of the unobserved components of the model are independent
across choices and outcomes as well as across time and training histories.21 Thus, conditional on
XiY and XiI , θi generates all cross-correlations of outcomes and choices: θi produces the so-called
“ability bias” (Card, 1999), as high-ability individuals may have larger returns from training than
low-ability workers. Since ability is unobserved by the econometrician, OLS estimates of equation
(3) are biased. Our model extends Card’s logic to a dynamic context: the earnings return to
different paths of training choices (ht , j) vary across the latent ability distribution.
Following a large body of literature on static and dynamic treatment effects, we extract the
latent ability factor using a measurement system.22 We do not observe θi , but approximate it
through a set of variables measuring an initial ability endowment, as these measures of observed
prior to labor market entry and training decisions. Let Tk represent a measure of ability, for
k ∈ K ≡ {1, 2, 3, 4}. The measurement system is given by:

T T
Tik = Xik
βk + θi λTk + εTik

k ∈ K,

(4)

T is a vector of exogenous control variables and εI (h) ⊥ εT for all (h, k) ∈ H × K,
where Xik
it
ik

εYit (j, h) ⊥ εTik for all (t, j, k) ∈ T × {0, 1} × K, and εTk ⊥ εTv for all k, v ∈ K.

2.2

Identification and Estimation

The identification of the joint distribution of counterfactual outcomes and choices is achieved in
three steps.23 First, we identify the distribution of θ using the measurement system. In this step, the
Formally, we assume that εIit (h) ⊥ εIit (h0 ) for all (t, h) ∈ T × H, εIit (h) ⊥ εYit (j, h) for all (t, j, h) ∈ T × {0, 1} × H,
and εYit (j, h) ⊥ εYit0 (j 0 , h0 ) for all (t, j, h) ∈ T × {0, 1} × H
22
Carneiro et al. (2003), Hansen et al. (2004), Heckman et al. (2006), Heckman and Navarro (2007), Heckman
et al. (2013), Attanasio et al. (2015), Agostinelli and Wiswall (2016a), Agostinelli and Wiswall (2016b), and Heckman
et al. (2016) are just a few examples.
23
Our identification argument follows by applying Theorems 1 and 2 of that Heckman and Navarro (2007) to any
particular node. See also Heckman et al. (2016).
21

8

distribution of the factor is nonparametrically identified up to a normalization (which usually takes
the form of setting one factor loading αk = 1), and by assuming that unobserved ability is orthogonal
T}
to Xi ≡ (XiY , XiI , {Xik
k∈K ). By identifying the joint distribution of counterfactual outcomes,

we can also identify the distribution of the treatment effect parameters of interest. Second, we
invoke that, conditional on θ and X, all choices and outcomes are independent—a “matching”
assumption, which allows for matching on unobserved dimensions. Third, identification is aided
with independent variation in the choice and outcome equations to apply an identification-at-infinity
argument. We achieve this condition by using instruments with enough support. We use the average
training hours at the firm and all firms within a certain geographical location (“comuna”) where
the individual is currently working. Hence, we use these variables as node-specific instruments.
An implicit assumption behind these exclusion restrictions is that an individual does not alter her
behavior—in a way that could affect her earnings—due to working in a firm that is more or less
likely to invest in training.24 We argue that it is unlikely that individuals sort into firms based
on the propensity of that firm to let workers participate in training hours, especially since average
training hours at the firm is not public information.25 Moreover, Heckman et al. (2016) argue
that, for an instrument to meet the standard exclusion and exogeneity restrictions, agents cannot
anticipate the value of the instrument in future periods. In our context, this argument implies that
hours at the firm and comuna level are revealed to workers at the time of each training decision,
rather than in the initial period.
For estimation purposes, we define the sample likelihood as follows. Let Ψ be the vector that
collects the set of structural parameters. Given our independence assumptions, the likelihood for
a set of I individuals is given by:


oHt
Y Z Y
Y Y n
T

L(Ψ | X, Y ) =
f (Tik | Xik
, θ)
f (Yit | XiY , θ)P r(Ht = 1 | XiI , θ)
dF (θ) ,
i∈I

θ k∈K

t∈T ht ∈Ht

24

Related to this issue, Ba et al. (2017) discuss how identification of the effects of training programs in an
experimental setting breaks down when individuals anticipate having a subsidized training in future periods and so
they change behavior today (for example, by lowering their present employment search intensity).
25
For the first training node, we use the number of hours the employing firm used two years prior to the worker’s
participation decision (at t = −1 in the timing of the model). Similarly, for the second-period decision, we use average
hours two years before, at t = 0. The correlation between these two variables is 0.397, indicating that a non-negligible
share of the workers in our sample change firms in their first two years in the labor market. We explore differential
returns to training for firm-stayers and switchers in Appendix C.

9

where we assume that idiosyncratic shocks in the choice process (equation 2), earnings regression
(equation 3), and measurement system (equation 4) follow independent normal distributions. F (θ)
represents the unobserved ability’s cdf. We adopt a flexible approach to estimate F (θ):

θ ∼ ρ1 N (τ1 , σ12 ) + ρ2 N (τ2 , σ22 ).

Given the numeric complexity in estimating the likelihood, we estimate the model by Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC). Using the estimated model, we simulate 20 samples from the original sample,
each new sample associated to a different draw from the posterior of distribution of structural
parameters.

3

Data Sources, Descriptive Analysis, and Institutional Details

3.1

Data Sources and Institutional Characteristics

In this paper, we examine the effects of a nationwide funding scheme for job training programs
called Franquicia Tributaria (FT) in Chile. The program funds training courses for a significant
number of workers in the country in any given year through a large-scale subsidy for training
expenditures undertaken by firms.26 As a result, the program targets formal-sector workers. While
all workers are theoretically eligible for the program, the design of the funding scheme implies that
those at larger firms are more likely to participate in training through FT.27 Training courses are
held off-the-job, in centers managed by private providers.28 There are three types of training courses
covered by FT (Comisión Revisora del Sistema de Capacitación e Intermediación Laboral, 2011):
(i) short-term courses, including industry-specific programs (such as learning to operate heavy
machinery), general-skills courses (such as Microsoft Excel courses), as well as programs focused on
soft skills; (ii) short-term degrees leading to specialization in specific disciplines; (iii) professional

26

In 2010, FT funded training courses for 920,688 workers, 12% of the labor force in that year. Using information
from Chile’s national accounts and data from Carrillo et al. (2018), we estimate the total cost of FT to be 0.08% of
the GDP.
27
FT subsidizes firms through a tax exemption, with a cap set at 1% of the firms’ annual payroll. Carrillo et al.
(2018) show that the government subsidizes 80% of the total cost of courses, making FT courses relatively inexpensive
for firms.
28
There are over 15,000 providers in the market. Courses are generally scheduled after-work and on weekends,
ensuring they do not interfere with regular work schedules.

10

conferences.29 The predominant role played by the private sector in training course provision under
FT resembles that of the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) in the United States. On of the main
goals of the WIA (which replaced the Job Training Partnership Act), was to strengthen the role
of the private sector (Barnow and Smith, 2016). In practice, the WIA defined individual training
accounts (vouchers for training) by which individuals can choose short-term, off-the-job, training
courses held in private providers.30 While the workers targeted by the FT program are different
than those in the WIA, we note that our analysis speaks to the effectiveness of short-term courses
that are also commonly used in other contexts.
To recover training histories and associated labor market outcomes, we construct a novel
database that merges three different sources of information. First, we take advantage of administrative records from Franquicia Tributaria. Using this data source, we construct workers’ training
histories by observing their participation in FT-subsidized courses from 1998 through 2010. We analyze labor market outcomes using information from Chile’s Unemployment Insurance (UI) system.
UI data registers workers’ monthly earnings and the firm of employment for all workers with formal
sector contracts. We focus on the worker’s main employment stint in each quarter and examine
earnings in the first quarter of the year following the training event. For notational simplicity, we
refer to the outcome variable as contemporaneous with the training event at time t. Lastly, our
final source of information comes from performance in a college-entry examination (PSU), which is
a mandatory test for all students who wish to enter a post-secondary institution. We observe PSU
scores for all high school graduates who took the test between 2000 and 2007. Using individual
identifiers, we recover PSU scores of workers to supplement our data of labor market outcomes and
training choices. We work with standardized PSU test scores (computed separately by year). The
PSU database also includes information on student’s observable characteristics, such as gender,
age, parental education, family size, and parental employment at the time of the test.
To circumvent threats to identification and for computational tractability, we restrict our sample
in several ways. First, we focus our attention on the returns to multiple job training courses for
young workers who are first-time labor entrants. We impose this restriction given that we do not
29
Courses of type (i) and (iii) must be of five hours at least while courses type (ii) must be over 100 hours. In
2009, the duration of the average job training course was 19.3 hours (Comisión Revisora del Sistema de Capacitación
e Intermediación Laboral, 2011).
30
Andersson et al. (2013) find moderate effects of receiving WIA training (plus possibly other types of job-related
services) on employment and earnings.

11

observe training histories before 1998; if training choices depend on prior training decisions, then
we would be omitting a relevant variable—past training—in the choice equation.31 We use the
sample of young workers, identify their first year of employment, and follow their labor market
history thereafter—by definition, their job training history in our first period is zero. Second, for
tractability, we restrict our analysis to training stints during their first two years in the labor force
and examine extensive-margin training decisions on a yearly basis. As a result, workers are trained
at most twice during our period of interest. Third, we restrict the sample to individuals who are
eligible to participate in training financed by FT—that is, individuals who work in the formal
sector. As our analysis of worker self-selection into training requires workers to be able to take
part in courses each year if they want to, we limit the sample to individuals who are employed for
at least nine months in each of their first two years in the labor force in firms with at least ten
employees.32 In this way, we analyze a group of workers who are effectively eligible for training
each year. By doing so, we abstract from analyzing effects of training on employment.33 We focus
on labor market entrants from years 2003-2008 and their training choices two years after entry.
Our final sample consists of 37,089 workers who meet all of the above criteria.

3.2

Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents summary statistics for our sample. 54% of individuals in our sample are women.
The age at the time of taking the college entrance exam is in line with the average for the country
(close to 18 years old). The average GPA and PSU scores in math and language are largely in line
with the national average. The average monthly salary in the first quarter of the second year in
the labor force equals 551 dollars, reaching 624 dollars after the second year in the labor market.
Table 2 reports summary statistics across workers’ training participation in their first two years
in the labor force. A training group is denoted as (h, h0 ), where the first and second entries denote
training participation in the first and second period, respectively (h, h0 ∈ {0, 1}). The never-trained
group is by far the largest in our sample, representing 61 % of all individuals. This group has a lower
31

This omission could influence the estimation of the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity. See Heckman
(1981) and Arellano and Honore (2001) for a related discussion.
32
The structure of the FT subsidy implies that the cost to medium- and large-sized firms is significantly smaller
than for firms with less than ten employees. Since UI data indicates that 90% of formal-sector employment in Chile
is at firms with at least ten employees, this restriction is not necessarily binding.
33
Our focus on the earnings dimension makes our paper comparable in scope to the on-the-job training literature.

12

PSU and GPA than workers in all other groups, with the largest difference appearing relative to
always-trained workers. The unconditional earnings differential between these two groups reaches
48 and 45% for the first and second period, respectively. We highlight earnings differentials across
workers trained only in the first year relative to second year trainees, as in a world of constant
returns to training, earnings differentials should not appear for these workers. In this context,
later-trained workers earn higher salaries than early-trainees, despite similar test score performance.
These intertemporal earnings differences across groups with similar stock of training suggest the
presence of different treatment effects of job training over time.

3.3

Reduced-Form Analysis

The descriptive statistics presented above highlight important differences in baseline characteristics and outcomes across training participation groups. We further explore whether training is
associated with increased earnings by first estimating the following panel-data model:
Yitf = δDit + Xit0 β + αt + κi + εitf ,

(5)

where Yitf represents the log of earnings for worker i, in period t (year since the individual entered
the labor market), working at firm f . Dit is a dummy that equals 1 if individual i was trained at
time t and zero otherwise, αt is a year fixed effect and κi an individual fixed effect. δ recovers the
average effect of training on earnings in period t. This equation represents a common approach
followed by the literature on training programs (Card et al., 2010).
Table 3 presents the estimated results following from different versions of equation (5). Column
1 shows that concurrent training participation is associated with an earnings gain in the range of
22%. Since background characteristics may affect both training participation and labor market
outcomes, in Column 2, we add control variables, including baseline test score performance. Here,
the estimated impact of training remains both economically and statistically significant, reaching
18 percent. Given that OLS estimates might not account for potential sorting on unobserved characteristics, in the third column, we add an individual fixed effect. We find that the estimated
impact of job training is significantly lower, falling to 0.9 percent, though remaining statistically
significant. This result fits in with previous findings by Frazis and Loewenstein (2007), who show

13

that that controlling for unobserved heterogeneity through an individual fixed effect largely attenuates the estimated impacts of training in an OLS regression. In the last column, we include
firm fixed effects to explore whether the returns to training are explained by workers sorting into
higher-quality firms. We do not find major changes in the estimated returns to training.
While the fixed-effect estimation in Table 3 may eliminate selection bias, this regression might
not identify a pre-determined parameter of interest. First, Goodman-Bacon (2018) shows that in
setting where the timing of treatment varies, the usual fixed effect estimator recovers a weighted
average of all possible pairs of the underlying differences-in-differences estimator. Moreover, when
treatment effects are not constant, some of these weights might be even negative (de Chaisemartin
and D’Haultfœuille, 2018). In the context of our model of choices and counterfactual outcomes,
Appendix A defines and tests the assumptions needed for fixed-effect estimators to recover the
average treatment effect of training. A first-difference estimator recovers the ATE of training only
if: (i) the earnings returns from training are constant across time and training histories and, (ii)
the earnings returns from training do not vary with unobserved ability. In Appendix A, using
our model estimates, we find evidence against the null hypothesis of lack of differential gains at
conventional significance levels.34 Second, the parallel-trends assumption required for identification
in reduced-form analyses may not hold if agents sort into training based on unobserved gains from
training. Third, even under a parallel trends assumption and assuming a correctly re-weighted
fixed-effect estimator (Callaway and Sant’Anna, 2018; de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille, 2018),
we would still miss potentially important questions for understanding the nature of job training
programs: To what extent do workers self-select into training based on unobserved characteristics?
What is the medium-term effect of training participation? What is the role of continuation values
and dynamic complementarity (substitutability) in the returns to training?

34
We present reduced-form evidence of heterogeneous effects of training by estimating an OLS regression of different
training histories against quarterly earnings in the first period (Table A.2). Confirming the results in Table 2, always
trained students outearn both their never-trained and once-trained peers—yet the main difference appears among
workers who are trained only once: late-trainees outearn first-year training participants by 8.1 percent. This analysis
is similar to the estimation of multi-valued treatment effects, as in Cattaneo (2010).

14

4

Model Estimates

This section presents the results from the estimation of our discrete choice model. First, we define the variables included in the implementation of the model. We then present the estimated
parameters and analyze the extent of sorting on unobserved ability.

4.1

Model Implementation

Table 4 shows the variables we include in the measurement system, training probit and earnings
equation. In the measurement system, we include age at the time at the time of PSU, as it may
affect test score performance. To identify the distribution of the latent factor, we rely on four
different measures, including language and math PSU test scores, high school GPA, and initial
wage at the time of entry. We include the initial wage in the measurement system to better capture
baseline productivity prior to training choices. In the choice equations, we use age and, as noted
above, we include the average training hours at the firm and all firms within a certain geographical
location (comuna) where the individual is currently working. Lastly, in the earnings equation, we
include a gender dummy, age, and a constant.

4.2

Estimated Parameters

Tables B.1-B.3 show the estimated parameters of our econometric model. In Table B.1, we present
the estimated parameters of the measurement system. We find that latent ability loads positively
on both test score measures, high school GPA, and the initial salary. To understand the relative
contribution of observed characteristics and latent ability vector to test score measures, we present
a variance decomposition in Figure 2. The unobserved ability measure explains 62% of the variance
in the initial salary, but only 5%, 3% and 4% of the math PSU and verbal PSU scores and high
school GPA, respectively. Hence, our measure of unobserved ability is more related to initial labor
market productivity than workers’ academic performance at high school graduation.35 In Figure
3, we depict the distribution of the unobserved ability factor. As the estimated unconditional
distribution of θ does not exhibit considerable deviations from normality, we note that assuming
35

Including initial salary as part of the measurement system involves a trade-off in estimating the distribution of
ability: it reduces the share of the variance in test scores explained by the unobserved factor but allows to better
capture unobserved ability at the time of labor market entry.

15

a standard normal distribution for the distribution of unobserved ability should not significantly
change selection patters and the estimated returns to training.
Tables B.2 and B.3 present the estimated parameters of the training and earnings equations.
Across all choice nodes, women are more likely to participate in training and more skilled individuals
are more likely to participate in job training. Moreover, workers in firms with a large share of
workers participating in FT courses as well as those in geographic areas with more training course
availability are more likely to have participated in training in any period.36 The earnings equations
indicate that males outearn women by upwards of 0.07 log points. No discernible pattern arises
with respect to age-earnings profile. Latent ability has positive effects on earnings, and this result
holds across all training nodes. Lastly, we assess the model’s accuracy in predicting observed
outcomes and choices. Figure 4 compares observed and simulated training histories. The model
matches training decisions well, both in the first and second year. Table 5 contrasts the means and
standard deviations of log wages by year and training choices. Overall, simulated earnings show
some differences with observed earnings but these gaps are smaller than 0.07 log points in all but
one case.

4.3

Selection on Unobserved Characteristics

Figure 5 compares the density of the unobserved ability for workers choosing different training
paths. Training choice are denoted by (h, h0 ), where h and h0 denote participation decisions in
periods t = 1 and t = 2, respectively. We find significant differences in the density of ability
across one-time participants, depending on the timing of the decision. While the latent ability for
those who choose training in the first period but not in the second (1, 0) almost entirely overlaps
with the density of the never-trained group, the distribution of the unobserved factor for those in
the (0, 1) group clearly surpasses the never-trained group. The always-trained group (1, 1) has the
largest ability stock relative to that of workers following other training paths, resembling differences
shown in baseline test scores in Table 2. In fact, the never-trained group trails their always-trained
counterparts by 0.83 standard deviations in the latent skill distribution. Overall, we find evidence
of selection on unobservables, as higher-skilled workers are more likely to have participated in job
36

The only statistically insignificant coefficient corresponds to the one on local-level course availability in the
training equation of period t = 2, conditional on training in the first period.

16

training.

5

Treatment effects of Job Training on Earnings

This section presents evidence on the impact of job training on earnings. We define and estimate
treatment effects both in the static and dynamic sense. We examine the mechanisms driving
the dynamic effects of training, by estimating dynamic complementarity (substitutability) in the
context of job training participation as well as continuation values. We also examine heterogeneous
impacts across the latent ability distribution.

5.1

Static Analysis

We first present evidence on static treatment effects, which capture the effects of training conditional
on reaching a particular choice node. Given that we examine earnings in the quarter following the
training event, this parameter recovers the short-term effects of training. We first present evidence
on the average treatment effect (ATE). Let E[.] denote the expected value taken with respect to
the distribution of (X, θ, ε), where ε is the collection of idiosyncratic shocks determining outcomes
and choices ε ≡ (εIj , εYs ). We define the average treatment effect as follows:37
AT E1 ≡ E[Yi1 (1) − Yi1 (0)],

(6)

AT E2 (h2 ) ≡ E[Yi2 (h2 , 1) − Yi1 (h2 , 0) | Di1 = h2 ]

with h2 ∈ H2 ≡ {0, 1},

(7)

where Yi1 (1) − Yi1 (0) is the effect of first-period training on first-period earnings. Yi2 (h2 , 1) −
Yi1 (h2 , 0) denotes the impact of second-period training on second-period earnings, conditional on
a training history h2 ∈ {0, 1}. We can additionally estimate the effects of training conditional on
having participated in a particular node. That is, the treatment on the treated (TT) parameter is
defined as:

T T1 ≡ E[Yi1 (1) − Yi1 (0) | Di1 = 1],

(8)

T T2 (h2 ) ≡ E[Yi2 (h2 , 1) − Yi2 (h2 , 0) | Di2 (h2 ) = 1, Di1 = h2 ]
37

with h2 ∈ H2 ≡ {0, 1}.

In our main empirical analysis, we use similar ATE parameters that are conditional on θ.

17

(9)

We present the estimated static returns to job training in Table 6. We estimate the average
treatment effect across different training periods and histories.38 The average short-term effect
of first-period training on earnings (AT E1 ) equals 1.7%. The effect on earnings conditional on
first-period training (T T1 ) does not differ significantly from AT E1 . For second-period training,
conditional on no training in the first year (AT E2 (0)), we find bigger short-term effect on earnings,
reaching 3.4%. This effect exceeds those of second-year participation for workers who had been
trained in the first period (AT E2 (1)), which equals 0.4%. Across both second-period returns, we
find that the treatment on the treated parameters (T T2 (0) and T T2 (1)) are in the same order of
magnitude with the average treatment effect parameters (AT E2 (0) and AT E2 (1)). Lastly, we note
that while the ATE parameters are positive on average, a considerable share of workers would
enjoy a negative return from program participation: first-period training (P r(AT E1 < 0)) lowers
earnings for 45% of workers in our sample.39
The estimated short-run effects of training (ATEs and TTs) are similar to the fixed-effects
estimates, presented in Table 3. However, ATEs and TTs do not necessarily coincide with the
parameters identified by fixed-effects regressions. The coefficient associated with job training in
the fixed-effects model is a weighted average—with potentially negative weights— across the three
treatment effect parameters (Callaway and Sant’Anna, 2018; de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille,
2018; Goodman-Bacon, 2018). Furthermore, as we show in Appendix A, the conditions for a firstdifference estimator to recover ATE are not met in our sample.
Figures 6 and 7 examine heterogeneous effects of training by estimating a non-linear regression
of the estimated treatment effects (ATE and TT) onto the latent skill distribution. In the first
year of training (Figure 6), we find larger returns to participation for less-skilled workers, though
the returns profile is largely flat across the skill distribution (both for AT E1 and T T1 ). Larger
differences appear in the returns to second year training (Figure 7). Among workers who had
not been initially trained (AT E2 (0)), training has larger effects on earnings for high-skill workers,
38

We show 95 percent confidence intervals in brackets. Standard errors are obtained from our simulated sample
and capture the sample variation of ATE and TT for a given structural parameters as well as parameters’ uncertainty
coming from the estimated posteriors.
39
We also find negative earnings returns for a non-negligible share of program participants. Since our econometric
model is agnostic about the role of expectations in the decision-making process, we cannot directly distinguish whether
the negative returns could be explained through financial regret—individuals do not correctly predict the monetary
gains following from training—or through psychic costs—the agent is willing to accept a negative monetary return
because training yields non pecuniary benefits.

18

exceeding 4% for those in the top decile of the skill distribution, while remaining close to 3% for
individuals in the bottom decile. For first-period participants (AT E2 (1)), the impact of secondperiod training for less-skilled workers stays around 1%, whereas the effects are not different from
zero for workers above the latent skill median.40
In short, the estimated static treatment effects reveal heterogeneous impacts across different
decision margins, job training histories, and latent ability. As such, the constant effect framework
required in fixed-effect estimators is rejected in favor of a model of differential short-term gains
from job training.

5.2

Dynamic Treatment Effects of Sequential Training Decisions

While we have so far analyzed short-term treatment effects, job training may also affect mediumand long-term labor market outcomes. In this section, we extend our analysis by defining and
estimating dynamic treatment effects of sequential training decisions. Furthermore, we analyze
heterogeneous effects across the skill distribution and identify the mechanisms through which job
training affects labor market outcomes, by estimating the direct effect and continuation value of
training.41
Our goal is to identify the returns to training participation in terms of the present value of
earnings.42 Formally, let Ye1 (j) be the present value of earnings associated with choosing training
option j in period t = 1 (D1 = j). Since we work with two time periods, we define Yei (j) as:

Yei (j) ≡ Yi1 (j) + ρ (Di2 (j)Yi2 (j, 1) + (1 − Di2 (j))Yi2 (j, 0)) ,

j ∈ H2 ≡ {0, 1}

where ρ is a discount factor. Di2 (j) denotes second-period participation and Yi2 (h, j) are earnings
for training choice j, given history h.43 The individual-level dynamic treatment effect is thus given

40

In two training nodes, job training has larger effects on less-skilled individuals. This type of reversed-Roy
selection has also been found in other contexts. Kline and Walters (2016) find that children who are less likely to
attend Head Start gain more from it, which is consistent with evidence from Germany (Cornelissen et al., 2017).
Mountjoy (2018) finds suggestive evidence that the returns to two-year colleges are larger for those who are less likely
to attend, a result in line with findings in the context of post-secondary education in Chile (Rodriguez et al., 2016).
41
Heckman and Navarro (2007) and Heckman et al. (2016) perform a similar decomposition. We compare our
results with those of Heckman et al. (2016).
42
Even though we focus on the effect of two training events, our framework can be extended to evaluate the impact
of training decisions on life-time earnings.
43
In what follows, we transform counterfactual earnings from logs to levels to compute treatment effects.

19

by Yei (1) − Yei (0). This effect can be decomposed as:

Yei (1) − Yei (0) =

(Yi1 (1) − Yi1 (0)) + ρ[Yi2 (1, 0) − Yi2 (0, 0)] +
|
{z
}
|
{z
}

Direct effect (short-term)

Direct effect (medium-term)

ρ [Di2 (1)(Yi2 (1, 1) − Yi2 (1, 0)) − Di2 (0)(Yi2 (0, 1) − Yi2 (0, 0))] .
{z
}
|

(10)

Continuation value

The first two terms of the right-hand side capture the direct effect of training at t = 1 (properly discounted). The first term and second represent the direct effect of training on earnings immediately
following participation and two years after the event, respectively. The third term corresponds to
the continuation value of training, which represents the additional gain (if any) of training in the
second-period from training in first period for those who take up training in t = 2. This term allows
us to explore whether early training increases the returns to additional training stints.44
In Table 7, we estimate the following dynamic treatment parameters:

i
Yei (1) − Yei (0) /Yei (0) ,

i
h
DT T ≡ E Yei (1) − Yei (0) /Yei (0) | Di1 = 1 ,
h

i
DT U T ≡ E Yei (1) − Yei (0) /Yei (0) | Di1 = 0 ,

DAT E ≡ E

h

(11)
(12)
(13)

and decompose them into short- and medium-term direct effects and continuation values (equation
10).45 The dynamic average treatment effect (DATE) indicates that job training in the first period
in the labor force increases the present value of earnings by 3.6%. This result is driven largely by
the direct effect of job training, as first-period participation increases earnings (in present-value
terms) by 1.1 and 2.5% one and two years after training, respectively.46 However, early training
lowers the returns to training in the second period—the continuation value—by 0.04%, though the
effect is not statistically significant. This result is consistent with the estimates of Table 6, which
indicates a lower impact on earnings of second-period training, for those who choose training in
the first period compared to those who do not. All in all, the direct effects make up for the bulk
44

Note that a reduced-form approach is unable to decompose treatment effects into the three components of
equation (10). Furthermore, a fixed-effects set-up implicitly assumes away continuation values.
45
For this exercise, we assume a discount factor ρ = 1/(1.05). In addition, we present our results as % increase
from the average baseline present value of earnings (Yei (0)).
46
The short-term direct effect is equivalent to the static treatment effect presented in Table 6.

20

of the estimated DATE (101%), whereas continuation value accounts for a small part of the total
effect (-1%). As with the static treatment effects, we find similar effects in the dynamic TT and
TUT parameters.
In Figure 8, we examine heterogeneous dynamic treatment effects across the latent skill distribution, while decomposing the effects into direct effects and the continuation value. Confirming
the results shown in Figure 6, the short-term direct effects of training are decreasing across the
skill distribution. In contrast, the medium-term direct effects are larger for higher-skilled workers. Lastly, we find that the continuation value of training decreases across the skill distribution.
The combination of these three elements leads to a DATE that is largely flat across the ability
distribution.
We note that the estimated continuation value of job training stands in contrast with those
estimated in the context of formal schooling. For example, Heckman et al. (2016) find that the
bulk of the return to high school graduation (around 70%) and to college enrollment (25%) is
explained by the continuation value of schooling, with a larger share for higher-skilled students. On
the other hand, we find negative continuation values for high-ability workers, yet the contribution
of continuation values to the total return to first-period training is small compared to that of the
direct effect components.

5.3

Continuation Values and Dynamic Complementarity (Substitutability)

In this subsection, we examine the conceptual and empirical difference between continuation values and dynamic complementarity (substitutability), two commonly estimated parameters in the
context of dynamic skill development. Even though these two parameters are closely related phenomena, they represent different components of the production function of human capital. Since
dynamic complementarity (substitutability) captures whether first period training raises (reduces)
the return to training in future periods, it is informative about the underlying “technology” of job
training.47 We can formalize this intuition by noting that continuation values can be decomposed

47

Continuation values are estimated conditional on second-period training participation. Following equation 11
note that for workers who do not take up second-period training, the continuation value equals zero by construction.

21

as follows:

Di2 (1)(Yi2 (1, 1) − Yi2 (1, 0)) − Di2 (0)(Yi2 (0, 1) − Yi2 (0, 0)) =
|
{z
}
Continuation Value

(Yi2 (1, 1) − Yi2 (1, 0)) − (Yi2 (0, 1) − Yi2 (0, 0)) +
|
{z
}
Dynamic Complementarity/Substitutability

(1 − Di2 (0))(Yi2 (1, 1) − Yi2 (1, 0)) − (1 − Di2 (1))(Yi2 (0, 1) − Yi2 (0, 0))
|
{z
}

(14)

Dynamic Sorting Gains

The continuation value of training equals dynamic complementarity/substitutability plus a sorting
term we label “dynamic sorting gains.” As noted above, dynamic complementarity (substitutability) is informative about the production function of human capital of training across multiple
periods (Cunha and Heckman, 2006), exhibiting dynamic complementarity (substitutability) if the
return from training in a second period is higher (lower) conditional on first-period participation:
Yi2 (1, 1) − Yi2 (0, 1) > Yi2 (1, 0) − Yi2 (0, 0). The continuation value is partly driven by workers’
second-period participation decisions: when the continuation value is larger than the dynamic
complementarity (substitutability), workers are positively sorting into training participation.
In Figure 9, we present evidence from a local polynomial regression of dynamic complementarity
(substitutability) against unobserved ability (equation 14).48 First-period job training lowers the
return from subsequent participation, independent of second-period decisions: on average, we find
evidence of dynamic substitutability (-2.7%), which increases with ability. On the other hand,
dynamic sorting gains are positive (1.4% on average) and increasing with ability (4% for the top
10% of the distribution of ability), which fits in with the sorting patterns documented in Section
4.3.
In general, any human capital accumulation process is shaped by dynamic substitutability.
In our case, it may arise in various contexts. First, job training could comprise multiple courses
covering topics in the same area, with workers starting in a baseline course and subsequently taking
part in more complex coursework.49 In this setting, dynamic substitutability may appear if the
first course delivers critical information for improving job performance, with subsequent courses
48

As before, we estimate these returns as a share relative to baseline earnings, given by the present value of
earnings conditional on no training in the baseline period.
49
For example, workers first need to learn to operate a computer before taking a course on a specific software.

22

delivering less value-added. As a result, while early trainees would take the second course in their
second year in the labor force, non-trainees would participate in the initial course, which delivers
larger returns—thus yielding dynamic substitutability. This result may also appear in a context
of course heterogeneity, with individuals choosing the most important (or higher-return) courses
early on in their labor market careers and subsequently taking courses delivering lower returns.50
Workers could rationally follow such a strategy as the returns to the high-payoff courses could be
enjoyed over a longer time horizon (Ben-Porath, 1967).
Dynamic substitutability could also emerge if workers face the decision to either accumulate
human capital within the firm, or “outside” the firm, through job training courses. Since the
returns to training would then recover the gains from formal training relative to on-the-job training,
dynamic substitutability would indicate increasing returns to within-firm learning over time, rather
than capturing the underlying technology of job training. In this context, the returns to training
should be higher for workers switching firms, as the human capital accumulated in job training
would transfer to the new employer, though this would not be the case for prior within-firm learning.
To test for this possibility, we replicate our empirical analysis for a subsample of workers who do
not switch firms in their first two years in the labor force (“stayers”) in Appendix C.51 As we find
similar static and dynamic returns to training in the stayer subsample (Tables C.2 and C.3), we
argue that firm-switching behavior induced through job training participation does not drive the
estimated impacts of job training. Given these results, we next examine whether increased job
training course availability would improve labor market outcomes for young workers and assess the
costs and benefits arising from such an exercise.

6

Dynamic Policy-Relevant Treatment Effects

We have so far focused on estimating parameters such as the average treatment effect and the
treatment on the treated. However, these may not necessarily be relevant parameters for policy
purposes. For instance, workers induced to change their training choices through a particular policy
50

In this context, workers would first take courses directly related to their industry or occupation and subsequently
participate in foreign language courses, for example.
51
This sample consists of 22,247 of the original 37,089 workers—that is, 60% of our sample never switched firms
in the first two years of labor force participation. We do not directly model workers’ firm switching behavior, yet
remark that the characteristics and training choices of stayers are largely similar to those in the full sample (Figure
C.1 and Table C.1).

23

may have different observed and unobserved characteristics relative to the average worker, and
thus their estimated gains from training would not be captured by average population parameters
(Mogstad and Torgovitsky, 2018). In this section, we introduce a framework which allows us to
examine the returns to various policy alternatives, decompose the effects across response types, and
study dynamic responses to these policies.

6.1

Policy Intervention

To examine the impacts of a potential policy affecting training choices and associated outcomes,
we follow the literature that defines policy relevant treatment effects in terms of policy shocks
that do not affect marginal treatment effects (Heckman and Vytlacil, 2001; Carneiro et al., 2010;
Mogstad et al., 2018; Mogstad and Torgovitsky, 2018). In our context, we study the effect of a
policy that affects the net cost of first-period training while leaving fixed the net cost of secondperiod training. Concretely, we examine the effect of an increase in the number of average hours
of FT courses available across comunas in period t = 1. In practice, our simulation may capture
a temporary, unexpected shock to the training industry that increases the number of available
courses in the market through a policy intervention.52 Even though the policy change only affects
net costs of job training in the first period directly, it alters second-period decisions by shifting
workers’ progression through the training tree depicted in Figure 1. Furthermore, the simulated
policy change affects observed outcomes exclusively through training choices, not by influencing
counterfactual earnings.
To consider how such a policy would impact training choices, we introduce the following notaa

tion. Let Di1j be the training choice in period t = 1 in a given state of the world aj . We model the
policy change as a shift from a0 to a1 , which may lead to a change in training decisions in the first
a1
a0
period. For instance, workers who are first-period compliers are captured by (Di1
= 1, Di1
= 0).53

We return to these definitions below, but note that we assume that this policy does not affect

52

This policy change could also take place through a subsidy for FT providers to develop additional courses for
first-year labor market participants. Our framework can be extended to the case of policies that shift the cost of
training across multiple time periods. Here, we study the simplest case to illustrate the benefits of our model in terms
of revealing dynamic policy responses.
53
In each policy state aj , we keep fixed draws of all error terms and parameters from posterior distributions from
the baseline model. Thus, differences in choices between a0 and a1 stem exclusively from changes in the net utility
of training participation through a shift in the local availability of course hours.

24

counterfactual outcomes: Yi1 (j)a1 = Yi1 (j)a0 = Yi1 (j), j ∈ {0, 1}.54 Finally, the policy may affect
a

a

second-period choices through changes in first-period decisions: Di2j = Di2 (Di1j ).
Both the number of workers affected by the policy and the estimated earnings effects might
depend on the magnitude of the intervention, which calls into question the external validity of
the LATE of a particular policy change. Mogstad and Torgovitsky (2018) discuss the importance
of considering the external validity of estimated treatment effect parameters, and they suggest
extrapolating local average treatment effects as a solution for the limited external validity of LATEs.
To this end, we incorporate this consideration in our policy simulation by estimating the effect of
a policy intervention of varying sizes, considering a 10 and 50 percent expansion in the number of
FT-hours available in each comuna.55

6.2

Counterfactual Choices and Outcomes
a

Observed earnings outcomes in both periods depend on training choices. Let Yit j be observed
earnings in period t. For period t = 1 and policy state aj , and given our assumption about the
nature of the policy, observed earnings can be expressed in a Quandt (1958) switching regression
framework:
a

a

a

Yi1j ≡ Di1j Yi1 (1) + (1 − Di1j )Yi1 (0).

(15)

Following equation 15, we note that the policy change only affects first-period earnings for workers
changing their initial training decision. Similarly, second-period earnings can be expressed as:


a
a
a
a
a
a
Yi2j ≡ Di1j × Di2 (Di1j ) × Yi2 (Di1j , 1) + (1 − Di2 (Di1j )) × Yi2 (Di1j , 0) +


a
a
a
a
a
(1 − Di1j ) × Di2 (1 − Di1j ) × Yi2 (1 − Di1j , 1) + (1 − Di2 (1 − Di1j )) × Yi2 (1 − Di1j , 0) .

(16)

In this context, we are interested in the effects of the policy on the present value of earnings. Let
a
a
a
a
a
Yei j ≡ Yi1j + ρYi2j , where ρ is the discount factor and Yi1j and Yi2j are given in equations (15) and
54

The simulated policy affects the latent utility associated with the first participation node. As such, whether
the policy impacts’ workers participation decisions depends on the coefficient associated with the instrument being
shifted in the policy simulation.
55
Since the baseline number of hours per worker in each comuna in the first year equals 0.55 hours, the policy is
simulated through an increase in 0.055 course hours, while the 50% increase results in an average increase of 0.275
hours.

25

(16). The effect of a policy that shifts the net benefits of training choices from a0 to a1 is given by
Yeia1 − Yeia0 .
Since the policy only affects Yeia1 − Yeia0 through changes in training choices rather than through
a direct impact on earnings, we can decompose its effect by identifying agents’ response types.
The policy intervention may lead workers to change their first-period participation decision (compliers and defiers) or to maintain their baseline choice under policy state a0 (always-takers and
never-takers). Given our implicit monotonicity assumption in equation (2), an increase in firstperiod course availability will only affect outcomes through first-period compliers—workers for
a0
a1
whom Di1
= 0 and Di1
= 1. However, this change would may also affect second-period choices,

as workers who modified their first-period decision due to the policy change may make different
a

a

training choices depending on their training history (Di2j = Di2 (Di1j )). Therefore, the group of
first-period compliers can be further divided by second-period responses in four types: compliersalways takers, compliers-compliers, compliers-never takers, and compliers-defiers.56 As the policy
change does not have an impact on counterfactual earnings, the effect for workers not changing
their training decision in either period will not be different from zero. All in all, the effect of the

56

We note than an alternative policy change affecting the utility of second-period training participation could
also impact Yeia1 − Yeia0 through workers who did not change their initial participation decision, but who became
second-period compliers. As such, estimating the effects of this policy intervention requires considering the impacts on
initial period always-takers and never-takers, who became second-period compliers. We therefore note that evaluating
policies in a dynamic context contrasts policy-relevant analysis in an static world, where only contemporary compliers
are the relevant group (Heckman and Vytlacil, 2001; Mogstad and Torgovitsky, 2018).

26

policy change on the present value of earnings is given by:57
a0
a1
E[Yeia1 − Yeia0 |Di1
= 0, Di1
= 1]

=
a0
a1
a0
a1
= 0, Di1
= 1]
E[Yeia1 − Yeia0 |Di2 (0) = 1, Di2 (1) = 1, Di1
= 0, Di1
= 1] × Pr[Di2 (0) = 1, Di2 (1) = 1|Di1
{z
} |
{z
}
|
Probability of Always-Takers

Compliers, Always-Takers (WCO,AT )

a0
a1
a0
a1
= 0, Di1
= 1]
+ E[Yeia1 − Yeia0 |Di2 (0) = 0, Di2 (1) = 1, Di1
= 0, Di1
= 1] × Pr[Di2 (0) = 0, Di2 (1) = 1|Di1
{z
} |
{z
}
|
Probability of Compliers

Compliers, Compliers (WCO,CO )

a0
a1
a0
a1
+ E[Yeia1 − Yeia0 |Di2 (0) = 0, Di2 (1) = 0, Di1
= 0, Di1
= 1] × Pr[Di2 (0) = 0, Di2 (1) = 0|Di1
= 0, Di1
= 1]
|
{z
} |
{z
}
Probability of Never-Takers

Compliers, Never-Takers (WCO,N T )

a0
a1
a0
a1
= 0, Di1
+ E[Yeia1 − Yeia0 |Di2 (0) = 1, Di2 (1) = 0, Di1
= 1]
= 0, Di1
= 1] × Pr[Di2 (0) = 1, Di2 (1) = 0|Di1
{z
} |
{z
}
|
Probability of Defiers

Compliers, Defiers (WCO,DF )

(17)
In this set-up, we can therefore estimate the aggregate effect of the policy on the net present value
of earnings for affected workers and examine the impacts across dynamic response groups. For
example, the increase in FT-course availability induces compliers-compliers to move from never
taking up job training to participating in the two periods. The complier-defier group may arise
if a particular sub-set of workers induced to participate in the first period would take up training
in the second period had they not been early trainees. These groups might reveal policy-relevant
behavior and we directly test for their presence in our empirical analysis. Note that the weights are
given by the prevalence of each response type as a share of all workers who change participation
decisions due to the policy.

6.3

Results

The first panel of Table 8 presents the share of workers induced to change their training decisions
due to the policy change. We find that a 10% increase in course-hour availability would induce
0.5% of the workers in our sample to participate in job training at some point in their first two
57
In a similar set-up, Heckman et al. (2016) decompose LATE into the effects of augmenting the availability of
colleges on earnings for different subgroups affected by the policy in a dynamic-discrete choice model. The difference
with our approach is that Heckman and coauthors look at the effects on earnings at one period for groups that are
affected at different choice nodes of past periods. Instead, we look at how both choices and outcomes of different
periods are affected by the policy.

27

years in the labor force. The share of “affected” workers expands linearly across program expansion
size, since a 50 percent increase in FT course-hours would induce 2.4% of young workers to change
their training decision.58 Moreover, we find that almost half of all policy compliers come from
the complier-never taker group, which captures workers who take up job training only in the first
period in response to the policy. Meanwhile, the complier-complier group, who take-up training in
both time periods due to the policy change, accounts for 30% of all affected workers. The weights
assigned to dynamic response types are largely constant across the two interventions.
In the second panel of Table 8, we show the estimated effect of the policy simulation on the
present value of earnings. We find that a small increase in course availability would increase
the earnings of affected workers by 3.1%, reaching 3.5% for a 50 percent increase in course-hour
availability, though the difference in the estimated dynamic policy relevant treatment effects is not
statistically significant. While the impacts are captured by the DPRTE parameter, presented in
equation (6.2), the effect sizes fit largely in line with the dynamic average treatment effect (DATE)
presented in Table 7.
We find that the simulated policy would have heterogeneous impacts across dynamic response
types. For instance, workers who are induced to take-up training in both periods (complierscompliers) enjoy an earnings increase in the 4% range. We find similar effects for workers who are
induced to participate in only one training course, reaching 3.2% for compliers-never-takers. The
complier-defier group, which captures workers who move up their training choice due to the policy
change, faces heterogeneous earnings gains by program size expansion. For small increases in coursehour availability, their earnings would increase by 1.8%, reaching 2.7% for the larger simulated
expansion. In Figure 10, we explore whether differences in the density of the unobserved factor
across response type groups may account for the heterogeneous earnings impacts documented above.
We find that the latent ability density of always-takers dominates that of the other response types,
surpassing the ability of compliers-compliers by 0.11 standard deviations, on average, providing
evidence that individuals respond to the policy based on the latent ability.59 In this context, we
examine whether the 50 percent expansion in first-year course hours would deliver heterogeneous
58

While the program expansion need not have linear effects on training take-up, the empirical evidence shows no
indication of non-linear responses by program expansion size.
59
There are larger differences with the other response types, as the average latent ability of compliers-always takers
exceeds that of compliers-never takers by 0.42 standard deviations.

28

returns by estimating a local polynomial regression of the dynamic policy relevant treatment effect
parameter against the distribution of latent ability (Figure 11).60 We find largely homogeneous
effects across the ability distribution, in the range of 3%.
All in all, we have found that increased course availability would lead a non-negligible share
of workers to change their early-career training decisions, while positively affecting their mediumterm earnings. However, the heterogeneous impacts across dynamic response types suggest that the
positive impacts will vary by the number and the timing of the courses that workers are induced to
take up. Since the static framework necessarily overlooks multi-period response types, these results
highlight the importance of considering dynamic effects of policy changes.

7

Conclusions

In this paper, we leverage a large government-subsidized program to present the first estimates of
repeated participation in job training for first-time labor market entrants. We document dynamic
selection patterns and show that high ability workers are more likely to participate in job training early in their careers, though among one-time participants, second-period trainees are more
skilled vis-a-vis those trained in the first year. We find that the static returns to job training are
positive and significant, though they vary across the timing of the event, training histories and heterogeneously across the latent ability distribution. The dynamic treatment effects indicate larger
medium-term gains from early job training, and this effect is fully explained through the direct
effect of training. As such, the continuation value of training is not different from zero, standing
in contrast with the positive continuation value from schooling (Heckman et al., 2016). We further
document the conceptual and the empirical differences between continuation values and dynamic
complementarity (substitutability). We find dynamic substitutability of first-year training: early
investments decrease the economic returns to later investments. The result is stronger for highskilled workers. Dynamic substitutability may be explained by the structure of the job training
courses examined in this paper, or more generally by the structure of post-schooling human capital
accumulation processes. While we cannot test the potential mechanisms formally, we consider our
60

The optimal policy design depends on the cost function of course hour expansion. While it would be natural
to think that costs follows a convex pattern, the Chilean government has recently allowed e-learning courses to be
included as part of Franquicia Tributaria courses, suggesting that a larger program expansion need not have a larger
per unit cost than a small expansion (SENCE, 2015).

29

results a first step towards understanding the complex dynamic of the returns to training.
Moreover, while estimating a variety of treatment effects allows us to capture the various margins through which training affects labor market outcomes, these returns may not necessarily be
actionable upon for workers (Mogstad and Torgovitsky, 2018). We have therefore examined the estimated impacts of an expansion in course-hour availability for first-time labor market entrants. In
this context, we identify dynamic response types and estimated dynamic policy relevant treatment
effects, as early-career policy changes may affect workers’ subsequent training decisions. While the
increase in course availability would lead to a sizable increase in medium-term earnings, the effects
are heterogeneous across dynamic response types. As a result, we remark that any policymaker considering an expansion in training courses should take into account the potential impact on workers’
subsequent labor market trajectories, rather than focusing solely on short-term outcomes.

30

References
Abbring, J. and G. van den Berg (2003). The non-parametric identification of treatment effects in
duration models. Econometrica 45, 1491–1517.
Abbring, J. H. and J. J. Heckman (2007). Econometric evaluation of social programs, part iii:
Distributional treatment effects, dynamic treatment effects, dynamic discrete choice, and general
equilibrium policy evaluation. Handbook of econometrics 6, 5145–5303.
Acemoglu, D. and D. Autor (2011). Chapter 12 Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
Employment and Earnings. In D. Card and O. Ashenfelter (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 4, pp. 1043–1171.
Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke (1999). Beyond becker: training in imperfect labour markets. The
Economic Journal 109 (453), 112–142.
Agostinelli, F. and M. Wiswall (2016a). Estimating the Technology of Children’s Skill Formation.
NBER Working Paper No. 22442.
Agostinelli, F. and M. Wiswall (2016b). Identification of Dynamic Latent Factor Models: The
Implication of Re-Normalization in a Model of Child Development. NBER Working Paper No.
22441.
Alzúa, M. L., G. Cruces, D. D. T. Nro, and C. Lopez (2014). Youth Training Programs Beyond
Employment. Experimental Evidence from Argentina. Documentos de Trabajo No. 177, CEDLAS.
Andersson, F., H. Holzer, J. Lane, D. Rosenblum, and J. Smith (2013). Does federally-funded job
training work? Nonexperimental estimates of WIA training impacts using longitudinal data on
workers and firms. NBER Working Paper No. 19446.
Arellano, M. and B. Honore (2001). Panel Data Models: Some Recent Developments. In J. Heckman
and E. Lazear (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics.
Ashenfelter, O. (1978). Estimating the effect of training programs on earnings. The Review of
Economics and Statistics 60 (1), 47–57.
31

Ashenfelter, O. and D. Card (1985). Using the longitudinal structure of earnings to estimate the
effect of training programs. The Review of Economics and Statistic 67 (4), 648–660.
Attanasio, O., S. Cattan, E. Fitzsimons, C. Meghir, and M. Rubio-Codina (2015). Estimating the
Production Function For Human Capital: Results From a Randomized Control Trail in Colombia.
NBER Working Paper No. 20965.
Attanasio, O., A. Guarı́n, C. Medina, and C. Meghir (2015). Long Term Impacts of Vouchers for
Vocational Training: Experimental Evidence for Colombia. NBER Working Paper 21390.
Attanasio, O., A. Kugler, and C. Meghir (2011). Subsidizing Vocational Training for Disadvantaged
Youth in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Trial. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 3 (3), 188–220.
Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003, nov). The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4),
1279–1333.
Ba, B., J. C. Ham, R. J. Lalonde, and X. Li (2017). Estimating (easily interpreted) dynamic
training effects from experimental data. Journal of Labor Economics 35 (S1).
Barnow, B. S. and J. Smith (2016). Employment and Training Programs. In R. A. Moffitt (Ed.),
Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume II. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Ben-Porath, Y. (1967). The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings. Journal
of Political Economy 75, 352–365.
Booth, A. L. (1993). Private sector training and graduate earnings. The Review of Economics and
Statistics 75, 164–170.
Buhrmann, J. R. (2017). Good enough jobs: Skill mismatch and two-sided heterogeneity in frictional
labor markets. Purdue University Economics Working Papers 1287.
Callaway, B. and P. H. C. Sant’Anna (2018). Difference-in-Differences With Multiple Time Periods
and an Application on the Minimum Wage and Employment. DETU Working Papers 1804,
Department of Economics, Temple University.
32

Card, D. (1999). Chapter 30 The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings. In O. Ashenfelter and
D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, pp. 1801–1863.
Card, D., P. Ibarrarán, F. Regalia, D. Rosas-Shady, and Y. Soares (2011). The Labor Market
Impacts of Youth Training in the Dominican Republic. Journal of Labor Economics 29 (2),
267–300.
Card, D., J. Kluve, and A. Weber (2010, nov). Active Labour Market Policy Evaluations: A
Meta-Analysis. The Economic Journal 120 (548), F452–F477.
Carneiro, P., K. T. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman (2003, may). 2001 Lawrence R. Klein Lecture
Estimating Distributions of Treatment Effects with an Application to the Returns to Schooling
and Measurement of the Effects of Uncertainty on College Choice. International Economic
Review 44 (2), 361–422.
Carneiro, P., J. J. Heckman, and E. Vytlacil (2010, jan). Evaluating Marginal Policy Changes and
the Average Effect of Treatment for Individuals at the Margin. Econometrica 78 (1), 377–394.
Carrillo, F., M. E. De Diego, and R. Miranda (2018). Caracterización del Funcionamiento de la
Franquicia Tributaria. Unpublished Manuscript, Comisin Nacional de Productividad.
Cattaneo, M. D. (2010). Efficient semiparametric estimation of multi-valued treatment effects under
ignorability. Journal of Econometrics 155 (2), 138–154.
Comisión Revisora del Sistema de Capacitación e Intermediación Laboral (2011). Informe Final.
Cornelissen, T., C. Dustmann, A. Raute, and U. Schönberg (2017). Who benefits from universal
childcare? Estimating marginal returns to early childcare attendance. Working Paper.
Cunha, B. F. and J. Heckman (2006). The Technology of Skill Formation. The American Economic
Review 97 (2), 31–47.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the Evidence on
Life Cycle Skill Formation. In E. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessmann (Eds.), Handbook of
the Economics of Education, Volume 1 of Handbook of the Economics of Education, pp. 697–812.
Elsevier.
33

de Chaisemartin, C. and X. D’Haultfœuille (2018). Two-way fixed effects estimators with heterogeneous treatment effects. Working Paper.
Fitzenberger, B., M. Furdas, and C. Sajons (2016). End-of-year spending and the long-run employment effects of training programs for the unemployed. IZA DP No. 10441 .
Fitzenberger, B. and R. Völter (2007, aug). Long-run effects of training programs for the unemployed in East Germany. Labour Economics 14 (4), 730–755.
Frazis, H. and M. A. Loewenstein (2007). On-the-Job Training. Now Publishers, Inc.
Fredriksson, P. and P. Johansson (2008). Dynamic treatment assignment: The consequences for
evaluations using observational data. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics (4).
Goodman-Bacon, A. (2018). Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Timing. Working Paper.
Guvenen, F., B. Kuruscu, S. Tanaka, and D. Wiczer (2015). Multidimensional skill mismatch.
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Research Department Working Paper 729 .
Hansen, K. T., J. J. Heckman, and K. J. Mullen (2004). The effect of schooling and ability on
achievement test scores. Journal of Econometrics 121 (1), 39–98.
Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, J. Smith, and P. Todd (1998). Characterizing Selection Bias Using
Experimental Data. Econometrica 66 (5), 1017.
Heckman, J., R. Pinto, and P. Savelyev (2013, oct). Understanding the Mechanisms Through
Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes. American Economic
Review 103 (6), 2052–2086.
Heckman, J. J. (1981). Statistical models for discrete panel data. In C. Manski and D. McFadden
(Eds.), Structural Analysis of Discrete Panel Data with Econometric Applications, pp. 114–78.
MIT Press.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and G. Veramendi (2016). Dynamic treatment effects. Journal
of Econometrics 191 (2), 276–292.

34

Heckman, J. J., R. J. LaLonde, and J. A. Smith (1999). The Economics and Econometrics of Active
Labor Market Programs. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labour Economics:
Volume 4B, pp. 1865–2097. Elsevier Masson SAS.
Heckman, J. J. and S. Navarro (2007). Dynamic discrete choice and dynamic treatment effects.
Journal of Econometrics 136 (2), 341–396.
Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua (2006, jul). The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior. Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3),
411–482.
Heckman, J. J. and E. Vytlacil (2001). Policy-Relevant Treatment Effects. The American Economic
Review 91 (2), 107–111.
Ibarrarán, P., J. Kluve, L. Ripani, and D. R. Shady (2015). Experimental Evidence on the LongTerm Impacts of a Youth Training Program. IZA Discussion Paper No. 9136.
Ingram, B. F. and G. R. Neumann (2006). The returns to skill. Labour Economics 13 (1), 35–59.
Keane, M. P., P. E. Todd, and K. I. Wolpin (2011). Chapter 4 The Structural Estimation of Behavioral Models: Discrete Choice Dynamic Programming Methods and Applications. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4, pp. 331–461.
Kline, P. and C. R. Walters (2016, nov). Evaluating Public Programs with Close Substitutes: The
Case of Head Start. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4), 1795–1848.
Lechner, M. (2009). Sequential causal models for the evaluation of labor market programs. Journal
of Business & Economic Statistics 27 (1), 71–83.
Lengermann, P. (1999). How long do the benefits of training last? evidence of long term effects
across current and previous employers. Research in Labor Economics 19.
Lise, J., C. Meguir, and J.-M. Robin (2016)). Mismatch, sorting, and wages. Review of Economic
Dynamics 53 (19), 63–87.
Lynch, L. M. (1992). Private-sector training and the earnings of young workers. American Economic
Review 82, 299–312.
35

Mincer, J. (1974). Schooling, experience, and earnings. human behavior & social institutions no. 2.
Mogstad, M., A. Santos, and A. Torgovitsky (2018). Using Instrumental Variables for Inference
about Policy Relevant Treatment Effects. Forthcoming in Econometrica.
Mogstad, M. and A. Torgovitsky (2018). Identification and Extrapolation with Instrumental Variables. Forthcoming in Annual Review of Economics.
Mountjoy, J. (2018). Community Colleges and Upward Mobility. Unpublished manuscript.
Postel-Vinay, F. and J. Lise (2015). Multidimensional skills, sorting, and human capital accumulation. Meeting Papers 386.
Quandt, R. E. (1958). The estimation of the parameters of a linear regression system obeying two
separate regimes. Journal of the American Statistical Association 53 (284), 873–880.
Rodriguez, J., S. Urzua, and L. Reyes (2016, apr). Heterogeneous Economic Returns to PostSecondary Degrees: Evidence from Chile. Journal of Human Resources 51 (2), 416–460.
Saltiel, F., M. Sarzosa, and S. Urzua (2018). Cognitive and Socio-emotional Ability. In G. Jones,
J. Johnes, T. Agasisti, and L. Lopez-Torres (Eds.), Handbook of Contemporary Education Economics. Edwar Elgar Publishing.
Sanders, C. and C. Taber (2012, sep). Life-Cycle Wage Growth and Heterogeneous Human Capital.
Annual Review of Economics 4 (1), 399–425.
SENCE (2015). Resolucion exenta numero 1664.
SpitzOener, A. (2006, apr). Technical Change, Job Tasks, and Rising Educational Demands:
Looking outside the Wage Structure. Journal of Labor Economics 24 (2), 235–270.
Veum, J. (1997). Training and job mobility among young workers in the united states. Journal of
Population Economics 10, 219–233.

36

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable
Male
Age at Graduation
Math PSU (Standardized)
Verbal PSU (Standardized)
High School GPA (Standardized)
Monthly Salary after First Year (USD)
Monthly Salary after Second Year (USD)
Observations

Mean
0.46
17.81
-0.04
-0.03
0.01
551.04
623.96

(Std. Dev.)
(0.5)
(0.64)
(0.98)
(0.99)
(0.99)
(333.4)
(388.31)
37,089

Notes: Table 1 presents summary statistics of our estimation sample (see Section 3). The dependent variable
is the monthly average of earnings in the first quarter following each training stint. For simplicity, we refer to
this variable as concurrent with the training decision. Tests scores (Math and Verbal) and high school GPA are
standardized across the general population of test-takers to be of mean zero and variance 1.

37

Table 2: Summary Statistics by Training Node

Male
Age at Graduation
Math PSU (Standardized)
Verbal PSU (Standardized)
High School GPA (Standardized)
Monthly Salary after First Year (USD)
Monthly Salary after Second Year (USD)
Observations

Tree = 0,0
0.46
17.82
-0.10
-0.07
-0.01
506.00
572.32
23675

Tree = 0,1
0.46
17.79
0.04
0.02
0.04
611.15
702.36
5306

Tree = 1,0
0.47
17.81
-0.04
-0.03
0.00
566.32
640.29
4360

Tree = 1,1
0.43
17.78
0.19
0.17
0.14
732.64
820.12
3748

Notes: Table 2 presents summary statistics of the estimation sample (see Section 3) across different choice
nodes. A choice node is denoted as “Tree = h, h0 ”, where h, h0 denotes training choices for period t = 1 and t = 2
(h, h0 ∈ {0, 1}).

38

Table 3: Reduced-Form Estimates: Returns to Job Training

Effect of training
OLS
OLS + controls
Individual FE
Individual and firm FE
Observations (N × T )

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.223***
(0.005)

0.179***
(0.004)

0.009***
(0.003)

0.013***
(0.002)

X
X
X
74178

74178

74178

X
66352

Notes: Table 3 presents regressions of log-earnings against a dummy variable capturing job training participation,
college entrance exam performance, high school GPA and age. The dependent variable is the monthly average of
earnings in the first quarter following the training period. Column (1) presents OLS regressions without control
variables. Column (2) includes PSU test scores, highschool GPA, a gender dummy, age, and age squared. Column
(3) computes the first differences estimator. Column (4) uses an individual and firm fixed-effect. p-values are in
parenthesis, where * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, and *** p < 0.001.

39

Table 4: Variables Used in Implementation of the Model
Variables
Constant
Gender
Age at Test
Age in Year t
Cognitive Factor
Average Training Hours at Firm
Average Comuna Hours

Earnings Equation
Yes
Yes

Training Probit
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Measurement System
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Table 4 shows the variables used in our empirical model. In the measurement system, we use math and
language college entrance test scores, high school GPA and the initial salary and include as the observed measures.
Training decisions include gender and age as control variables as well as training-course availability across training
decision nodes.

40

Table 5: Goodness of Fit: Labor Market Outcomes by Training History
Estimate

Y1 (1)

Y1 (0)

Y2 (1, 1)

Y2 (1, 0)

Y2 (0, 1)

Y2 (0, 0)

Actual

6.30
[6.29,6.32]

6.12
[6.12,6.13]

6.55
[6.53,6.57]

6.29
[6.28,6.31]

6.40
[6.39,6.42]

6.20
[6.19,6.20]

Model

6.23

6.14

6.42

6.27

6.35

6.23

Actual

0.57

0.52

0.58

0.57

0.55

0.54

Model

0.51

0.50

0.53

0.52

0.53

0.52

A. Means

B. Standard Deviations

Notes: Table 5 shows the means of log earnings by year and training choice from the observed data and the
simulated sample. Yt (h, h0 ) denote earnings in period t, where h and h0 represent training choices in the first and
second period (h, h0 ∈ 0, 1). In brackets, we show a 95% confidence interval on the mean of observed earnings. The
second panel shows the observed and estimated standard deviation of earnings across training histories.

41

Table 6: Static Returns to Job Training (in %)
Treatment effect

t=1

t = 2 (D1 = 0)

t = 2 (D1 = 1)

AT E (percentage points)

1.69
[1.65,1.72]

3.39
[3.31,3.47]

0.43
[0.27,0.58]

T T (percentage points)

1.79
[1.72,1.86]

3.51
[3.31,3.70]

0.35
[0.11,0.60]

P r(AT E < 0) × 100

45.33
[45.21,45.44]

45.89
[45.76,46.02]

49.46
[49.22,49.71]

P r(T T < 0) × 100

45.14
[44.90,45.39]

45.66
[45.37,45.96]

49.55
[49.17,49.93]

Notes: Table 6 presented the estimated Average Treatment Effects (ATE) and Treatment on the Treated (TT) parameters
along with the share of workers who enjoy negative returns to training across training histories and over time. The first column
shows the returns to first-period training(t = 1). The second and third columns present the estimated returns to second-period
job training, conditional on not participating in first-period training (Column 2) and conditional on first-period participation
(Column 3). We show 95% confidence intervals in brackets.

42

Table 7: Dynamic Returns to First-Period Job Training (in %)
DATE

DTT

DTUT

Direct Effect (short-term)

1.11
(0.01)
[31%]

1.16
(0.02)
[32%]

1.10
(0.01)
[31%]

Direct Effect (medium-term)

2.51
(0.02)
[70%]

2.49
(0.05)
[69%]

2.52
(0.02)
[70%]

Continuation Value

-0.04
(0.02)
[-1%]

-0.05
(0.04)
[-1%]

-0.04
(0.02)
[-1%]

Total

3.58
(0.02)

3.59
(0.05)

3.58
(0.03)

Notes: Table 7 presents the estimated Dynamic Average Treatment Effects (DATE), Dynamic Treatment on the Treated
(DTT) and Dynamic Treatment on the Untreated (DTUT) of first-period training on the present value of earnings. Let
Yei (j) ≡ Yi1 (j) + ρ (Di2 (j)Yi2 (1, j) + (1 − Di2 (j))Yi2 (0, j)) be the present value of earnings for training choice j ∈ {0, 1}. The
individual-level dynamic treatment effect equals Yei (1) − Yei (0), where
Yei (1) − Yei (0) =

(Yi1 (1) − Yi1 (0))
|
{z
}

Direct effect (short-term)

+ ρ[Yi2 (0, 1) − Yi2 (0, 0)] +
{z
}
|
Direct effect (medium-term)

ρ [Di2 (1)(Yi2 (1, 1) − Yi2 (0, 1)) − Di2 (0)(Yi2 (1, 0) − Yi2 (0, 0))] .
|
{z
}
Continuation value

We show the above decomposition for:

i
h
Yei (1) − Yei (0) /Yei (0) ,
h

i
DT T ≡ E Yei (1) − Yei (0) /Yei (0) | Di1 = 1 ,

i
h
DT U T ≡ E Yei (1) − Yei (0) /Yei (0) | Di1 = 0 .

DAT E ≡ E

We present DATE, DTT, and DTUT as percentage of mean baseline of the present value of earnings (E[Yei (0)]). We present
standard errors in parenthesis and the percentage contribution of each term in brackets.

43

Table 8: Share of Compliers and Dynamic-Policy Treatment Effects (in %)
Panel A. Share of Compliers by Intervention Size and Dynamic Response Type Group Weights

Compliers (CO)

Share Compliers
Policy: +10%
(1)
0.47%

Policy: +50%
(2)
2.38%

Weights by type
Compliers-Always Takers (CO, AT )
Compliers-Compliers (CO, CO)
Compliers-Never Takers (CO, N T )
Compliers-Defiers (CO, DF T )

0.106
0.297
0.489
0.106

0.105
0.294
0.487
0.109

Panel B. Dynamic Policy Relevant Treatment Effect by Response Type

Dynamic Policy Relevant Treatment Effects
Policy: +10% Policy: +50%
(1)
(2)
Compliers
3.09%
3.51%
[2.44,3.74]
[3.23,3.79]
Compliers-Always Takers (CO, AT )
Compliers-Compliers (CO, CO)
Compliers-Never Takers (CO, N T )
Compliers-Defiers (CO, DF )

1.54%
[-0.39,3.46]
3.97%
[2.81,5.14]
3.19%
[2.24,4.14]
1.84%
[-0.18,3.87]

2.05%
[1.20,2.91]
4.02%
[3.51,4.53]
3.71%
[3.30,4.12]
2.65%
[1.78,3.51]

Notes: Table 8 shows policy-relevant treatment effects of two policy shocks: a temporary increase in FT-hours by 10 and
50%. We present the effect of the policy on the present value of earnings conditional on being a Wj type of complier (as a
percentage of baseline earnings), a 95% confidence interval of these returns (in brackets), and the proportion of compliers (in %
a
a
a
terms). Formally, let Yei j ≡ Yi1j + ρYi2j be the present value of earnings for a policy regime aj . Following the notation used in
the main text, this table presents the probabilities associated with the different groups (weights) and E[(Yeia1 − Yeia0 )/Yeia0 | Wj ]
for j ∈ {(CO, AT ), (CO, CO), (CO, N T ), (CO, DF ), (CO)}, where
 a0
a1
CO, AT ≡ Di1
= 0, Di1
= 1, Di2 (0) = 1, Di2 (1) = 1 ,
 a0
a1
CO, CO ≡ Di1 = 0, Di1
= 1, Di2 (0) = 0, Di2 (1) = 1 ,
 a0
a1
CO, N T ≡ Di1 = 0, Di1 = 1, Di2 (0) = 0, Di2 (1) = 0 ,
 a0
a1
CO, DF ≡ Di1
= 0, Di1
= 1, Di2 (0) = 1, Di2 (1) = 0 .
 a0
a1
CO ≡ Di1 = 0, Di1 = 1 .

44

Figure 1: Observed Training Choices

Second

e

Y(1,1)

of N
ode

Y(1,0)

e

Y(0,1)

of N
ode

Y(0,0)

d
f No
o
%
6

4

Year

ple

am
fS

First

o
22%

Training

54%

Year
Training

78%

of

S am

ple

Second

d
f No
8% o

1

Year
Training

82%

Note: In Figure 1, we present the decision tree through which workers decide whether to participate in training in
each of their first two years in the labor force. In each node, we include the observed share of workers in our sample
who decide to participate in training.

45

Figure 2: Measurement System: Variance Decomposition

High School GPA

Initial Wage

Language

Math

0

.2

.4
Observables
Error

.6

.8

1

Ability Factor

Note: In Figure 2, we show the contribution of each variable to the variance of observed measures using the
simulated sample from our model. The “Observables” row indicates the share of the variance of the measure explained
by the observed variables: age at the time of test score, gender, parental employment dummy variables, mother’s
and father’s education, as well as household size. The “Ability Factor” component shows the proportion of the test
score variance explained by unobserved ability. Finally, the “Error term” represents the share of the variance in each
observed measure explained by the unobserved idiosyncratic error of the measurement equation.

46

0

.1

Density
.2
.3

.4

.5

Figure 3: Distribution of Unobserved Ability

-4

-2

0
Unobserved ability (θ)

2

4

Note: In Figure 3, we show the estimated density of the unobserved ability factor. We obtain this density using
the simulated sample from our estimated model. We approximate the distribution of the individual’s unobserved
ability factor by a mixture of normal distributions.

47

0

Proportion of individuals
.2
.4

.6

Figure 4: Goodness of Fit: Training Decisions

0-0

0-1

1-0

1-1

Tree
Observed choices

Simulated choices

Note: In Figure 4, we compare the share of workers who followed each of the four possible training histories in
their first two years in the labor force. A training history is h − h0 for h, h0 ∈ H, where the first and second entry
indicate training decisions in the first and second period, respectively

48

0

.1

Density
.2
.3

.4

.5

Figure 5: Distribution of Unobserved Ability by Training History

-4

-2

0
Unobserved ability (θ)

Always-trained (1,1)
Trained Once (0,1)

2

4

Trained Once (1,0)
Never-trained (0,0)

Note: Figure 5 shows the estimated density of unobserved ability for different training paths for workers in their first two years
in the labor force. A training path is defined by (h, h0 ), where h and h0 denotes training choices (h, h0 ∈ {0, 1}) for periods 1
and 2, respectively

49

Change in log earnings
0
.01
.02
.03
.04

Figure 6: Heterogeneous Returns to First-Period Training Participation

-2

-1
0
1
Unobserved ability (in σs)

2

Change in log earnings
0
.01
.02
.03
.04

(a) Average Treatment Effect

-2

-1
0
1
Unobserved ability (in σs)

2

(b) Treatment on the Treated
Note: In Figure 6, we estimate local polynomial regressions of the estimated ATE and TT parameters for the first training
event (at t = 1) against the distribution of unobserved ability.

50

-2

-1
0
1
Unobserved ability (in σs)

Change in log earnings
-.01
.01
.03
.05

Change in log earnings
-.01
.01
.03
.05

Figure 7: Heterogeneous Returns to Second-Period Training Participation

2

-2

-2

-1
0
1
Unobserved ability (in σs)

2

(b) ATE (D1 = 1)
Change in log earnings
-.01
.01
.03
.05

Change in log earnings
-.01
.01
.03
.05

(a) ATE (D1 = 0)

-1
0
1
Unobserved ability (in σs)

2

(c) TT (D1 = 0)

-2

-1
0
1
Unobserved ability (in σs)

2

(d) TT (D1 = 1)

Note: In Figure 7, we estimate local polynomial regressions of the estimated average treatment effect and treatment on the
treated parameters of second-period job training participation against the distribution of latent ability, conditional on first-period
choices (D1 ∈ {0, 1}). The upper-left panel shows, for instance, the average treatment effect of second-period participation for
workers who had not taken up training in the first year.

51

0

Change in earnings (%)
.01
.02
.03

.04

Figure 8: Heterogeneous Dynamic Returns to First-Period Training Participation

1

3

5
7
Deciles of ability (θ)

Continuation value
Direct effect (medium-term)

9
Direct effect (short-term)
ATE (DE+CV)

.04
Change in earnings (%)
.01
.02
.03
0

0

Change in earnings (%)
.01
.02
.03

.04

(a) DATE

1

3

5
7
Deciles of ability (θ)

Continuation value
Direct effect (medium-term)

9

1

Direct effect (short-term)
TT (DE+CV)

3

5
7
Deciles of ability (θ)

Continuation value
Direct effect (medium-term)

(b) DTT

9
Direct effect (short-term)
TUT (DE+CV)

(c) DTUT

Note: In Figure 8, we estimate Dynamic Average Treatment Effects (DATE), Dynamic Treatment on the Treated (DTT) and
Dynamic Treatment on the Untreated (DTUT) of training in t = 1 on the present value of earnings across deciles of unobserved
ability. Let Yei (j) ≡ Yi1 (j) + ρ (Di2 (j)Yi2 (1, j) + (1 − Di2 (j))Yi2 (0, j)) be the present value of log earnings for training choice
j ∈ {0, 1}. The individual-level dynamic treatment effect equals Yei (1) − Yei (0), where
Yei (1) − Yei (0) =

(Yi1 (1) − Yi1 (0))
|
{z
}

Direct effect (short-term)

+ ρ[Yi2 (0, 1) − Yi2 (0, 0)] +
|
{z
}
Direct effect (medium-term)

ρ [Di2 (1)(Yi2 (1, 1) − Yi2 (0, 1)) − Di2 (0)(Yi2 (1, 0) − Yi2 (0, 0))] .
|
{z
}
Continuation value

We show the above decomposition for:

i
Yei (1) − Yei (0) /Yei (0) | θ ,
h

i
DT T (θ) ≡ E Yei (1) − Yei (0) /Yei (0) | Di1 = 1, θ ,
h

i
DT U T (θ) ≡ E Yei (1) − Yei (0) /Yei (0) | Di1 = 0, θ ,

DAT E(θ) ≡ E

h

where θ captures unobserved ability.

52

Change in earnings (%)
-.035
-.03
-.025
-.02

Figure 9: Heterogeneous Dynamic Complementarity (Substitutability) and Dynamic Sorting

-2

-1
0
1
Unobserved ability (in σs)

2

Change in earnings (%)
.02
.025
.03

(a) Dynamic Complementarity (Substitutability)

-2

-1
0
1
Unobserved ability (in σs)

2

(b) Dynamic Sorting Gains
Note: In Figure 9, we show dynamic complementarity (substitutability) and dynamic sorting gains (as a percentage
of mean baseline of the present value of earnings) as a function of unobserved ability, where
Di2 (1)(Yi2 (1, 1) − Yi2 (0, 1)) − Di2 (0)(Yi2 (1, 0) − Yi2 (0, 0)) =
{z
}
|
Continuation value

(Yi2 (1, 1) − Yi2 (0, 1)) − (Yi2 (1, 0) − Yi2 (0, 0)) +
|
{z
}
Dynamic Complementarity/Substitutability

(1 − Di2 (0))(Yi2 (1, 1) − Yi2 (0, 1)) − (1 − Di2 (1))(Yi2 (1, 0) − Yi2 (0, 0))
|
{z
}
Dynamic Sorting Gains

53

0

.1

.2

Density
.3

.4

.5

Figure 10: Density of Unobserved Ability by Dynamic Response Types

-2

-1

0
1
Unobserved ability (θ)

Compliers - Always-Takers
Compliers - Never-Takers

2

3

Compliers - Compliers
Compliers - Defiers

Note: Figure 10 shows the estimated density of unobserved ability across dynamic response types. The simulated
policy reflects a 50% expansion in program course-hours availability in both periods. The density of the latent factor
across response types is similar across different program expansion levels.

54

0

.01

Change in earnings (%)
.02
.03
.04
.05

.06

Figure 11: Heterogeneous Dynamic Policy Relevant Treatment Effects

-2

-1

0
1
Unobserved ability (in σs)

2

Note: Figure 11 shows the estimated impact of a 50% expansion in course availability on the present-value of earnings
across levels of unobserved ability, captured by the dynamic policy-relevant treatment effect parameter.

55

Appendices
A

FD Estimator and Treatment Effects

Here, we analyze if fixed-effects estimators recover the ATE of training choices. We show that, in
the context of our model, the fixed-effect estimator can solve the inconsistency problem of OLS by
controlling for unobserved heterogeneity. However, it fails to identify the average treatment effect.
By using the structure of our model, we formally define the ATE. The impact of training for an
individual i at period t for a given history h equals Yit (ht , 1)−Yit (ht , 0). Let Hit (ht ) be an indicator
variable that equals 1 if individual i in period t followed training history h and 0 otherwise. The
overall average of these individual treatment effects is defined as:


X
AT E ≡ E 
Hit (ht ) (Yit (ht , 1) − Yit (ht , 0))
h∈Ht




=E

X


Hit (ht ) µY (ht , 1) − µY (ht , 0) + (λY (ht , 1) − λY (ht , 0))θi  ,

(A.1)

h∈Ht

where the expected value operator integrates with respect to i and t. Therefore, ATE is a weighted
average of individual treatment effects across periods and different potential training histories.
In a longitudinal data set-up, the analyst’s goal is to identify (A.1) using observed data (Yit , Dit ),
where Dit and Yit represent the observed training indicator and outcome variable. As a starting
point, consider the following linear regression:
Yit = π0 + π1 Dit + ξit

for i = 1, ..., N and t = 1, ..., T

(A.2)

where ξit is an error term. OLS identifies:
δ OLS ≡

Cov(Yit , Dit )
= E[Yit |Dit = 1] − E[Yit |Dit = 0]
V ar(Dit )

If the data generating process follows our dynamic model, then potential self-selection into
training results in a correlation between ξit and Dit (Ashenfelter and Card, 1985). To see how
self-selection affects the reduced-form estimate, first, let us define the following:
X
X
X
µY (j) ≡
Hit (ht )µY (ht , j), λY (j) ≡
Hit (ht )λY (ht , j), Yit (j) ≡
Hit (ht )Yit (ht , j)
ht ∈Ht

h∈Ht

ht ∈Ht

for j ∈ {0, 1}. Second, following the standard switching regression model, we can express observed
variables (Yit , Dit ) as functions of underlying potential outcomes and choices. Observed variables
are given by:
X
Dit ≡
Hit (ht )Dit (ht ),
(A.3)
ht ∈Ht

Yit ≡

X

Hit [Dit (ht )Yit (ht , 1) + (1 − Dit (ht ))Yit (ht , 0)] .

ht ∈Ht

56

(A.4)

Using the above definitions of Dit and Yit , and summing over observed and unobserved parameters
across training histories, we have:
Yit = µY (0) + Dit (µY (1) − µY (0)) + ξit

(A.5)

where the unobserved part of the equation is:
ξit ≡ (λY (0)θi + Yit (0)) + Dit (Yit (1) − Yit (0)) + (λY (1) − λY (0))θi
Thus, the consistency of OLS depends on whether the individuals know their unobserved latent
ability endowment (θi ) and act on it. In this case, net benefits of training (Iit (ht ) in equation 1)
depend on the unobserved latent ability endowment and the OLS estimator of π1 (equation A.2)
is inconsistent.
Since the inconsistency is originated because the analyst does not observe θi —and, thus, it
cannot control for it—, one commonly-used approach is to assume that an individual fixed-effect
factor drives selection bias. Even though the analyst does not observe θi , she can take advantage
of the longitudinal nature of the data to eliminate this fixed effect. To see how, reorganize terms
in equation (A.5) in the following way:
π

u

π

z }|0 {
}|1
{ z
}|i
{
z
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Yit = µ (0) +Dit (µ (1) − µ (0)) + [(λ (1) − λ (0))θi + λ (0)θi ] +vit

(A.6)

where vit ≡ Yit (0)+Dit (Yit (1)−Yit (0)), and note that the equation above is the standard fixed-effect
regression. Here, the fixed effect ui is a function of the unobserved productivity θi .
One way of estimating (A.6) is by taking First Differences (FD). Since we observe (Yit , Dit ) for
various periods, we could run OLS on:
∆Yit = π1 ∆Dit + ∆vit ,
where the fixed effect has been eliminated and the resulting error term is independent of Dit .61
Therefore, by controlling for ui , we can recover consistent estimates of π1 .
Which treatment parameter is the FD estimator recovering? Next, we show that the FD
estimator identifies the average treatment effect (that is, π = AT E as defined in equation A.1) only
if the underlying model of counterfactual outcomes is independent of training histories—which
means ignoring the dynamics we laid out in the previous section.
Consider the following assumptions:
Assumption 1. In equation (3), µY (ht , 1) − µY (ht , 0) = π1 for all ht ∈ Ht and t ∈ T .
Assumption 2. In equation (3), λY (ht , 1) − λY (ht , 0) = 0 for all ht ∈ Ht and t ∈ T .
Assumptions 1 and 2 restrict the gains from training to be constant for all training histories.
Assumption 2 rules out any potential gains to treatment for individuals with different levels of
unobserved heterogeneity, thereby disregarding the possibility that individuals with higher levels
of unobserved ability may enjoy larger returns to training. As a result, these assumptions not
only impose strong restrictions within periods, but also across labor market and training histories;
Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that the returns to training are equivalent for workers trained at time t
61

When T = 2, the fixed-effect estimator is equivalent to the first-differences estimator. In this paper, we focus
on the first-differences estimator, but the results are equivalent in the fixed-effect framework.

57

with training histories h ∈ Ht and h00 ∈ Ht as well as for workers trained at time t − 1 with histories
h0 ∈ Ht−1 . Furthermore, these assumptions imply absence of complementarities in the human
capital accumulation process—a particularly strong restriction in the context of skills development
in the labor market (Mincer, 1974).
Under these assumptions, we can show the following.
Proposition 1. Suppose outcomes are determined by equation (3) and Assumptions 1 and 2. Then
the FD estimator from equation (A.6) follows:
δ F D = π1 = µY (ht , 1) − µY (ht , 0)

for ht ∈ Ht , t ∈ T

Proof. Let h and h0 denote elements of Ht and Ht−1 . We can express the FD estimator as


X
X
Hit (h)Yit (h, 1) −
Hit−1 (h0 )Yit−1 (h0 , 0)
δ F D = 1/2 × E 
h∈Ht

h0 ∈Ht−1

X

X


− 1/2 × E 


Hit (h)Yit (h, 0) −

Hit−1 (h0 )Yit−1 (h0 , 1)

h0 ∈Ht−1

h∈Ht

Given our assumption about counterfactual outcomes (equation 3), the equation above reduces
to:

δ F D = 1/2 × E 


X

X

Hit (h)(µY (h, 1) + λY (h, 1)θi ) −

Hit−1 (h0 )(µY (h0 , 0) + λY (h0 , 0)θi )

h∈Ht

h0 ∈Ht−1

X

X


− 1/2 × E 


Hit (h)(µY (h, 0) + λY (h, 0)θi ) −

Hit−1 (h0 )(µY (h0 , 1) + λY (h0 , 1)θi ) ,

h0 ∈Ht−1

h∈Ht

and collecting terms, we have


X
X
δ F D = 1/2 × E 
Hit (h)(µY (h, 1) − µY (h, 0)) +
Hit (h)(λY (h, 1) − λY (h, 0))θi 
h∈Ht

h∈Ht


+ 1/2 × E 


X

Hit−1 (h0 )(µY (h0 , 1) − µY (h0 , 0)) +

h0 ∈Ht−1

X

Hit−1 (h0 )(λY (h0 , 1) − λY (h0 , 0))θi  .

h0 ∈Ht−1

Reducing the expression above by applying the expected value operator cannot yield ATE,
because of two fundamental reasons. First, Ht (h) is, in general, not independent of θi , since agents
may sort into training at different periods based on their knowledge of θi . Second, even if Ht (h)
and θi were independent, the resulting weighted averages of treatment effects of t and t − 1 may
not necessarily have to be the same. Under assumptions 1 and 2, the second term in each square
bracket collapses to 0 and the first term to a constant π1 . We have then
δ F D = 1/2 × π1 + 1/2 × π1 = π1
As a result, assumptions 1 and 2 imply that the ATE equals π1 across all training nodes and
training histories (see equation A.1).
58

Under Assumptions 1 and 2, Proposition 1 shows that the FD estimator recovers an average treatment effect which is constant in time and across histories. Hence, the FD recovers our
parameter of interest only under the assumption of constant returns to training.
Another potential set of parameters of interest—specially relevant in the context of a dynamic
setting—are treatment effects in a dynamic sense. Dynamic treatment effects can be of interest as
they allow capturing potential complementarities in the returns to training. For instance, we may
be interested in estimating the effect of training for a worker who has received training at time
t and t − 1 relative to a counter-factual history with no training in either period. Formally, this
parameter can be defined as:
E[Yit ((h0 , 1), 1) − Yit ((h0 , 0), 0)],

h0 ∈ Ht−1

(A.7)

Is the FD able to identify dynamic treatment effects as defined in equation (A.7)? One can
show the FD estimator equals E[∆Yit |∆Dit = 1] − 1/2 × E[∆Yit |∆Dit = −1]. Then, since the FD
estimator requires using the sample of workers who have changed their participation decision in
periods t and t − 1, we cannot use the FD estimator to recover a dynamic treatment effect.
Table A.1 performs formal tests of Assumptions (1) and (2). Panel A presents the parameters
associated with assumption (1). Assumption (1) requires that µY (1)−µY (0) = µY (1, 1)−µY (1, 0) =
µY (0, 1) − µY (0, 0) = π1 for h ∈ Ht . In the implementation of the dynamic model, µY (j, ht ) equals
XiY β Y (j, ht ) for j ∈ {0, 1} and for all histories ht . Using a F test, we test the null hypothesis
that the three parameters are equal to each other. Our results indicate a strong rejection the null
hypothesis (p-value < 0.01). Panel B presents the parameters associated with Assumption (2). In
our context, this assumption requires λ(1) − λ(0) = λ(1, 1) − λ(1, 0) = λ(0, 1) − λ(0, 0) = 0 for
h ∈ Ht . This assumption implies that higher ability workers cannot enjoy additional returns to
training across different time periods and training histories. We conduct the same F test and find
the three parameters are statistically different from each other (p-value < 0.01). Therefore, we find
evidence against the null hypothesis that fixed-effect estimators recover the ATE.

59

Table A.1: Testing Assumptions 1 and 2 for Validity of FD Estimators
(a) Assumption 1: µY (ht , 1) − µY (ht , 0)

Coefficient
p-value of test

µY (1) − µY (0)
0.017

µY (0, 1) − µY (0, 0)
0.034

µY (1, 1) − µY (1, 0)
0.006

0.000
(b) Assumption 2: λY (ht , 1) − λY (ht , 0)

Coefficient
p-value of test

µY (1) − µY (0)
-0.003

µY (0, 1) − µY (0, 0)
0.007

µY (1, 1) − µY (1, 0)
-0.006

0.000

Notes: We test for assumptions 1 and 2 using a simulated sample drawn from the estimated dynamic model. We
show the p-value of the joint hypothesis of equality of parameters.

60

Table A.2: Estimated Returns to Different Job Training Histories

Second-Period Trainees

Monthly Earnings After t = 2
(1)
(2)
0.209***
0.177***
(0.008)
(0.007)

First-Period Trainees

0.0964***
(0.009)

0.0966***
(0.007)

Trained in Both Periods

0.354***
(0.009)

0.266***
(0.008)
X
37089
0.322

Control Variables
Observations
R2

37089
0.045

Note: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Standard errors in parentheses. The omitted category is workers
who do not participate in training in either year. Table A.2 presents the estimated returns to different training
histories on average monthly earnings in the first quarter following second-year training. Column 1 does not include
control variables. Column 2 includes baseline college entrance test scores, high school GPA, parental education and
workers’ gender as control variables.

61

B

Estimated Parameters
Table B.1: Measurement system estimates

Constant
Male
Age
Cognitive Factor
Precision
Observations

Math PSU
3.71
(0.14)
0.13
(0.01)
-0.21
(0.01)
0.38
(0.01)
1.20
(0.01)
1000

Language PSU
3.28
(0.14)
-0.09
(0.01)
-0.18
(0.01)
0.31
(0.01)
1.12
(0.01)
1000

High School GPA
4.14
(0.14)
-0.38
(0.01)
-0.22
(0.01)
0.24
(0.01)
1.14
(0.01)
1000

Initial Salary
-2.58
(0.06)
0.11
(0.01)
0.10
(0.00)
1.00
(0.00)
3.58
(0.03)
1000

Note: The table displays the estimation results from the measurement system of test scores (equation 4). We
obtain these estimates by simulating 1,000 values of parameters using our estimated posterior. The dependent variable
are the standardized test score and the initial log earnings at the time of labor market entry. The earnings equation
includes year-of-entry dummies. Standard errors are in parentheses. The loading on cognitive factor in the initial
earningsmodifiqu equation is normalized to 1.

62

Table B.2: Training Probits: Estimated Parameters

Constant
Gender
Firm average training hours
Comuna average training hours
Cognitive Factor
Precision
Observations

I
-1.32
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.02)
0.60
(0.01)
0.28
(0.07)
0.11
(0.01)
1.00
(0.00)
1000

I(0)
-1.40
(0.05)
-0.04
(0.02)
0.72
(0.01)
0.16
(0.08)
0.15
(0.01)
1.00
(0.00)
1000

I(1)
-0.43
(0.08)
-0.09
(0.03)
0.35
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.13)
0.27
(0.02)
1.00
(0.00)
1000

Note: We show the estimated parameters of the training probits (equation 2). We obtain these estimates by simulating
1,000 values of parameters using our estimated posterior. The dependent variable corresponds to the training dummy I(h), for
lagged training choice ht ∈ {0, 1}. Standard errors are in parentheses.

63

Table B.3: Earnings Equations: Estimated Parameters

Constant
Gender
Age
Age2
Cognitive Factor
Precision
Observations

Y (0)
5.91
(0.17)
0.07
(0.01)
-0.03
(0.02)
0.00
(0.00)
0.59
(0.00)
114.82
(4.95)
1000

Y (1)
4.69
(0.33)
0.07
(0.01)
0.08
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.58
(0.00)
87.79
(4.78)
1000

Y (0, 0)
5.82
(0.23)
0.10
(0.01)
-0.02
(0.02)
0.00
(0.00)
0.55
(0.00)
17.68
(0.20)
1000

Y (0, 1)
5.13
(0.38)
0.10
(0.01)
0.05
(0.04)
0.00
(0.00)
0.56
(0.01)
19.60
(0.44)
1000

Y (1, 0)
4.60
(0.50)
0.10
(0.01)
0.09
(0.05)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.56
(0.01)
18.36
(0.49)
1000

Y (1, 1)
4.88
(0.49)
0.11
(0.01)
0.06
(0.04)
0.00
(0.00)
0.55
(0.01)
20.85
(0.60)
1000

Note: We show the estimated parameters of the earnings process (equation 3). We obtain these estimates by simulating
1,000 values of parameters using our estimated posterior. The dependent variable corresponds to average monthly earnings
Y (j, h), for training choice j ∈ {0, 1} and lagged training choice ht ∈ {0, 1}. All earnings equations include year-of-entry
dummies. Standard errors are in parentheses.

64

C

Returns to Job Training: Stayer Sample
Figure C.1: Observed Training Choices for Stayers

e

Y(1,1)

of N
ode

Y(1,0)

e

Y(0,1)

of N
ode

Y(0,0)

d
f No
1% o

5

ple

am
fS
o
24%

Second
Year
Training

49%

First
Year
Training

76%

of

N od
% of

18

S am

ple

Second
Year
Training

82%

Notes: We present the decision tree through which workers decide whether to participate in training in each of their
first two years in the labor force. In each node, we include the observed share of workers in our sample who decide
to participate in training.

65

Table C.1: Summary Statistics: Stayer Sample
Variable
Male
Age at Graduation
Math PSU (Normalized)
Verbal PSU (Normalized)
High School GPA (Normalized)
Monthly Salary after First Year (USD)
Monthly Salary after Second Year (USD)
N

Mean
0.44
17.81
-0.03
-0.01
0.04
567.01
623.53

(Std. Dev.)
(0.5)
(0.63)
(0.98)
(0.99)
(0.99)
(344.8)
(392.41)
22247

Note: The table presents summary statistics of the sample of stayers. The dependent variable is the monthly
average of earnings in the first quarter following the training period. For simplicity, we refer to this variable as
concurrent with the training decision. Tests scores (Math and Verbal) and high school GPA are standardized across
the general population of test-takers to be of mean zero and variance 1.

66

Table C.2: Static Returns to Training: Stayer Sample
Treatment effect

t=1

t = 2 (D1 = 0)

t = 2 (D1 = 1)

AT E (percentage points)

2.54
[2.51,2.58]

2.95
[2.87,3.04]

0.35
[0.18,0.52]

T T (percentage points)

2.60
[2.53,2.68]

3.02
[2.82,3.22]

0.07
[-0.17,0.31]

P r(AT E < 0) × 100

41.77
[41.63,41.92]

45.42
[45.25,45.59]

49.51
[49.21,49.82]

P r(T T < 0) × 100

41.65
[41.34,41.95]

45.14
[44.75,45.53]

49.96
[49.51,50.41]

Notes: We report estimates of the Average Treatment Effects (ATE), Treatment on the Treated (TT), and likelihood of
negative treatment effects across three training nodes. The first column show treatment effects after individuals make their first
choice (t = 1). The second and third columns show estimates for after individuals make a second choice (t = 2), conditional on
two possible choices in the first period (D1 ∈ {0, 1}). We show 95% confidence intervals in brackets.

67

Table C.3: Dynamic Returns to Training: Stayer Sample
DATE

DTT

DTUT

Direct effect (short-term)

1.49
(0.01)
[37%]

1.52
(0.02)
[38%]

1.48
(0.01)
[37%]

Direct effect (medium-term)

2.61
(0.02)
[65%]

2.63
(0.04)
[66%]

2.60
(0.02)
[64%]

Continuation value

-0.07
(0.02)
[-2%]

-0.17
(0.04)
[-4%]

-0.04
(0.02)
[-1%]

Total

4.03
(0.02)

3.97
(0.05)

4.05
(0.03)

Note: We estimate Dynamic Average Treatment Effects (DATE), Dynamic Treatment on the Treated (DTT) and Dynamic Treatment on the Untreated (DTUT) of training in t = 1 on the present value of earnings. Let Yei (j) ≡ Yi1 (j) +
ρ (Di2 (j)Yi2 (1, j) + (1 − Di2 (j))Yi2 (0, j)) be the present value of log earnings for training choice j ∈ {0, 1}. The individuallevel dynamic treatment effect equals Yei (1) − Yei (0), where
Yei (1) − Yei (0) =

(Yi1 (1) − Yi1 (0))
|
{z
}

Direct effect (short-term)

+ ρ[Yi2 (0, 1) − Yi2 (0, 0)] +
{z
}
|
Direct effect (medium-term)

ρ [Di2 (1)(Yi2 (1, 1) − Yi2 (0, 1)) − Di2 (0)(Yi2 (1, 0) − Yi2 (0, 0))] .
|
{z
}
Continuation value

We show the above decomposition for:
DAT E ≡ E[Yei (1) − Yei (0)],
DT T ≡ E[Yei (1) − Yei (0) | Di1 = 1],
DT U T ≡ E[Yei (1) − Yei (0) | Di1 = 0],
We present standard errors in parenthesis and the percentage contribution of each term in brackets.

68

