                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE REVERSAL INTEREST RATE

                                    Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                         Yann Koby

                                       Working Paper 25406
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25406


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2018




We are grateful for comments by Joseph Abadi, Julien Bengui, Emmanuel Farhi, Lunyang
Huang, Florian Heider, Sam Langfield, Cesaire Meh, Helene Rey, Philipp Schnabl, Frank Smets,
Adi Sundaram, Skander Van den Heuvel, and seminar participants at the European Central Bank,
the Bank for International Settlements, Princeton University, the Federal Reserve Board, Banque
de France, the Danish Central Bank, the Finnish Central Bank, the London School of Economics,
ETH Zurich, the Swiss Economists Abroad meetings, the Swiss National Bank, the 2018 AEA
meetings, Humboldt University, the Philadelphia Macro Workshop, the International Research
Forum on Monetary Policy, the University of Chicago, and the Bank of Canada. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25406.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Markus K. Brunnermeier and Yann Koby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Reversal Interest Rate
Markus K. Brunnermeier and Yann Koby
NBER Working Paper No. 25406
December 2018
JEL No. E43,E44,E52,G21

                                           ABSTRACT

The “reversal interest rate” is the rate at which accommodative monetary policy reverses its
intended effect and becomes contractionary for lending. It occurs when banks' asset revaluation
from duration mismatch is more than offset by decreases in net interest income on new business,
lowering banks' net worth and tightening their capital constraints. The determinants of the
reversal interest rate are 1) banks' fixed-income holdings, 2) the strictness of capital constraints,
3) the degree of pass-through to deposit rates, and 4) the initial capitalization of banks.
Furthermore, quantitative easing increases the reversal interest rate and should only be employed
after interest rate cuts are exhausted. Over time the reversal interest rate creeps up since asset
revaluation fades out as fixed-income holdings mature while net interest income stays low. We
calibrate a New Keynesian model that embeds our banking frictions and show that the economics
behind the reversal interest rate carry through general equilibrium.


Markus K. Brunnermeier
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08540
and CEPR
and also NBER
markus@princeton.edu

Yann Koby
Princeton University
ykoby@princeton.edu
1     Introduction
In most New Keynesian models, the economy enters a liquidity trap because of an exoge-
nously assumed zero lower bound. This assumption has been called into question since a
growing number of central banks – the Swedish Riksbank, Danmarks Nationalbank, the
Swiss National Bank, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of Japan – have led money
market rates into negative territory as a response to the Great Recession. In addition to
going negative, these rates have been kept low for a long period. Although unusual by his-
torical standards, this economic environment is likely to prevail amid the persistent decline
in real and nominal interest rates over the last two decades.
     This motivates the question: what is the effective lower bound on monetary policy? We
suggest in this paper that it is given by the reversal interest rate, the rate at which ac-
commodative monetary policy reverses its effect and becomes contractionary for lending. A
monetary policy rate decrease below the reversal interest rate depresses rather than stimu-
lates the economy.
     Importantly, the reversal interest rate is not necessarily zero. Hence, unlike what some
commentators suggest, negative interest rates are not fundamentally different. In our model,
when the reversal interest rate is positive, say 1%, a policy rate cut from 1% to 0.9% is already
contractionary. On the other hand, if the reversal interest rate is -1%, policy rate cuts stay
expansionary up to that point, even if their effectiveness might be impaired.
     The reversal interest rate is endogenous, and its existence is guaranteed when banks’
gains from maturity mismatch are insufficiently large. We formally demonstrate this result
in a stylized model of monetary policy transmission through banks. Following an interest
rate cut, two opposing forces affect banks’ net worth. On the one hand, banks make capital
gains on assets with long-term fixed-rate coupon payments (e.g., bonds). On the other hand,
the rate cut shrinks banks’ net interest income going forward. The yield they obtain per unit
of liability employed decreases. Note that our result does not require the elasticity of deposit
demand faced by banks to vary with the level of interest rates, even though properties of
this elasticity matter in our quantitative application.
     Our comparative statics reveal four key determinants of the reversal interest rate: 1)
banks’ holdings of long-term fixed-income assets, 2) banks’ equity capitalization, 3) the
tightness of capital constraints, and 4) the deposit supply elasticity faced by banks. Higher
initial holdings of long-term fixed-income assets imply a larger maturity mismatch, resulting
in a larger asset revaluation that decreases the reversal interest rate. Low initial bank capi-


                                               1
talization and restrictive capital constraints both imply that the capital constraint tightens
sooner following the drop in profitability caused by rate cuts, ceteris paribus. Finally, when
the deposit supply elasticity increases as rates fall – due to consumer awareness of spreads
or cash competition as rates approach zero – banks’ profits shrink faster and the reversal
interest rate is higher.
    Quantitative easing (QE) increases the reversal interest rate, as it takes long-term fixed-
income holdings out of bank balance sheets. Consequently, QE should only be employed
after interest rate cuts are exhausted.
    Our multiple-period extension shows that the effectiveness of a given path of policy rates
depends on the duration of banks’ initial fixed-income holdings. The negative effects on
net interest income we described cumulate every period, while asset revaluation fades out as
bank assets mature. In other words, a rate cut far in the future decreases banks’ profitability
but without revaluation gains if all initial fixed-income holdings have matured by then. In
other words, the reversal interest rate “creeps up”: said differently, the most stimulatory
path of policy rates is increasing over time. “Low for long” rate environments can depress
lending relative to policies that generate a relatively larger decrease in the slope of the yield
curve while keeping the long end of that curve high.
    The economics behind our results carry through in general equilibrium. After embedding
our banking model in a New Keynesian macro model, we calibrate it in order to study
quantitatively the importance of general equilibrium feedbacks. A new force emerges due
to sticky prices. A policy rate cut generates a demand for credit that increases banks’
intermediation and hence profits. This force, in loose terms, decreases the reversal interest
rate. We find in our calibration that the monetary authority’s ability to stimulate lending
rates on impact declines with the size of the monetary shock and reverses at around -1% for
the euro area. Given the persistence of our monetary shock, the negative effects are even
more pronounced on lending rates one or two years ahead. This is due to our earlier “creeping
up” effect: banks are shielded from rate cuts on impact, but not later. Once the reversal in
bank lending is crossed, the economy’s reliance on bank credit – the share of firms that are
bank-dependent and the extent to which they are – dictates the aggregate implications for
investment, output, and consumption. The reversal interest rate for these aggregate variables
is lower, as other channels through which monetary policy operates – nonbank-dependent
firms’ funding costs and the inter-temporal substitution channel – remain active. Finally,
we also show that a permanently lower steady-state real natural rate r∗ leaves less leeway
for monetary policy to be effective should the inflation target π ∗ stay unchanged.


                                               2
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, we present a partial-equilibrium,
two-period model where we provide explicit conditions for the existence of the reversal in-
terest rate. In Section 2, we provide comparative statics and implications of our model for
quantitative easing. In Section 3, we extend the model to multiple periods while keeping
the analysis in partial equilibrium, and analyze how paths of policy rates transmit through
banks. Finally, in Section 4 we introduce our simple banking model inside a New Keyne-
sian model. We calibrate the model and illustrate its implications for impulse responses of
aggregate variables to a monetary shock. The last section concludes.

Literature Review. A long-standing literature developed the concepts of the “balance
sheet” and “bank lending” channels of monetary policy, emphasizing the importance of the
balance sheet structure and the net worth of intermediaries for the transmission of monetary
policy (Bernanke and Blinder, 1988; Bernanke and Gertler, 1995; Van den Heuvel, 2007). In
our model, these objects are key determinants of the transmission of monetary policy.
    From a theoretical standpoint, our microeconomic modeling of banks stands on the shoul-
ders of a literature formally started by Klein (1971) and Monti (1972).1 This literature em-
phasized the importance of market power when modeling banks.2 Sharpe (1997) provides
evidence of switching costs for depositors, and Kim et al. (2003) and Chodorow-Reich (2014)
demonstrate the existence of relationship costs. Hainz et al. (2017) offer suggestive evidence
that depositors’ switching costs might change in low-rate environments, which we exploit in
our quantitative exercise.
    Banks’ market power on their funding sources materializes in the impaired transmission
of money market rates to bank deposit rates, affecting banks’ interest rate risk exposure.
Saunders and Schumacher (2000) and Maudos and Fernandez de Guevara (2004), among
others, showed this fact empirically. Eggertsson et al. (2017) document a collapse of the
pass-through of the monetary policy rate when the latter hits negative territory, owing to
zero-interest-bearing cash becoming relatively more competitive. Work by Rognlie (2016)
also suggests that the elasticity of demand changes at zero and sub-zero rates, affecting the
pass-through. Drechsler et al. (2017) showed that quantities also respond to the spread that
banks’ charge. Importantly, this impaired transmission suggests a wedge between contractual
and effective maturity of deposits, a fact long recognized by regulators when assessing banks’

   1
     Santomero (1984) provides a good survey of this early theoretical literature.
   2
     Petersen and Rajan (1995) in fact argue that banks need some monopoly power to sustain their busi-
nesses.



                                                  3
interest rate risk (Hoffmann et al., 2018).
    The interest rate exposure on banks’ liabilities due to market power is balanced by banks’
long-term fixed-income assets. Begenau et al. (2015) and Gomez et al. (2017) document that
banks’ assets are exposed to interest rate risk, which banks do not fully hedge in derivative
markets (Abad et al., 2016; Hoffmann et al., 2018). Hoffmann et al. (2018) and Drechsler
et al. (2018) show that this asset exposure is rationalized by banks’ market power on deposits
as it provides a natural hedge to the resulting interest rate risk. Drechsler et al. (2018) show
effectively that due to this hedge, realized net interest income varies little with the level of
policy rates: banks optimally choose a maturity mismatch in order to hedge the interest
rate risk created by their market power on the liability side of their balance sheets. We
view our study as complementary: we argue that the long-lasting low/negative interest rate
period was largely unexpected and hence not hedged, and we study the implications of an
unexpected shock. Di Tella and Kurlat (2017) offer an alternative rationalization with a
similar result. In Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2016), banks also hold interest rate risk since
appropriate monetary policy provides a “stealth recapitalization” in downturns. Importantly,
these hedging strategies work in expectation. Hence, upon unusual interest rate realizations,
the valuations of banks can fluctuate significantly, as in our model.
    A recent empirical literature has shown real effects of low/negative rate environments
on banks’ profitability. English et al. (2012), Ampudia and Heuvel (2018), Claessens et al.
(2017), Eisenschmidt and Smets (2018), and Wang et al. (2018) provide evidence that banks’
net interest income and equity valuations vary with the level of interest rates, possibly in a
nonlinear way. In particular, Claessens et al. (2017) find that a 1% policy rate drop implies,
on average, a net interest margin 8 basis points, but that this magnitudes grows as rates
move lower. This effect carries through bank profitability. Moreover, for each additional
year of low rates, margins and profitability fall further. Altavilla et al. (2017) document that
the ECB’s introduction of negative interest rates was significantly detrimental to banks’
net interest income, although increased intermediation activity as well as an improvement
in the risk profile of banks’ assets helped sustain returns on assets. Evidence provided by
Ampudia and Heuvel (2018) suggest that banks’ profitability response to interest rate cuts is
non-monotonic: in normal times, interest rate cuts increase banks’ valuations, although this
does not hold in low-rate environments. Our DSGE model replicates this non-monotonicity.
    Finally, we rely on a literature showing that the profitability of banks impacts their
lending activities and hence the level of intermediation in the economy. Brunnermeier and
Sannikov (2014) provide a theoretical foundation where intermediaries’ profitability is key


                                               4
for the economy to function properly. Cavallino and Sandri (2018) obtain contractionary
monetary easing in their theoretical model and explore the implications in an open economy
context. Empirically, Chodorow-Reich (2014) shows real effects of bank lending frictions on
firm employment. Heider et al. (2017) employ a difference-in-difference analysis using syndi-
cated loans in the euro area to document that banks with a high deposit base decreased their
lending relative to low-deposit, wholesale-funded banks following the ECB’s decision to im-
plement negative interest rates.3 Importantly, Gropp et al. (2018) show that banks exposed
to higher capital requirements decrease their risk-weighted assets instead of recapitalizing,
as in our model.


2       Two-Period Partial Equilibrium Setup
In this section, we analyze a two-period banking model in partial equilibrium. That is, we
hold fixed any aggregate prices and quantities that are not directly determined by banks’
decisions.
    Each of a continuum of (ex ante) identical banks is initially endowed with equity funding
of E0 . In addition, banks can raise liabilities D in the form of bank deposits. On the asset
side of the balance sheet, banks have two investment opportunities: loans L to firms and
fixed-income assets S. Banks compete for loans to firms, while they take the return on fixed-
income assets as well as their initial equity as given. Figure 1 displays a stylized balance
sheet of a bank.


2.1     Timing of events
There are two periods, 0 and 1. We let i0 denote the interest rate between time 0 and 1 that
was expected before the beginning of period 0. At the beginning of period 0, the central
bank sets the policy rate to i, which may differ from i0 . Observing i, banks then set new
interest rates to maximize their period 1 net worth.

    3
      Gomez et al. (2017) offer similar evidence, by studying two groups differentially exposed to interest rate
risk. The group whose profitability is affected negatively (in relative terms) by a change in aggregate interest
rates decreases its lending.




                                                       5
                         Figure 1: Bank’s balance sheet: two-period model.


2.2     Bank assets
Bank loans. Each bank grants loans to a unit measure of its customer firms. We assume
for simplicity that informational friction make firms locked in a relationship with their house
bank. The loan demand that bank j faces is denoted by L(iLj ), where iLj is the nominal rate
on bank loans that bank j offers.4

Fixed-Income Assets. Each bank can also invest in fixed-income assets S. These assets
are available in perfectly elastic supply, with a yield i that banks take as given.5


2.3     Bank Liabilities
Deposits. As with loans, each bank is naturally associated with depositors over which
they have market power. We assume the demand schedule is given by D(iD ), where D(·)
is increasing. In the comparative statics section – as well as in our quantitative analysis –

   4
      In our general equilibrium section, we micro-found the loan demand of firms and make them dependent
on aggregate conditions beyond iL  j.
    5
      A broader interpretation of these assets would include equities, as banks take their returns essentially
as given, and the risk-free component of these returns tracks the policy rate i.



                                                      6
we’ll consider ways in which D(·) might also depend on the current level of rates: we might
expect, for example, competition for deposits to be tougher in low-rate environments.

Equity. Let E0 (i0 ) be the banks’ book equity before the surprise policy rate change. We
assume that banks’ book equity after the surprise change, E0 (i), is a function of the nominal
policy interest rate i. This captures the fact that the value of banks’ past assets and liabilities
might change after monetary policy changes its stance. This revaluation can take the form of
capital gains on mark-to-market assets, but include in spirit any asset revaluation, including,
for example, changes in loan-losses provisions. We decompose the equity after the monetary
policy shock into E0 (i) = ē0 + e0 (i), where ē0 is the interest-insensitive component of initial
equity and e0 (i) the interest-sensitive part. We assume that ∂e0 (i)/∂i < 0, reflecting a
maturity mismatch.6


2.4     Financial frictions
Banks face two forms of financial frictions. First, banks are subject to a capital constraint
of the form
                                     ψ L L + ψ S S ≤ N1 ,

where ψ L , ψS ≥ 0 are risk weights and N1 denotes the bank’s (nominal) net worth (defined
below). That is, a weighted average of book assets must be covered by the value of the bank.
We set ψ S = 0 for concreteness.7 The capital constraint captures economic and regulatory
factors. Note that E0 does enter the constraint indirectly through N1 : ceteris paribus, a
larger E0 leads to higher net worth.8
    Second, banks face a liquidity constraint of the form

                                               S ≥ ψ D D,

with ψ D > 0. That is, each bank’s fixed-income holdings must cover a certain fraction of
deposits. Such a constraint captures the fact that banks need sufficient and easily accessible
funds to avoid run risk.

   6
     For example, assume that banks enter the period with some equity ē0 and an interest rate swap with
                                      0
                                        −i
notional value A0 . Setting e0 (i) = i1+i  A0 is isomorphic to including this derivative in the analysis.
   7
    The analysis generalizes to the case ψS < ψL .
   8
    Regulation often has an object closer to E0 in the analysis. Such a constraint would not tighten in our
two-period model, but would if time between these two periods is split into more sub-periods.


                                                    7
2.5     Banks’ problem
Finally, let L + S = D + E0 (i) be the balance sheet identity of the bank. Then, we can write
its problem as

                          max           N1 = (1 + iL )L + (1 + i)S − (1 + iD )D
                     iL ,iD ,L,D,S,N1

                                  L + S = D + E0 (i)
                                      ψD D ≤ S
                                      ψ L L ≤ N1
                                         L = Lj (iLj )
                                        D = Dj (iD    D
                                                 j ; i−j , i).


This problem offers no particular mathematical difficulties, and hence we omit conditions for
existence and uniqueness of a symmetric equilibrium. In our micro-foundations of D(·), L(·)
in later sections, existence and uniqueness are straightforward to show.


3     Partial Equilibrium Reversal Interest Rate

3.1     Definition of the reversal interest rate
We now explicitly define the “reversal interest rate” as the rate at which a decrease in the
nominal policy rate, i, stimulates lending if and only if the current level of the interest rate,
i, is above the reversal interest rate iRR .

Definition 1 (reversal interest rate). Let iRR define the reversal interest rate such that
                         dL∗
    1. i > iRR implies    di
                               < 0;
                         dL∗
    2. i = iRR implies    di
                               = 0;
                         dL∗
    3. i < iRR implies    di
                               > 0.

    In what follows, we first derive the bank’s optimal setting rules. We then spell out
sufficient conditions under which a reversal interest rate obtains.




                                                         8
3.2       Banks’ rate-setting rules
Monetary policy affects the marginal investment opportunity of banks. Given that a bank
can earn a return of i from holding a fixed-income asset, i encodes the opportunity cost of
granting loans, and banks charge a mark up above it. Similarly, for deposits banks apply a
mark down on the marginal investment yield i.
   The constraints limit banks’ portfolio choices. In particular, when the capital constraint
binds, banks charge higher-than-desired lending rates in order to decrease their leverage.
Similarly, when the liquidity constraint binds, banks offer higher-than-desired lending and
deposit rates in order to bring the liquidity ratio up.
   Let εf ∗ denote the semi-elasticity of the function f with respect to the relevant rate,
evaluated at the optimal pricing rules.9 The next lemma formally encodes these results.

Lemma 1 (rate-setting rules). The optimal rate on loans is given by

                                                                      1      ψL
                                iL∗ =               i          +         +        λL∗ .                             (1)
                                                                     εL∗   1 + ψL
                                                  |{z}              |{z}   | {z }
                                               Marginal            Mark up     Capital constraint
                                            opportunity cost


The optimal rate on deposits is given by

                                       D∗                          1        ψD
                                   i        =      i  −                  +       λD∗                                (2)
                                                               εD∗         1+ψ L
                                                 |{z}          |{z}        | {z }
                                                Marginal   Mark down         Liquidity constraint
                                                 benefit


   When constraints are slack, the Lagrangian multipliers are simply zero; when they do
bind, the Lagrange multipliers are defined by the FOCs, and actual rates are given by the
constraints themselves.10


3.3       Existence of iRR
We now show how the constraints lead to a reversal of the bank lending channel. Remember
that the capital constraint depends on how profitable the bank is. The next lemma shows

   9                    ∂ log L(iL )
       That is, εL∗ =       ∂iL
                                             . Although    mathematically these are semi-elasticities, economically they
                                     iL =iL∗
                                          L D
are elasticities since the units of i , i are percentage points.
   10
      Smooth costs would enter in a similar way, increasing both lending and deposit rates.



                                                                    9
that profits of banks have two components: net interest income (NII) and capital gains (CG).
NII is defined as11

                                  NII = i|L∗ L∗{z+ i S}∗ −        i|D∗{zD}∗       .
                                          Interest income     Interest expenses


Capital gains, on the other hand, are simply the change in initial equity (retained earnings)
created by the surprise change in interest rates:

                                          CG = E0 (i) − E0 (i0 ).

The following lemma also shows that when there are no capital gains, that is, CG = 0, then
the change in profits following an interest rate cut is strictly negative. We first state the
result when the liquidity constraint binds and then show that it only works to increase the
derivative.

Lemma 2 (profit response). Assume that ψ D = 0. The change in profits following a change
in i is then given by

                             dN1∗               dNII           dE0 (i) 
                                  = (1 + λL∗ )        + (1 + i)           .                              (3)
                              di    | {z } | {z   di } |      {z di }
                                      Amplification
                                                      NII>0           CG<0

                                  dN ∗
Moreover, if dEdi0 (i) = 0, then di1 > 0.
                                                                    dN1∗
  Also, if ψ D > 0, then the derivative is larger than               di
                                                                           given in (3) above.

    This result is intuitive. An interest rate cut depresses the return on new investments
in fixed-income assets. Because fixed-income assets are always held by banks (whether the
liquidity constraint binds or not), net interest income, and hence profits, decreases. That
this is sufficient is a consequence of the envelope theorem – the fact that the first-order
conditions described above apply. However, an interest rate cut also leads to an increase in
E0 (i), on the basis of the maturity mismatch. Without such gains, profits unambiguously
decrease following an interest rate cut.
    Moreover, an amplification occurs when the capital constraint binds (implying that λL∗ >
0). From that point onward, banks are forced to divert loan investment into fixed-income

  11
     Note that our definition differs from measurements of realized net interest income as given, for example
that in Drechsler et al. (2017). One can view our capital gains as the component of realized net interest
income which is “shielded” from interest rate fluctuations.

                                                      10
asset investment. Ceteris paribus, that makes further cuts more harmful to banks’ profits.
    Returning to our main result, when the capital gains are sufficiently small – that is, the
change in E0 (i) is small enough – then the NII channel dominates. Hence, profits decrease
with a decline in i. Moreover, as long as the capital constraint does not bind, diL∗ /di > 0,
so that an interest rate cut lowers the loan interest rate, leading to more loans. Both forces
tighten the constraint. Eventually, the constraint inevitably binds: at that point the policy
rate hits the reversal interest rate, because any further decrease in i will decrease profits,
which through the constraint must decrease L∗ , so that dL∗ /di flips sign.

Proposition 1. (existence of iRR ) When capital gains E0 (i) are sufficiently low (uniformly
bounded by some number), there exists a finite reversal interest rate iRR .

   Furthermore, nothing guarantees the reversal interest rate to be zero or any particular
number.

Corollary 1. Generically, iRR 6= 0.

A numerical example. Figure 2 displays a numerical example of a reversal interest
rate triggered by a binding capital constraint for a baseline interest rate of i0 = 1.5%. An
interest rate cut lowers banks’ net worth (lower-left panel), as the decline in net interest
income exceeds the increase in capital gains (lower-right panel). The capital constraint
tightens until it inevitably binds. At this stage, i falls below the reversal interest rate and
a further decrease in the policy rate lowers loan volume (top-left panel). Interestingly, the
loan interest rate then rises below that interest rate (top-right panel).


3.4     Comparative statics results
We now derive the comparative statics results. Unsurprisingly, the reversal interest rate is
lower when capital constraints are looser or initial equity is low. This is consistent with
Corbae and D’Erasmo (2014), who find in a structurally estimated banking model that an
increase in capital requirements leads to a decline in aggregate loan supply and an increase
in the loan interest rate.12,13 Our third result in the next proposition states that, everything

   12
      It is important to note that we neglect the potential risk-taking effects of decreasing interest rates,
which might be the basis for a constraint – see, for example, Di Tella (2013) or Klimenko et al. (2015). In
a theory encompassing both channels, a trade-off would emerge between the two; we are only modeling one
side of a trade-off, and hence our results are unambiguous here.
   13
      Note that for Propositions 2 and 3 below, the statements hold only weakly; however, for some reasonable
constellations of parameters they hold strictly.

                                                     11
Figure 2: A numerical example of a reversal interest rate (dashed vertical line) due to a binding
capital constraint. The constraint binds since the losses on net interest income (NII) are not
sufficiently compensated by capital gains (CG). ∆CG and ∆N II refer to changes relative to their
respective value at a baseline rate of i0 = 1.5%.


else equal, higher capital constraints on leverage make subsequent interest rate cuts below
the reversal interest rate even more harmful for lending.

Proposition 2 (capital constraint and equity). The reversal interest rate iRR has the fol-
lowing properties:

  1. The reversal interest rate iRR increases in the risk weight of the capital constraint ψ L .
  2. The reversal interest rate iRR decreases in the interest rate sensitivity of the initial
     equity ∂e0 (i)/∂i (keeping E0 (i0 ) constant).
  3. An interest rate cut below the reversal rate is more detrimental for lending in an econ-
     omy with a tighter capital constraint. Specifically, consider two economies, A and B,
     that have the same reversal interest rate iRR      RR
                                                 A = iB and that are identical in all respects
                                                                             ∗        ∗
     except that ē0,A < ē0,B and ψAL < ψBL . Then, for any i < iRR   RR
                                                                  A = iB , LA (i) > LB (i).




                                               12
    Arguably, one of the most striking features of our reversal result is that it does not rely
on stickiness of the deposit rate. However, the next proposition shows the higher intensive
margin deposit supply, coming, for example, from competition with other nominal saving
vehicles such as cash. Naturally, if banks face a higher elasticity as rates fall for competitive
reasons – as happens in our New Keynesian model, due to higher stickiness (through decreas-
ing spread tolerance from customers) – the reversal interest rate increases as well. Finally,
larger liquidity constraints also work toward making the reversal interest rate higher.
Proposition 3 (liquidity constraint and deposit rate pass-through). The reversal interest
rate iRR has the following properties:
  1. For iD , such that d(iD ) = 0 for all iD ≤ iD , where d(·) is the intensive margin of the
     deposit supply from depositors, iRR is increasing in iD . In other words, the reversal
     interest rate is increasing with the lower bound on deposits.

  2. Similarly, assume that the perceived elasticity ε∗D is decreasing in i, leaving D(·) un-
     changed – e.g., individual banks face a higher perceived elasticity for extensive margin
     reasons. Then, the reversal interest rate is larger than with a constant ε∗D .

  3. The reversal interest rate iRR increases with the tightness of the liquidity constraint
     ψD .
    We finally add an obvious but important result. Suppose that capital gains can be paid
out as dividends: that is, equity is given by E0 (i) = ē0 + (1 − υ0 )e0 (i), υ0 is the dividend
rate, and e0 (i) represents capital gains (asset revaluation). Certainly, the larger υ0 is, the
less effective interest rate cuts are at recapitalizing gains for the purpose of making new
loans, thus increasing the reversal interest rate. Our framework therefore rationalizes some
of the recent policies implemented to restrict the dividend payments of banks.
Proposition 4 (dividends and the reversal interest rate). Suppose that equity is given by
E0 (i) = ē0 + (1 − υ0 )e0 (i), with υ0 the dividend rate. Then, iRR is increasing in υ0 .


3.5    Optimal sequencing of QE
Our model also implies an optimal sequencing of interest rate policy and other monetary
operations such as quantitative easing (QE). QE changes the bond holdings of the banking
sector and hence its interest rate risk exposure. QE reduces the banks’ holdings of long-term
bonds; hence, after QE, the interest rate sensitivity of bank equity ∂e(i)/∂i is reduced, which
increases the reversal interest rate.

                                               13
Proposition 5 (QE and capital gains). Quantitative easing, which lowers the interest rate
sensitivity of banks’ initial equity ∂e(i)/∂i while leaving the overall level of E0 (i0 ) unchanged,
lowers potential capital gains from a subsequent interest rate cut and hence increases the
reversal interest rate iRR .
   The optimal sequence of stimulating monetary policy is to cut the interest rate all the
way toward the reversal interest rate before conducting QE measures.

    We emphasize that this is a partial equilibrium result. In general equilibrium, other
forces might pull toward an alternative sequencing.14


4        The “Creeping up” Effect
In this section, we extend the model to a three-period setting. This allows us to study how
announcements about a path of policy rates impact the business of the bank, in particular
net interest income in the future and the feedback on lending today. Our main result is
that the optimal length of interest rate cuts should be related to the maturity of the banks’
existing assets. The reason is as follows. As in the two-period model, a cut in an interest
rate in the future has two effects: 1) fixed-income assets experience capital gains, while 2)
net interest income will be depressed. Since the fixed-income assets mature over time, the
first force slowly fades out whereas the loss in margins on future business does not. Hence,
the interest rates that maximize lending “creep up” over time.
    To make that intuition concrete, we consider banks in a setting similar to our two-period
model, except that banks enter the period with two assets on their books: a one-period
bond and a two-period bond. Moreover, their equity in the second-period is endogeneous
and depends on profits that banks make in the first period. We then ask: what is the path
of interest rates that maximizes banks’ loan supply? Since fixed-income holdings of the first
period are larger than those of the second period, the case for cutting the interest rate is
stronger in the first period, where the capital gains are higher, while the effect on net interest
income is similar across both periods. In that sense, the optimal path of (reversal) interest
rates is increasing, and an exceedingly long-lasting environment of low interest rates might
hurt lending.

    14
     In particular, the sequencing described above stealthily recapitalizes banks, meaning that losses other
sectors – the government, households, foreigners, or others – could distort other economic decisions.




                                                    14
4.1     Three-period model extension
In our three-period model, the monetary authority controls a path of one-period interest
rates {i0,1 , i1,2 }: the rate between the first two periods, i0,1 , and the rate between the last
two periods, i1,2 . Banks enter the period with their past book, consisting of equity ē0 , one-
period bonds B0,1 , and two-period zero-coupon bonds B0,2 .15 Bonds are priced competitively
                  1                         1
at pB                        B
     0,1 = 1+i0,1 and p0,2 = (1+i0,1 )(1+i1,2 ) . Hence the bank’s equity entering the period is
E0 (i0,1 , i1,2 ) = ē0 + pB           B
                           0,1 B0,1 + p0,2 B0,2 : when rates and therefore prices change, so too does
equity entering the new period.
    Each period, the bank is able to grant loans and deposits and to invest in fixed-income
assets. The demand for loans L(·) and the supply of deposits D(·) is the same in both
periods. We also assume that, before the policy experiment, the interest rates are equal in
both periods, denoted by i∗ . Hence, the two periods are identical in every aspect to repeating
our two-period model twice, except that we have one- and two-period bonds and the equity
level in the second period is now endogenously specified. As before, let N1 be the net worth
of the bank after optimization in the first period. We assume that part of the earnings is
retained. Specifically, we assume a dividend (payout) rate υ ∈ (0, 1) of the net worth, so
that E1 = (1 − υ)N1 . We further assume that υ is such that E0 (i∗ , i∗ ) = E1 . In sum, the
environment is totally stationary when there are no policy changes, and the bank makes
similar decisions in both periods should rates stay at i∗ . Finally, we keep the analysis in
partial equilibrium, so there are no feedbacks from the policy changes and banks’ endogenous
responses.


4.2     Loan-maximizing policies
We define the loan-maximizing policies iP0,1 , iP1,2 as those that maximize the discounted sum
of loans:
                   (iP0,1 , iP1,2 ) = argmax L∗0,1 (i0,1 , i1,2 ) + β P L∗1,2 (i0,1 , i1,2 ),
                                     i0,1 ,i1,2

where L∗0,1 , L∗1,2 are the optimal choices of banks’ loan supply given the interest rates, and
β P is a “policy specific” discount factor (of the social planner). We assume that β P ≤ 1,
that is, the policy cares more about present loans than future loans.
    Our goal in this section is to characterize the choices iP0,1 , iP1,2 .

   15
      More generally, these bonds should represent the duration structure of banks’ balance sheets as they
enter the period, in the spirit of Begenau et al. (2015).


                                                   15
4.3      “Creeping up” result
Our main result is that, under mild conditions, iP0,1 < iP1,2 – that is, the interest rate path
“creeps up.” The key reason for this result is that, although the loss in net interest income
following an interest rate cut is similar in both periods, the capital gains from cutting the
short-term rate are larger than from cutting the long-term rates since assets mature. In
other words, a long-lasting low-interest-rate environment is going to hurt banks’ flow profits
in every period, while generating low capital gains in the later periods. As a consequence, it
is optimal to cut the short-term rate more deeply than the long-term one.
    One condition we need when capital gains on long-term assets are present, however, is
that the policy makers must care about loans in the second period. To see this, suppose
that β P = 0, that is, the policy maker is myopic and cares only about current loan volume.
Suppose, moreover, that B0,2 > 0, that is, there are capital gains to be made on long-term
assets. The policy response will naturally be to decrease the long rate as much as possible,
so as to maximally boost capital gains on long-term assets, which will drive down long-term
loans to very low levels. Consequently, bank net worth would tank and, with it, loan volume
in the second period. Hence, to avoid these myopic cases, we need β P to be sufficiently close
to one whenever B0,2 > 0.

Proposition 6. Assume that B0,1 and B0,2 are small enough such that the loan-maximizing
rates iP0,1 , iP1,2 are well defined. Then iP0,1 < iP1,2 .

    Note that we have not assumed that a low net worth in the long term feeds back on
the banks’ ability to lend in the first period.16 This would make the case for cutting the
long rate even weaker, as there would be an additional motive to raise the long-term rate
further in order to avoid the drop in long-term net worth that would feed back on the bank’s
risk-taking ability.


5        Reversal in a New Keynesian DSGE
We now ask whether a reversal interest rate still exists in a quantitatively realistic general
equilibrium setting in which changes in the policy rate can stimulate aggregate demand due
to nominal price rigidities. As in our partial equilibrium model, the capital gains are not

    16
     That is, we could have assumed that ψ L L0,1 ≤ N1 + βN2 , where β is some discount factor relevant to
evaluating how much long-term net worth impacts a bank’s ability to take on risk.


                                                   16
enough to offset the fall in the net interest income of banks, decreasing their profitability
and hence threatening their ability to provide productive lending to the economy. Moreover,
the decreased pass-through to deposit rates weighs further on bank profitability. However,
standard New Keynesian forces operating through inter-temporal substitution and price
rigidity generate an increase in loan demand and hence lift bank profitability. If such lift is
strong enough, it may overturn our partial equilibrium results.17 The lack of deposit rate
pass-through mitigates this channel, very much like an economy entering a liquidity trap.
    Our calibration quantitatively pins down these forces. We find that a general equilibrium
reversal interest rate still obtains. Moreover, even before the reversal interest rate is reached,
the effectiveness of monetary policy decreases as it approaches the reversal interest rate: in
that sense, our frictions smoothly affect monetary policy’s effectiveness.


5.1     Environment
Time is discrete and the horizon is infinite. Households choose consumption, savings, and
labor supply to maximize their lifetime utility over consumption and leisure. They own
banks and all three types of firms in the economy: intermediate goods producers, retailers,
and final goods producers. Some intermediate goods producers require bank loans to sustain
their investment activities. Banks obtain deposits from households and invest these savings
in government fixed-income assets and loans to the bank-dependent intermediate goods pro-
ducers. Intermediate goods producers competitively sell goods to retailers. These retailers
differentiate these goods at no cost and sell them to competitive final goods producers. Re-
tailers are subject to price frictions, in a New Keynesian fashion. Final goods producers then
bundle retail goods into final goods usable for consumption and capital. Finally, a mone-
tary authority (government) supplies nominal fixed-income assets to banks elastically at a
particular interest rate, taxing (or redistributing gains to) households lump-sum to finance
such assets.

Households. A unit continuum of identical households with separable preferences over
consumption and labor choose consumption Ct , labor supply lt , and deposits Dt in order to

  17
     With flexible prices, general equilibrium forces will work to alleviate the negative consequences of a
reversal interest rate, but they cannot undermine its existence.




                                                    17
maximize their lifetime utility:
                                                                 ∞
                                                                 X
                                            max           E0           β t U (Ct , lt ),
                                        {Ct ,lt ,Dt+1 }
                                                                 t=0


where the per-period utility is given by

                                                                Ct1−γ    l1+ϕ
                                        U (Ct , lt ) =                −χ t
                                                                1−γ     1+ϕ

subject to their budget constraint

                          pt Ct + Dt+1 = pt wt lt + (1 + iD
                                                          t−1,t )Dt + pt Πt − pt Tt ,


where Πt denotes profits coming from retailers, intermediate goods producers, and banks,
and Tt are government lump-sum transfers.

Final goods producers. Final goods producers purchase retail goods j ∈ [0, 1] at price
pt (j) and aggregates them into the final good, with production function
                                                                                       
                                                  Z        1                        −1
                                                                         −1
                                          Yt =                  Yt (j)        dj
                                                        0


They then sell these final goods on competitive markets to households for consumption and
to intermediate firms for capital investment.

Retailers. A unit continuum of retailers is indexed by j ∈ [0, 1]. Each produces its
own retail good variety j by costlessly transforming intermediate goods. They face the
demand function for their retail variety derived from the problem of the final goods producers.
Retailers are subject to Rotemberg price adjustment costs. The problem of a single retailer
j is then summarized by
                            "∞
                             X              h
                                                                                   − 
              max Et                β s Λt+s pt+s (j)1− p−1
                                                          t+s Yt+s − mct+s pt+s (j) pt+s Yt+s
             {pt+s (j)}
                              s=0
                                                                       2                       #
                                               θ           pt+s (j)                            i
                                             −                       − 1 pt+s (j)1− p−1
                                                                                      t+s Yt+s     ,
                                               2          pt+s−1 (j)




                                                                 18
where real marginal costs mct are equal to pIt , the price of intermediate goods, and Λt+s =
UC (Ct+s ), where Ct+s is the consumption of the representative household.

Intermediate firms. Labor and capital are combined to produce intermediate goods.
These goods are then sold competitively to retailers. Labor is hired competitively at a wage
rate w. Capital is purchased a period in advance from final goods producers, and depreciates
slowly. There are two types of firms in the economy, which differ in two aspects: their access
to financial markets and their productivity.
    Intermediate firms are of two types. A share 1 − ξ of firms are neoclassical and obtain
capital directly from households. Specifically, the problem of neoclassical firms is to maximize
their profits, given that they hire labor at the real wage wt and acquire capital a period in
advance. In so doing, they value the opportunity cost of capital acquisition at the effective
rental rate rt−1,t defined by
                                                Λt
                                    rt−1,t = β      − 1 + δ,                                 (4)
                                               Λt−1
where δ is the depreciation rate of capital. They then produce output using a Cobb-Douglas
production function with TFP Ā and sell it at the given price pIt . Hence their problem reads
as
                                                     ν
                               max pIt Ā ktα `1−α
                                               t          − wt `t − rt−1,t kt .
                               ellt ,kt


    The second type of intermediate firms, the remaining share ξ, are bank dependent. They
produce by combining labor and capital in a Cobb-Douglas production function with produc-
tivity A. These firms are born without financial resources, so their entire capital purchase
must be financed with a bank loan; in subsequent periods, they can use retained earnings as a
source of financing, which diminishes their need for bank loans. We introduce heterogeneous
duration of firms’ projects in order to obtain a maturity structure for bank loans. Specifi-
cally, when a bank-dependent firm is founded, it learns a specific duration τ ∈ {1, ..., T } of
its project, drawn from a distribution Γτ . In their founding period, these firms can choose to
enter long-term bank contracts that fix their loan and rate schedules; changing the schedule,
once settled, requires paying a fixed cost Fb .18 Specifically, firms can commit to an interest
                                                       ∗
rate schedule iL∗
                0,...,τ and associated loan schedule L0,...,τ . Finally, we assume that firms dis-
count using the SDF of households, although frictions prevent them from being able to draw

  18
    This helps us micro-found capital gains from loans on banks’ balance sheets. Capital gains will also
come from banks’ holding of bonds.


                                                  19
funds from them.19,20
   Given this setting, a firm that drew a project of duration τ and does not commit to a
loan plan solves the following problem (we drop firm indices for simplicity):
                                              τ
                                              X
                                   max E0            β t Λ t xt
                                               t=0

                       xt + kt − Lt = pIt yt + (1 − δ)kt−1 − wt `t − (1 + rtL )Lt−1
                                            α
                                     yt = Akt−1 `1−α
                                                 t

                                              1 + iLt−1
                                 1 + rtL =
                                               1 + πt
                                     Lt ≥ 0, xt ≥ 0.

A firm that drew a project of duration τ at time 0 and commits to a plan solves
                                    τ
                                    X
                         max E0            β t Λ t xt
                                     t=0

                xt + kt − Lt = pIt yt + (1 − δ)kt−1 − wt `t − (1 + rtL )Lt−1 − Fb 1Lt 6=L∗t,0
                                   α
                            yt = Akt−1 `1−α
                                        t

                                   1 + iL∗
                                        t−1,0               iLt−1 − iL∗
                                                                     t−1,0
                      1+   rtL   =            + 1Lt 6=L∗t,0
                                     1 + πt                     1 + πt
                           Lt ≥ 0, xt ≥ 0,

with k−1 = L−1 = 0. Note that in our calibration, it will be the case that the optimal payout
rate is xt = 0 for all t < τ – that is, firms will direct all retained earnings toward investment
and minimize the reliance on bank loans. Also, note that in a perfect-foresight equilibrium,
firms will be totally indifferent as to whether to commit to a plan or not.

Banks. A unit continuum of identical banks exists. The problem of each bank is identical
to the one described in our two-period model, with one exception: to keep the banks’ prob-
lems differentiable, we replace our capital inequality constraint with smooth leverage costs.
We also assume there is perfect competition on the loan side, so that loans are priced at
marginal costs that include costs from leverage. Specifically, marginal costs have three com-

  19
       Note that banks are special in our model because they have the ability to grant loans to these firms.
  20
       Since rtL > ΛΛt+1
                      t
                         − 1 in equilibrium, the choice of the households’ SDF is inconsequential.


                                                                  20
ponents: 1) the return on fixed-income assets it , which represent the marginal opportunity
cost of lending; 2) a per-loan unit leverage cost %(γtL ), where γtL is the aggregate leverage
                                     Lt
of the banking sector and γtL = N1,t+1   and Lt , N1,t+1 are, respectively, the aggregate loans
and next-period aggregate net worth of the banking system; and 3) a time-invariant per-loan
unit cost cL . The loan rate offered on new loans is then given by

                                           iLt = it + %(γtL ) + cL .

However, as described in the previous sections, banks also offer firms lon- term loans with
locked-in rates and quantities. They price these according to marginal costs.21
    Next, we describe the capital accumulation process of banks between periods. We assume
that banks accumulate real equity according to the following formula:

                                                           1
                                      Et+1 = (1 − υ)             Nt+1 ,
                                                        1 + πt+1

where υ is a fixed dividend rate, and Nt+1 is the nominal (in period t terms) net worth of
banks. Dividends are rebated directly to households.22
    Next, we need to parametrize deposit demand in the model and, in particular, how the
margins on deposit vary with the level of interest rates. The data suggests that deposits
rates are quite sticky, with a declining pass-through as money market rates decrease. We
micro-found one explanation for this phenomenon at the extensive margin in Appendix B.23
Simply put, we posit that households become more aware of spreads as rates approach zero or
negative territory. This makes the extensive margin dominate bank mark downs on deposit
rates so that we can simply set iD             D                     D
                                   t = it − η (it ) and parametrize η (·) to fit the observed
pass-through in the data. Importantly, once they post a rate, banks in our setting are willing
to absorb as many deposits as are demanded by households.24
    Finally, given the level of equity Et , the loan demand given prices Lt (iLt ), and deposit

   21
      After a surprise shock, though, banks still pay the leverage costs coming from these fixed-interest loans.
   22
      The fixed-dividend assumption makes certain that banks do not drive leverage costs %(·) to zero by
borrowing from households. This is consistent with the empirical evidence in Gropp et al. (2018). When
undercapitalized, banks do not recapitalize but instead deleverage by decreasing the size of their balance
sheets or rebalance their assets toward less risky ones. Debt overhang is one underpinning for this behavior
(Admati et al., 2017).
   23
      The explanation at the intensive margin would be the presence of cash.
   24
      This is important, as it can be that iD
                                            t < it . In our two-period model, the liquidity constraint played
the role of preventing banks from shedding their fixed-income assets. Here, banks hold on to their deposits.



                                                      21
demand Dt (iD  t ), banks’ balance sheet equation means that the total level of fixed-income
assets invested by banks must be St = Et + Dt − Lt . We furthermore allow banks to invest in
                                                                          P
fixed-income assets of different maturities τ . Let total holdings be St = τ St,τ . These assets
are elastically supplied by the government at fair prices. In the perfect-foresight equilibrium
that we study, banks are indifferent between maturity choices. We pick the maturity choices
of banks to match their empirical maturity structure of assets.
    Hence, the representative bank’s net worth is
                                                     X
                      Nt+1 = (1 + iLt )Lt (iLt ) +          pt+1,τ St,τ − (1 + iD
                                                                                t )Dt ,
                                                      τ


where pt+1,τ is the price of the fixed-income asset with remaining maturity τ at time t + 1.

Government and Monetary Authority. The government taxes (or transfers) a lump-
sum amount Tt to households, which allows it to pay the nominal interest rates it on fixed-
income assets. Ricardian equivalence holds in our economy, making the timing of taxes
irrelevant. The monetary authority follows a Taylor rule, which is assumed to take the
following common form:
                                                   ρi             (1−ρi )φπ
                          1 + it         1 + it−1           1 + πt                  m
                                 =                                                eεt ,
                          1 + i∗          1 + i∗            1 + π∗

where i∗ is the steady-state policy rate, π ∗ is the steady-state inflation rate, and εm
                                                                                       t is a
monetary policy shock.


5.2     Solution concept
We calibrate our model to the euro area, where negative rates have been implemented since
2014.25 We assume that every agent in the economy has perfect foresight over the future and
solve the deterministic equilibrium after a one-time unexpected monetary policy shock εm t .
Our computational algorithm solves for the full nonlinear system of equations, and hence
does not rely on perturbation techniques. This is important, since our economy inherently
features large nonlinearities.

  25
    The euro area also has a higher share of small and medium-sized firms, and its firms are more bank
dependent than firms in the U.S.




                                                     22
                              Table 1: Conventional DSGE Parameters.


                          Parameter        Description                   Value
                                γ          IES parameter                 2
                                φ          Disutility of labor           1
                                δ          Capital depreciation          0.1
                                α          Capital share                 0.33
                                ν          Scale parameter               0.81
                                          Retail price elasticity       6
                                θ          Rotemberg cost                60
                                φπ         Taylor rule coefficient       1.5
                                 i
                                ρ          Taylor rule persistence       0.8



5.3     Calibration
We set the length of a period to one year. The calibration of the New Keynesian block of
the model is standard, and the parameters are summarized in Table 1.
    We calibrate the remaining parameters to match key moments about banks and the pro-
duction sector’s dependence on bank lending. Table 2 displays the resulting parameters. We
choose the nominal fixed-income asset rate and households’ deposit rates to be, respectively,
2.00% and 0.65%, corresponding to values prior to the low/negative rate environment. We
use the EONIA for the fixed-income asset rate, and the deposit rate for euro-area households
in the ECB MIR data. Next, we need to match the pass-through of fixed-income rates into de-
posit rates. We choose to do so using the flexible functional form η D (i) = i − η1 − η2 exp(η3 i),
which allows for a decaying pass-through. Concretely, we fit the parameters η1 , η2 , and η3
such that 1) the steady-state values satisfy the equation iD              D
                                                           SS = iSS − η (iSS ); 2) the average
deposit rate during the negative rate environment, which was iD   neg = 0.1%, matches the av-
erage negative rate on fixed-income assets of ineg =-0.3%, that is iD                D
                                                                      neg = ineg − η (ineg ); and
                                                                  D
3) the pass-through at steady-state value is perfect, that is, ∂i∂i = 1 in the steady state.26
Figure 8 in the Appendix depicts the resulting pass-through. Next, we match banks’ profits
to assets to equal the equivalent ratio in the data, which is 1.80%.27 Given steady-state

  26
      This is desirable, as IRFs in the steady state’s vicinity are not affected by the lack of deposit pass-
through, which facilitates the comparison with the vanilla New Keynesian model.
   27
      We sum net interest income and net fee and commission income for euro-area domestic banks and divide


                                                     23
lending costs, cL adjusts to match this ratio. For leverage costs, we choose the specification
          κ
%(γ) = γ−γ̄   with parameter κ and γ̄: it has an asymptote as γ → γ̄, mimicking our hard
constraint in the two-period model. We pick a maximum leverage γ̄ of 10%, in accordance
with the guideline provided by the ECB for the minimum leverage ratio. Steady-state lever-
age costs depend on the capital ratio of banks in the steady state: we pin it down to 15.5%,
the average value reported by Altavilla et al. (2017). As in Alpanda et al. (2014), we set
the capital leverage cost parameter κ so that we match the elasticity of rates to changes in
capital leverage in the MAG report of the Financial Stability Board (Macroeconomic As-
sessment Group, 2010). This report estimates that a 1% increase in capital leverage results
in a 0.28% increase in capital funding costs. Next, we obtain information on the maturity
structure of banks from Hoffmann et al. (2018). Within fixed-income assets, we target a
duration of 3.4 years, which we match using a geometrically decaying structure of banks’
fixed-income asset purchases such that the share of fixed-income assets expiring in every
period is 1 − τS . Within loans, we set the firm project duration (Γτ ) such that a firm can
draw either a short-term (one year) or long-term (three year) project upon its foundation,
and set the fraction p for the former to 75% so that the average banks’ loan maturity is 1.9
years. We set the fixed cost of renegotiating loans Fb large enough that no firms renegotiate
their loans in equilibrium.28 Next, we set loans to represent 60% of banks’ assets, as in Hoff-
mann et al. (2018). Loan demand then pins down the banks’ balance sheet size. Finally, we
need to specify the relative characteristics of two intermediate producer types. We relate our
bank-dependent firms to small and medium enterprises, which represent more than 99% of
all enterprises in the euro area. We calibrate ξ to the value reported by Eurostat’s statistics
on SMEs. However, we adjust the relative productivity Ā/A so that bank-dependent firms
only end up producing 55.8% of output in steady state, consistent with the values reported
in Eurostat. Our neoclassical firms end up being about three times more productive; more-
over,by enjoying cheaper borrowing rates, they end up producing significantly more output
than the average bank-dependent firm, which allows us to match the data.

that by the outstanding amounts of assets for the years 2007-2013, e.g., prior to the introduction of negative
rates. The data is from the ECB’s statistics on consolidated banking data.
   28
      In the perfect-foresight equilibrium, firms are indifferent between locking in their loan interest rate or
not.




                                                      24
                                Table 2: Calibrated Parameters.


               Parameter         Description                                Value
                   iSS           Steady-state policy rate                   2.00%
                   iLSS          Loan rate                                  2.88%
                   iD
                    SS           Deposit rate                               0.65%
                    η1           Deposit pass-through parameter             8.2e-4
                    η2           Deposit pass-through parameter             2.6e-4
                    η3           Deposit pass-through parameter             154
                    κ            Leverage costs parameter                   4.8e-3
            LSS /(SSS + LSS )    Steady-state loan-to-assets ratio          60%
                E0,SS /LSS       Steady-state equity-to-capital ratio       15.5%
                    γ̄           Maximal equity-to-capital ratio            10%
                    υ            Bank dividends                             11.4%
                    τS           Fixed-income maturity parameter            0.7
                    p            Probability of three-year project draw     75%
                     ξ           Share of bank-dependent firms              99.8%
                   Ā/A          Relative firm productivity                 2.83



5.4    Results
To study the impact of each marginal innovation on aggregate variables, we generate inno-
vations εm0 to the Taylor rule of various magnitudes. In an economy log-linearized around
its steady state, these marginal innovations always have identical effects. Our economy, in
contrast, features a a nonlinear and non-monotonic response to these innovations.
    Specifically, we first study the effects of a marginal – 10 basis points – negative Taylor
rule innovation in the vicinity of the steady state and report the resulting impulse response
function. Then, we generate innovations of larger sizes and study the effect of the last 10
basis point innovation. In other words, we compute three impulse responses: that of a small
shock in the vicinity of the steady state, that of a large shock, and finally a small shock
in addition to the large one; we then compare the first IRFs with the difference between
the last two IRFs. We use a Newton algorithm with automatic differentiation as a solution
procedure, iterating on 10 basis point innovations.
    Before describing our results, we point out two subtleties of our analysis. First, a reversal

                                                25
Figure 3: Impulse response of loan rates to Taylor rule innovations of increasing size, in deviations
from the steady state. The dashed line reflects a clear reversal of the response, including on impact.
The dotted line shows that a reversal occurs even for smaller innovations but at a later horizon, in
line with our “creeping up” result.


within our experiment necessarily applies to a particular variable at a particular horizon. In
our two-period model, we focused on the lending rate on impact. Due to the creeping up
effect, the reversal rate for the lending rate one or two periods ahead may differ. Similarly,
if one focuses on GDP, the reversal rate will also be different. Second, given that our
economy’s constraints are smooth – in contrast to the sharp constraints of our previous
sections’ stylized models – the economic mechanisms we highlight have consequences before
aggregate variables display a full reversal, and work toward dampening the effectiveness of
rate cuts before reversing it.
    Figure 3 depicts the response of bank lending rates to negative Taylor rule innovations of
increasing size, and Figure 4 displays the response of physical capital from bank-dependent
firms to the same innovations. As negative monetary innovations become larger, their ability
to stimulate lending rates diminishes, eventually reverting (dashed line) when the level of
nominal rates on impact reaches about -1%.29 Hence, in this particular sense, we estimate
the reversal interest rate to be about -1% in our calibration.
    Figure 5 (left panel) reflects the same result, but instead computes the marginal response
of the lending rates to a 0.1% shock after the steady state and after an innovation large

  29
     Due to the inflation response in the Taylor rule, a one percent negative innovation to the Taylor rule
decreases the actual nominal rate by less than one percent.



                                                    26
Figure 4: Impulse response of log capital of bank-dependent firms to Taylor rule innovations of
increasing size, in deviations from the steady state. The dashed line reflects a clear reversal of
the response, including on impact. The dotted line shows that a reversal occurs even for smaller
innovations but at a later horizon, in line with our “creeping up” result.


enough to trigger a “reversal” of the impact response of lending rates.30 Figure 5 also contains
the response of loans, and Figures 6 and 7 depict the responses of additional variables.
     Some variables experience reversals even at higher rates: in particular, the response of
bank net worth to a marginal shock reverses when policy rates arrive in the vicinity of 0%;
loans rates and loan quantities two periods ahead also reverse before -1% is reached. In
contrast, some variables do not experience a reversal at -1%: output on impact, for example,
still rises following a marginal shock, although it does decline two periods ahead. The right
panel of Figure 5 shows that the response of loans closely follows that of the loan rate,
modulo changes in other prices.
     Figure 6 confirms that the reversal in loan rates and loans has aggregate consequences for
output and investment. On impact, the increase in aggregate demand generates an increase
in output, as loans do not play a direct role in the production of period 0 output. Investment,
moreover, still increases due to the response of neoclassical firms in the economy, which do
not rely on loans.31 However, in subsequent periods, the rise in loan rates results in depressed
investment in output, which persists for one to four years. These results reinforce the idea

  30
      Alternatively, taking the first curve, as well as the two differences in the last two curves of Figure 3,
more or less replicates Figure 5 – except that the innovations have a size of 50 basis points.
   31
      Costs of changing investments, as present in Christiano et al. (2005), for example, would likely weaken
that mechanism.



                                                      27
Figure 5: Marginal impulse responses of loan rates and loans to a 10 basis points innovation to the
Taylor Rule in two economies. In the baseline economy (plain line), the shock occurs in the vicinity
of the steady state. In the second economy, the marginal shock occurs on top of an innovation
to the Taylor rule that, on its own, would depress the policy rate to about -1% on impact. The
reversal in loan rates has been crossed at this stage.


that the contractionary aggregate effects of low or negative interest rate environments may
take some time to materialize.
    Finally, Figure 7 shows that the reversal is due to poor bank profitability and rising lever-
age costs. Note that bank net worth actually increases following a shock around the steady
state, due to the intermediation boom that lift banks’ net interest income. In contrast, a
cut into negative territory deeply depresses the net worth of banks. This is consistent with
the evidence documented in Ampudia and Heuvel (2018), who document that the response
of banks’ stock valuations to monetary policy shocks changes sign as the level of interest
rates decreases. Following their decrease in net worth, banks are forced to increase their
loan rates in order to lower their leverage costs. Quantitatively, three key forces shape the
response of banks’ net worth. First, banks’ net worth on impact is well hedged from in-
terest rate risk as they hold long-term assets. Without this hedge, the reversal rate would
be substantially larger. However, these assets mature, making net worth more sensitive in
subsequent periods. Second, the impaired deposit rate pass-through as policy rates decrease
substantially lowers bank profitability, especially as rates enter negative territory. Finally,
this impaired pass-through also weakens the inter-temporal substitution channel. This de-
creases the intermediation gains that generated the positive net worth response close to the


                                                28
Figure 6: Marginal impulse responses of output and investment to a 10 basis points innovation
to the Taylor rule in two economies. In the baseline economy (plain line), the shock occurs in
the vicinity of the steady state. In the second economy, the marginal shock occurs on top of an
innovation to the Taylor rule that, on its own, would depress the policy rate to about -1% on
impact. The reversal in loan rates has been crossed at this stage.


steady state.


5.5     The effects of permanently lower rates
We now consider a permanent decrease in the natural rate r∗ and suppose that the steady-
state inflation target π SS stays unchanged. This implies that the steady-state nominal
rate iSS decreases.32 This permanent shift in the level of steady-state rates reduces the
effectiveness of monetary policy for shocks of comparable magnitude. Concretely, for a shock
of a similar magnitude to force our baseline economy into its reversal rate, the economy with
a lower iSS has a lower response of aggregates to that shock. This indicates that the reversal
interest rate has not decreased one-for-one with the steady-state nominal rate change, leaving
less leeway for monetary policy.33

  32
     Effectively, β permanently shifts upward.
  33
     The maintained assumptions here are that 1) banks do not change their maturity structure in response
to that change, and 2) the pass-through of deposit rates stays as described by the data. Our analysis
here is purely positive. We leave it to future research to determine whether such responses have happened
empirically.




                                                   29
Figure 7: Marginal impulse responses of bank net worth and leverage costs to a 10 basis points
innovation to the Taylor Rule in two economies. In the baseline economy (plain line), the shock
occurs in the vicinity of the steady state. In the second economy, the marginal shock occurs on top
of an innovation to the Taylor rule that, on its own, would depress the policy rate to about -1% on
impact. The reversal in loan rates has been crossed at this stage.


6     Conclusion
We have shown the conditions for the existence of a reversal interest rate, the rate at which
monetary policy stimulus reverses its intended effect and becomes contractionary. Its exis-
tence relies on the net interest income of banks decreasing faster than recapitalization gains
from banks’ initial holdings of fixed-income assets. We showed that its level depends on the
magnitudes of these capital gains, the overall capitalization of banks, the strength of the
leverage constraints faced by banks, and the deposit supply elasticity. The reversal interest
rate creeps u over time, making steep but short rate cuts preferable to “low for long” interest
rate environments. Finally, we included our banking frictions in a New Keynesian model
and showed that the economics we described have meaningful effects for the transmission of
monetary policy in general equilibrium.
    For the sake of tractability, we have omitted other channels through which monetary
policy can affect banks as well as the real economy. In particular, policies such as ECB’s
long term refinancing operations could have alleviated some of the low rates’ effect on bank
margins. Moreover, we have omitted the explicit modeling of risk; hence, we have remained
agnostic on how low rates change nonperforming loans and the associated responses in pro-


                                                30
visions. We see these as important quantitative refinements for future research. Finally, we
view our results as driven by unusual surprise movements in interest rates: low-for-long and
negative rates were largely unforeseen events. It remains a question whether banks can and
will adjust to a permanently lower interest rates environment – for example, by increasing
their maturity mismatch. The competitive landscape faced by banks could also change, with
depositors growing accustomed to the possibility of negative interest rates, hence supporting
banks’ profitability in negative-rate environments.


References
Abad, J., I. Aldasoro, M. D’Errico, L. Fache Rousova, P. Hoffmann, S. Langfield, and
 T. Roukny (2016). Shedding light on dark markets: first insights from the new EU-wide
 OTC derivatives dataset. ESRB Occasional Paper Series (10), 1–32.

Admati, A. R., P. M. DeMarzo, M. F. Hellwig, and P. Pfleiderer (2017). The leverage ratchet
 effect. Journal of Finance 73 (1), 145–198.

Alpanda, S., G. Cateau, and C. Meh (2014). A policy model to analyze macroprudential
  regulations and monetary policy. Bank of Canada Staff Working paper 2014-6 .

Altavilla, C., M. Boucinha, and J.-L. Peydr (2017, October). Monetary Policy and Bank
  Profitability in a Low Interest Rate Environment. CSEF Working papers 486, Centre for
  Studies in Economics and Finance, University of Naples, Italy.

Ampudia, M. and S. V. d. Heuvel (2018, November). Monetary policy and bank equity
 values in a time of low interest rates.

Begenau, J., M. Piazzesi, and M. Schneider (2015, July). Banks’ Risk Exposures. NBER
  Working papers 21334, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bernanke, B. S. and A. S. Blinder (1988). Credit, money, and aggregate demand. American
  Economic Review 78 (2), 435–439.

Bernanke, B. S. and M. Gertler (1995). Inside the black box: The credit channel of monetary
  policy transmission. Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (4), 27–48.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and Y. Sannikov (2014). A macroeconomic model with a financial
  sector. American Economic Review 104 (2), 379–421.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and Y. Sannikov (2016). The I theory of money. Working paper,
  Princeton University.

Cavallino, P. and D. Sandri (2018, 11). The expansionary lower bound: Contractionary
  monetary easing and the trilemma. IMF Working papers.

                                             31
Chodorow-Reich, G. (2014). The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-
 level Evidence from the 2008-9 Financial Crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1),
 1–59.

Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (2005). Nominal rigidities and the dynamic
 effects of a shock to monetary policy. Journal of Political Economy 113 (1), 1–45.

Claessens, S., N. Coleman, and M. S. Donnelly (2017, February). “Low-for-long” interest
  rates and banks’ interest margins and profitability: Cross-country evidence. International
  Finance Discussion Paper 1197, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).

Corbae, P. D. and P. D’Erasmo (2014). Capital requirements in a quantitative model of
  banking industry dynamics. Working paper 14-13, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Di Tella, S. (2013). Uncertainty shocks and balance sheet recessions. Working paper, Stanford
  University.

Di Tella, S. and P. Kurlat (2017, November). Why are banks exposed to monetary policy?
  Working paper 24076, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl (2017). The deposits channel of monetary policy.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4), 1819–1876.

Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl (2018, May). Banking on deposits: Maturity trans-
  formation without interest rate risk. (24582).

Eggertsson, G. B., R. E. Juelsrud, and E. G. Wold (2017). Are negative nominal interest
  rates expansionary? NBER Working paper 24039 .

Eisenschmidt, J. and F. Smets (2018). Negative interest rates: Lessons from the euro area.

English, W. B., S. Van den Heuvel, and E. Zakrajsek (2012). Interest rate risk and bank
  equity valuations. Working paper.

Gomez, M., A. Landier, D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2017, June). Banks’ exposure to interest
 rate risk and the transmission of monetary policy.

Gropp, R., T. Mosk, S. Ongena, and C. Wix (2018). Banks response to higher capital
  requirements: Evidence from a quasi-natural experiment. Review of Financial Studies.

Hainz, C., A. Marjenko, and S. Wildgruber (2017). Interest rate risk and bank equity
  valuations. CESifo Forum (Nr. 03, 21-24).

Heider, F., F. Saidi, and G. Schepens (2017). Life below zero: Bank lending under negative
  policy rates. Working paper.

Hoffmann, P., S. Langfield, F. Pierobon, and G. Vuillemey (2018, September). Who bears
  interest rate risk? Working paper Series 2176, European Central Bank.

                                             32
Kim, M., D. Kliger, and B. Vale (2003). Estimating switching costs: the case of banking.
  Journal of Financial Intermediation 12 (1), 25–56.

Klein, M. A. (1971). A theory of the banking firm. Journal of Money, Credit and Bank-
  ing 3 (2).

Klemperer, P. (1995). Competition when consumers have switching costs: An overview with
  applications to industrial organization, macroeconomics, and international trade. The
  Review of Economic Studies 62 (4), 515–539.

Klimenko, N., S. Pfeil, and J.-C. Rochet (2015). Bank capital and aggregate credit. Working
  paper, University of Zurich.

Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010). Assessing the macroeconomic impact of the tran-
 sition to stronger capital and liquidity requirements. Financial Stability Board and the
 Basel Committe on Banking Supervision.

Maudos, J. and J. Fernandez de Guevara (2004, September). Factors explaining the in-
 terest margin in the banking sectors of the European Union. Journal of Banking & Fi-
 nance 28 (9), 2259–2281.

Monti, M. (1972). Deposit, credit and interest rate determination under alternative bank ob-
 jective functions. In S. Karl and S. Giorgio P. (Eds.), Mathematical methods in investment
 and finance, pp. 431–454. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Petersen, M. A. and R. Rajan (1995). The effect of credit market competition on lending
  relationships. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (2), 407–443.

Rognlie, M. (2016). What lower bound? monetary policy with negative interest rates.
  Working paper.

Santomero, A. M. (1984). Modeling the banking firm: A survey. Journal of Money, Credit
  and Banking 16 (4), 576–602.

Saunders, A. and L. Schumacher (2000). The determinants of bank interest rate margins:
  An international study. Journal of International Money and Finance 19 (6), 813–832.

Sharpe, S. A. (1997). The effect of consumer switching costs on prices: A theory and its
  application to the bank deposit market. Review of Industrial Organization 12 (1), 79–94.

Van den Heuvel, S. (2007). The Bank Capital Channel of Monetary Policy. Working paper.

Wang, Y., T. M. Whited, Y. Wu, and K. Xiao (2018, 01). Bank market power and monetary
 policy transmission: Evidence from a structural estimation. SSRN Electronic Journal .




                                            33
A       Proofs
Lemma 1
Proof. The Lagrangian of this problem is

        L =(1 + iL )L + (1 + i)S − (1 + iD )D − µ(L + S − D − E0 (i)) + λD (ψ D D − S)
               − λL (ψ L L − (1 + iL )L − (1 + i)S + (1 + iD )D).

    The first-order conditions with respect to S, iL and iD are

                                        µ = (1 + λL )(1 + i)
                                                                   
                                  L      1               L L    L L
                               1+i =          µ − (1 + λ ) 0 + λ ψ
                                      1 + λL               L
                                                                   
                                 D      1               L D     D D
                              1+i =           µ − (1 + λ ) 0 + λ ψ .
                                     1 + λL                D
          0               0
Define DD = D , LL = −L . Rearrangement of these first-order conditions then yields the
equations in Lemma 1.



Lemma 2
Proof. We can write a bank’s problem as

  N (i) = max (1 + iL )L + (1 + i)S − (1 + iD )D
              iL ,iD ,S

              s.t. L + S = D + E0 (i), ψ L L ≤ (1 + iL )L + (1 + i)S − (1 + iD )D, ψ D D ≤ S.

The envelope condition of this problem implies
                                      dN
                                          = µE00 (i) + (1 + λL )S,
                                       di
where the Lagrange multipliers µ and λL are as defined in Lemma 1. This yields
                                   dN
                                       = (1 + λL )(S + (1 + i)E00 (i)).
                                    di
Write
                                CG = E00 (i), N II = iL L + iS − iD D.




                                                   34
Combining these definitions with the expression for dN
                                                     di
                                                        , we obtain
                                                               
                          dN           L    dN II
                               = (1 + λ )         + (1 + i)CG
                           di                di

as desired.
   Finally, note that when ψ D > 0, banks’ holding of fixed-income assets (weakly) increases,
making the derivative higher.

Proposition 1
Proof. Define N (i) as in the proof of Lemma 2. First, we show that N (i) is an increasing
function. From the previous lemma above, we know that dN       di
                                                                  ≥ µE00 (i) + (1 + λL )S. Given
that we can bound the first term by assumption, it suffices to show that S > 0. But that is
immediate given our assumption of a liquidity constraint.
   Thus the derivative of N (i) is bounded away from 0 for i < i0 . That is, there exists some
G(i0 ) such that:
                                N (i) ≤ N (i0 ) − G(i0 )(i0 − i).
When the capital constraint does not bind, the quantity of loans made by the bank is given
by L(iL∗ ), where iL∗ satisfies the equation
                                                          1
                                           iL∗ = i +               .
                                                       εL (iL∗ )

Note that L(iL∗ ) is decreasing in i. For sufficiently low i, then,

                             ψ L L(iL∗ ) ≥ N (i0 ) − G(i0 )(i0 − i) ≥ N (i),

meaning there exists a largest interest rate î such that the capital constraint binds for all
i < î. In this region, L(iL ) = ψ1L N (i), so dL
                                               di
                                                  = ψ1L dN
                                                         di
                                                            < 0. Therefore iRR = î, since dL
                                                                                           di
                                                                                              <0
for all i < î and dL
                   di
                      > 0 for i > î.

Main Lemma
Suppose i0 > iRR when the parameters of the bank’s problem are θ = (ψ L , ψ D , e0 , e0 (i)).
Under an alternative set of parameters θ̂ = (ψ̂ L , ψ̂ D , ê0 , ê0 (i)) such that N (i, θ) > N (i, θ̂) for
i ≤ i0 , the reversal interest rate is lower under parameters θ than under θ0 (so long as it is
unique under both sets of parameters).
Proof. Define iL∗ (i) implicitly as the solution to the equation

                                             L L(iL )
                                            i − 0 L = i.
                                               L (i )


                                                    35
Note that iL∗ (i) is increasing in i, so L(iL∗ (i)) is decreasing in i. Furthermore, iL∗ does not
depend on parameters. The reversal interest rate iRR is the solution to the equation

                                     ψ L L(iL∗ (i)) = N (i, θ).

Let iRR (θ) be the reversal interest rate under parameters θ. With parameters θ0 , for any
i ≤ iRR (θ) we have
                              ψ L L(iL∗ (i)) ≥ N (i, θ) > N (i, θ0 ).
This is because by the definition of the reversal interest rate, the function N (i, θ) must be
increasing in i in the region i ≤ iRR (θ). Thus it cannot be that iRR (θ0 ) ≤ iRR (θ).

Proposition 2
Proof.


  1. Clearly, an increase in the capital constraint ψ L weakly decreases N (i) for all i. Then,
     by the main lemma, the reversal interest rate must increase.

  2. Consider a shift in the interest rate sensitivity of equity such that E0 (i0 ) remains
     constant but dedi0 is uniformly increased for all i. Then N (i) is uniformly increased for
     all i ≤ i0 , since capital gains following an interest rate cut are larger. By the main
     lemma, the reversal interest rate must decrease.

  3. Note that the first-order condition for iD implies that iD is the same in both economies
     for a given level of i < iRR , so DA (i) = DB (i). Then the equation

                                     Lj (i) + Sj (i) = Dj (i) + E0j (i)

      for j ∈ {A, B} implies LA (i) + SA (i) < LB (i) + SB (i), since E0A (i) < E0B (i) for all i.
      Furthermore, note that when i = iRR , iL is the same in both economies, so it must be
      that SA (i) < SB (i). Thus

                                 dN
                                     = (1 + λL )(S(i) + (1 + i)E00 (i))
                                  di
      must be larger in economy B when evaluated at iRR because S(iRR ) is larger. Thus

                             dLA (i)       dNA (i)       dNB (i)   dLB (i)
                                     = ψAL         < ψBL         =
                               di            di            di        di

      at iRR , so the balance sheet constraints Lj (i) + Sj (i) = D(i) + E0j (i) yield dSdi  A (i)
                                                                                                   >
      dSB (i)         RR
        di
              at i = i . But clearly, then, we can keep iterating this argument to obtain
      SA (i) < SB (i) for all i < iRR , which then implies LA (i) > LB (i) for all i < iRR through
      the equation for dNdi
                             above (using the fact that the constraint is tighter in economy B).

                                                 36
Proposition 3
Proof.

   1. A higher lower bound on the deposit rate lowers N (i), so the main lemma implies that
      iRR increases.
   2. Lower markdowns as rates decrease must lower N (i) uniformly, so again the main
      lemma applies.
   3. An increase in the liquidity coefficient ψD can only lower N (i). Therefore, iRR must
      increase by the main lemma.



Proposition 4
Proof. A larger δ0 must make N (i) (weakly) increase, so iRR must weakly decrease by the
main lemma.

Proposition 5
Proof. Here we consider a perturbation E0 (i) → Ẽ0 (i) such that Ẽ0 (i) ≥ E0 (i) if and only
if i ≥ i0 . In particular, for i < i0 , Ẽ0 (i) < E0 (i), so N (i) is shifted uniformly downward to
below i0 . Hence, by the main lemma, iRR must increase.

Proposition 6
Proof. There are four possible cases: 1) the capital constraint does not bind in either period
at an optimum, 2) the capital constraint binds in both periods, 3) the capital constraint
binds only in the first period, and 4) the capital constraint binds only in the second period.
We consider these cases in turn.
   1. If the bank is unconstrained in both periods, iLt = it−1,t + ε1L for t = 1, 2. Thus it is
                                                                     t
      possible to increase the quantity of loans made in both periods by decreasing both i0,1
      and i1,2 by a small constant  > 0. Therefore, case 1) is never optimal for the central
      bank.
   2. If the capital constraint binds in both periods, it is possible to increase the bank’s net
      worth in both periods by increasing i0,1 as long as B0,1 and B0,2 are sufficiently low
                               B0,1
      that dN  II1
             di0,1
                   > did0,1 ( 1+i 0,1
                                      + (1+i0,1B)(1+i
                                                0,2
                                                     1,2 )
                                                           ). This increase in interest rates at t = 1 then
      increases the quantity of loans made at t = 1 and t = 2, so it is never optimal for the
      constraint to bind in both periods.

                                                    37
3. When the capital constraint binds only in the first period, the central bank can increase
   the net worth of the bank (and thus the quantity of loans made) by cutting i1,2 , since
                                                           B0,1
   this increases the value of equity E0 (i0,1 , i1,2 ) = 1+i 0,1
                                                                  + (1+i0,1B)(1+i
                                                                            0,2
                                                                                  1,2 )
                                                                                        and N1 is increasing
   in equity. This cut in i1,2 does not change the quantity of loans made at t = 2 because
   the bank’s choice of iL2 is unconstrained by assumption. Hence it cannot be that the
   capital constraint binds only in the first period.

4. Given the analysis of the three cases above, it must be that the capital constraint binds
   only in the second period. We now argue that it must be exactly binding (in the sense
   that λL2 = 0) when B0,2 is sufficiently low. Suppose λL2 > 0. Then the quantity of
   loans made in the second period is increasing in the bank’s net worth N2 in period 2,
   as ψ L L2 = N2 . A change in the interest rate at t = 2 has two effects: it changes the
   value of bank equity at t = 1, which feeds into t = 2 net worth, and it directly impacts
   net interest income at t = 2. Formally,

           N2 (i0,1 , i1,2 ) = max (1 + iL )L + (1 + i1,2 )S − (1 + iD )D
                            iL ,iD ,S

                                        s.t. L + S = D + E1 (i0,1 , i1,2 ), ψ L L ≤ N2 , ψ D D ≤ S.

   Then the envelope theorem implies
                                                                      
                                dN2           L   ∗              dE1
                                      = (1 + λ ) S + (1 + i1,2 )         .
                                di1,2                            di1,2

   Note that using the formula E1 = (1 − ν)N1 , we can write

                               dE1             dN1 dE0
                                     = (1 − ν)
                               di1,2           dE0 di1,2
                                                dN1         B0,2
                                     = −(1 − ν)                             .
                                                dE0 (1 + i0,1 )(1 + i1,2 )2

   Recall from the proof of Lemma 1 that dN 1
                                          dE0
                                               = 1 + i0,1 when the capital constraint does
   not bind. Thus                                                 
                          dN2           L    ∗              B0,2
                                = (1 + λ ) S − (1 − ν)              ,
                          di1,2                           1 + i1,2
   so net worth is increasing in i1,2 when B0,2 is sufficiently small. Therefore, when B0,2 is
   small and the constraint in the second period binds, loans are increasing in i1,2 . Loans
   in the first period do not depend on i1,2 because the capital constraint is slack at t = 1.
   The capital constraint must then bind exactly at t = 2.
   The proof in part 1) to raise interest rates in the first period as long as the constraint
   in the first period is slack as well. Consider setting i0,1 = i0,2 = î such that î is the
   highest interest rate for which the constraint binds in the second period. We now show
   that under these interest rates, the constraint in the first period will be slack. By


                                                     38
       assumption, B0,1 and B0,2 are small enough that N1 (î, î) < N1 (i∗ , i∗ ). Then

                 E1 (î, î) = (1 − ν)N1 (î, î) < (1 − ν)N1 (i∗ , i∗ ) = E1 (i∗ , i∗ ) = E0 (i∗ , i∗ ),

       so equity in the second period is lower than in the first. By the main lemma, the reversal
       interest rate must be higher in the second period because net worth is increasing in
       equity. Hence at î, the capital constraint in the first period must be slack, so by the
       argument above it is never optimal to increase i0,1 from î, meaning that at an optimum
       i0,1 ≤ i1,2 .




B      A Micro-Foundation for Deposit Stickiness
We describe in this section a micro-foundation for the lack of pass-through on deposits. Each
bank is naturally associated with a continuum of depositor households. Their deposit supply
is sticky in the sense that the depositors shop around for better deposit rates if the spread
between i and the deposit rate iD       j from their associated bank j is larger than some threshold,
                           D
the “activation level,” η (i). Hence, banks compete on prices, but only if the spread they
charge relative to some baseline rate i is large enough.34
    Importantly, we assume that the search “activation level” η D (i) is decreasing in the
interest rate i. In other words, depositors become more sensitive to spreads when the policy
rate is low. This generates pressure on the extensive margin of banks’ deposit margins as
rates decrease. For example, depositors are more prone to switch banks if the interest rate
is negative, as empirically documented in Hainz et al. (2017). In addition, bank deposit rate
choices are also driven by intensive margin considerations. That is, conditional on keeping
a customer, the bank might decide to offer an attractive interest rate to ensure that the
customer supplies a sufficient amount of deposits instead of simply consuming his income or
substituting to alternative savings vehicles like cash.
    Concretely, each depositor household h ∈ [0, 1] in the continuum associated with bank j
has an activation level η D (i). He only considers looking at the rates offered by competing
bank j 0 if the rate offered by his bank, iD                      D                      D
                                                j , is below i − η (i). We assume that ∂η (i)/∂i ≥ 0,
that is, the activation level is increasing with the interest rate level, so that spreads are less
tolerated at low levels of the policy rate.
    Let us denote iD         D
                     −j ≡ {ij 0 }j 0 6=j as the vector of competitors’ deposit rates. Hence, the share
of costumers ϑD  j that actually stay with bank j is


  34
     Varying markdowns at the extensive margin can be modeled in numerous ways. A large literature
focuses on switching costs (Klemperer, 1995), which is sometimes applied to banking (as in Sharpe (1997)).
Our goal here is to have a realistic yet parsimoniously parametrized model that easily fits in a New Keynesian
model.




                                                       39
Figure 8: Pass-through of nominal rates into deposit rates given η1 , η2 , η3 . The pass-through is
assumed to be one-for-one above the steady state (i > iSS ).




                          ϑD   D D
                           j (ij ; i−j , i) ≡ 1{i−iD   D       D               D .
                                                   j ≤η (i) ∨ ij > maxj 0 6=j i 0 }
                                                                               j


   We can then decompose the residual deposit supply faced by bank j as consisting of an
extensive and an intensive margin:

                        Dj (iD    D           D D D
                             j ; i−j , i) = ϑj (ij ; i−j , i)     ×       d(iD )
                                            |     {z        }             | {zj }
                                             Extensive margin         Intensive margin


Provided the intensive demand for deposits is sufficiently inelastic – which is true in our
calibration – the extensive margin dominates and the rates are given by

                                            iD         D
                                             t = it − η (it )

Figure 8 depicts the pass-through of it in iD                         D
                                            t for our calibration of η (it ).




                                                    40
