                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 MANAGING EXPECTATIONS:
                                 INSTRUMENTS VS. TARGETS

                                      George-Marios Angeletos
                                         Karthik A. Sastry

                                        Working Paper 25404
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25404


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2018




n earlier version of this paper was entitled “Managing Expectations without Rational Expectations.”
We are grateful to Gaetano Gaballo, Gauti Eggertsson and Marcus Hagedorn for insightful conference
discussions; and to Robert Barro, Roland Benabou, V.V. Chari, Martin Eichenbaum, John Leahy,
Stephen Morris, four anonymous referees, and various seminar participants for valuable feedback.
Angeletos acknowledges the financial support of the National Science Foundation (Award #1757198).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2018 by George-Marios Angeletos and Karthik A. Sastry. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Managing Expectations: Instruments vs. Targets
George-Marios Angeletos and Karthik A. Sastry
NBER Working Paper No. 25404
December 2018, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. D82,D84,E03,E52,E58

                                         ABSTRACT

Should policymakers offer forward guidance in terms of a path for an instrument such as interest
rates or a target for an outcome such as unemployment? We study how the optimal approach
depends on a departure from rational expectations. People have a limited understanding of the
behavior of others and of the general equilibrium (GE) effects of policy. The bite of such
bounded rationality on implementability and welfare is minimized by target-based guidance if
and only if GE feedbacks are strong enough. This offers a rationale for why central banks should
shine the spotlight on unemployment when faced with a prolonged liquidity trap, a steep
Keynesian cross, or a large financial accelerator.


George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics, E52-530
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu

Karthik A. Sastry
Department of Economics, MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue E52-300
Cambridge, MA 02139
ksastry@mit.edu
1 Introduction

Forward guidance is not comprehensive. Even if a central bank can shape expectations about future inter-
est rates, it remains up to the public to predict the consequences for aggregate employment and income.
Under what circumstances is it better to do the opposite, anchoring expectations about the targeted eco-
nomic outcomes and leaving the public to ponder the supporting policy?
    The existing literature on instruments and targets for monetary policy (e.g., Poole, 1970; Friedman,
1990; Atkeson, Chari and Kehoe, 2007) emphasizes controllability, accountability, and contingency on
shocks. We instead focus on the difficulty people may have in reasoning about the economy, especially
during unprecedented times like the Great Recession or the Covid-19 crisis.
    We model this difficulty as a structured departure from rational expectations equilibrium (REE). Peo-
ple understand the direct, partial equilibrium (PE) effects of policy but not necessarily its indirect, general
equilibrium (GE) effects. For example, although people may understand that lower rates mean cheaper
credit for themselves, they may incorrectly perceive how others, and hence aggregate demand, may re-
spond to the same policy. Our main result is that, in such circumstances, the optimal communication
strategy switches from anchoring expectations of instruments to anchoring expectations of targets like
employment or income as Keynesian multipliers, financial accelerators and other GE feedbacks intensify.
    This provides a rationale for why experimentations with target-focused communication during the
Great Recession, such as the Fed’s “unemployment target” in their December 2012 policy announcement
or ECB President Mario Draghi’s famous “whatever it takes” speech, may have been timely—and why sim-
ilar strategies may be appropriate in the Covid-19 context as all. These two episodes share the following
common threads: intensified GE feedbacks and a lack of comparable, prior experiences, which could serve
as learning foundations for rational expectations. These are precisely the conditions that, under the lens
of our analysis, call for policy commitments that “shine the spotlight on unemployment.”

Framework. We use an abstract, minimalistic model to convey the main insights as transparently as pos-
sible. Each agent’s optimal action is an increasing function of their expectations of a policy instrument, τ,
and an economic outcome, Y . The realized Y , in turn, depends on the agents’ average action. Together,
these relations yield a feedback loop between Y and the agents’ average action; this stylizes GE feedback.
Finally, the policymaker’s objective is to minimize the gaps of τ and Y from their first-best counterparts.
    We provide two micro-foundations for this model. The first concerns monetary policy in a New Keyne-
sian economy at the zero lower bound (ZLB). The second concerns taxation in a Neoclassical economy. To
fix ideas, let us commit on the first application. In this context, τ corresponds to the negative of the interest
rate set once the ZLB ceases to bind, or the length of time for which rates will remain low; Y corresponds
to aggregate employment or income; the agents’ relevant action is how much to spend during the liquidity
trap; and the dependence of this spending on Y stylizes the Keynesian cross.
    Conventional monetary policy is unavailable because of the ZLB, but the central bank can offer a policy
commitment for the future. Such “Odyssean” forward guidance can take one of two forms: instrument
communication or target communication. The first strategy anchors expectations of τ (“keep rates low
until 2014”), the second anchors expectations of (“keep rates low until unemployment is 6.5%”).

                                                       1
REE and beyond. Each communication strategy anchors agents’ expectations of one object but leaves
them to reason the implications for the other object. This is true even when agents are fully rational. But in
this fully rational case, agents can flawlessly reason back and forth between τ and Y , or between the extent
of monetary loosening and the stimulation of aggregate employment, implying that the policymaker faces
no meaningful trade off between the two strategies. Formally, we show that, under rational expectation
equilibrium (REE), the implementable combinations of τ and Y are the same under both strategies.1
    We depart from this benchmark by letting agents have limited depth of knowledge and/or rationality.2
Such a friction is consistent with the kind of “shallow” higher-order reasoning observed in laboratory ex-
periments (Nagel, 1995; Crawford, Costa-Gomes and Iriberri, 2013). It is also the core common element
of a recent theoretical literature upon which we build (Angeletos and Lian, 2018; Farhi and Werning, 2019;
Gabaix, 2020; Garcıa-Schmidt and Woodford, 2019). But whereas this literature has restricted the policy-
maker to instrument-based forward guidance, here we study how the policymaker can regulate the bite of
the assumed friction on implementability and welfare by switching to target-based forward guidance.

Main results. Our main results are stated as Theorems 1 and 2. The first revisits implementability away
from the REE benchmark. The second characterizes the optimal communication strategy.
    Theorem 1 includes three points. First, the sets of τ and Y that can be implemented differ between the
two communication strategies. Second, the distance of either set from the rational-expectations counter-
part increases with the shallowness of knowledge and rationality. And third, this distance increases with
the GE feedback under instrument communication and decreases with it under target communication.
    The first two points formalize the idea that the policymaker’s choice of whether to anchor the public’s
expectations of τ or its expectations of Y becomes consequential once we depart from the REE benchmark,
and the more so the larger the departure. The last point highlights the differential effect of the GE feedback
and holds the key to Theorem 2. To prove these points, we show how each of the policymaker’s strategies
induces a different game among the public and study the effect of the belief imperfection in each of them.
    Under instrument communication, agents play a game of strategic complements: conditional on an
path for interest rates, an agent that expects others to spend more also expects higher aggregate income,
so she is willing to spend more herself. The degree of strategic complementarity increases when spending
is more sensitive to income, or when the Keynesian cross is steeper.
    Under target communication, everything flips. Agents now play a game of strategic substitutability:
conditional on a target for aggregate income, an agent that expects others to spend more also expects
tighter monetary policy, which reduces the incentive to spend. And because a steeper Keynesian cross
maps to a smaller dependance of spending to expectations of interest rates (via which the expectations of
others now enter) relative to expectations of income (which are themselves anchored by the policymaker),
a steeper Keynesian cross also maps to a lower substitutability in this game.
  1 This irrelevance result is closely related to the equivalence of primal and dual formulations of policy problems in the Ramsey

literature (Chari and Kehoe, 1999; Lucas and Stokey, 1983). And it depends not only on rational expectations but also on the
uniqueness of the equilibrium in the game(s) played by the agents. We will clarify this point in Sections 3 and 4.2.
  2 “Depth of knowledge” relates to what agents think others believe (and so on, to higher orders). “Depth of rationality” refers to

whether agents think others are rational (and so on, to higher orders). Sections 3.3 and 5.3 cover these issues in detail.



                                                                 2
   Why are these game-theoretic observations important? For any finite depth of knowledge and rational-
ity, the deviation of actual behavior from its rational-expectations counterpart increases with the absolute
magnitude of the strategic interaction: the more agents care about the behavior of others, the larger the
footprint on their own behavior of any mistakes in their reasoning about others. The above observations
thus translate as follows: a steeper Keynesian cross increases the deviation from rational expectations un-
der instrument communication and decreases it under target communication.
   This sums up the logic behind Theorem 1. And along with the assumption that the REE outcome
is efficient, it yields Theorem 2: target communication, or “shining the spotlight on unemployment,” is
optimal if and only if the Keynesian multiplier or other GE feedback is large enough.

Robustness. The aforementioned assumption that the REE outcome is efficient is conceptually appeal-
ing because it isolates bounded rationality as the only source of distortion. But it stretches our ZLB appli-
cation. In that context, it makes more sense to let the REE outcome be inefficiently low. We explain how
this enriches the optimal communication strategy without however upsetting our main lesson.
   Our (and the related literature’s) preferred departure from REE amounts to having agents systemati-
cally under-estimate the responses of others. Assuming the opposite bias, or a form of over-extrapolation,
flips the sign of the distortion of behavior under both communication strategies. But it does not upset the
comparative static of its magnitude with respect to the strength of the GE feedback. It follows that Theo-
rem 2 is robust to both kinds of bias. Similarly, a policymaker who suspects that the public “does not fully
understand GE” but is not sure of the precise mis-specification thereof could still apply our main lesson.
   At the same time, our insights hinge on a departure from full rationality as opposed to pure “noise” or
rational inattention. In particular, if we allow agents to observe noisy signals of the policy communica-
tions (as, e.g., in Morris and Shin, 2002) but maintain REE, we also maintain the irrelevance of the form of
forward guidance for implementability.
   Last but not least, our lessons are robust to introducing measurement error, policy trembles, and un-
certain fundamentals. These elements, which are the focus of the classics by Poole (1970) and Weitzman
(1974), naturally enter the costs and benefits of different policy options. But unlike our approach they do
not tie the optimal choice to the relative importance of PE and GE effects.

Discussion and related literature. As mentioned in the beginning of the Introduction, the existing liter-
ature on the optimal choice of instruments and targets emphasizes three issues: controllability (or tight-
ness); accountability; and state-contingency. The first refers to the minimization of the “trembles” in the
policymaker’s hand. The second refers to the alleviation of the type of time-inconsistency problems first
highlighted in Kydland and Prescott (1982) and Barro and Gordon (1983). The third refers to the generic
necessity of having policy vary with the shocks hitting the economy. See Atkeson, Chari and Kehoe (2007)
for a sharp treatment of these issues and Friedman (1990) for an earlier review.
   Optimal policy is also generally state-contingent. Insofar as the desirable contingencies can be explic-
itly articulated (as typically assumed in the Ramsey literature), it suffices for optimality to specify instru-
ments as a functions of exogenous shocks. Otherwise, conditioning instruments on endogenous outcomes
may help replicate the missing contingencies. This replication logic, which is the common core of Poole


                                                      3
(1970), Weitzman (1974), and the DSGE literature on optimal policy rules, blurs the distinction between
instrument- and target-based policies. But it is orthogonal to the logic behind our own results.
    A different argument for making instruments contingent on outcomes is to aid equilibrium selection.
This relates to the Taylor principle for monetary policy and to the issues discussed in Atkeson, Chari and
Kehoe (2010) and Bassetto (2002). None of these considerations are relevant here because, by design, the
equilibrium is unique in our setting under both instrument- and target-based policies.
    Athey, Atkeson and Kehoe (2005) shift the focus to a trade off between commitment and flexibility. In
their setting, tying the monetary authority’s hands avoids the familiar time-inconsistency problem at the
expense of preventing it from acting on valuable private information about the economy. The optimal
policy turns out to be a cap on inflation, which could be read as a target-based policy.3 Similar trade
offs are studied by Amador, Werning and Angeletos (2006), Amador and Bagwell (2013) and Halac and
Yared (2018), albeit in different contexts. The core element of all these papers is the interplay of private
information and time inconsistency. That of our paper, instead, is the departure from REE.
    Similar points distinguish our paper from the literature on policy communication spurred by Morris
and Shin (2002).4 We share this literature’s emphasis on higher-order beliefs but drop rational expecta-
tions. We also change the meaning of policy communication, from signaling about exogenous fundamen-
tals to regulation of the private agents’ strategic interaction via different policy commitments.5
    Caballero and Simsek (2019) study an economy where, from the policymaker’s perspective, private
agents have wrong beliefs about a fundamental but correct beliefs about others’ behavior. This precludes
the kind of flawed GE reasoning and the trade off between instruments- and target-based policies that our
paper focuses on. But it shares the theme of finding a policy that persuades the public to do the right thing
despite its wrong beliefs. Similar points apply to Hansen and Sargent (2007) and Woodford (2010, 2013).
    Last but not least, our paper adds to the literature on the “forward guidance puzzle.”6 Del Negro, Gian-
noni and Patterson (2015), McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016) and Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018)
have argued that the puzzle is eased by accommodating finite horizons and liquidity constraints. These
works maintain rational expectations and the associated irrelevance of instruments versus targets. But
the kind of frictions they emphasize map to stronger GE feedbacks, which under the lens of our analysis
can favor target-based guidance. Angeletos and Lian (2018), Farhi and Werning (2019), Garcıa-Schmidt
and Woodford (2019), Gabaix (2020) and Wiederholt (2016), on the other hand, shift the focus to a be-
lief friction like that captured in our preferred specification. But as previously mentioned, they study only
instrument-based guidance. We, instead, highlight that a switch to target-based guidance can ease or even
flip the distortion. And we provide a gauge for when such a switch is optimal.
  3 However, a cap on inflation implements the same outcomes as as a cap on the underlying policy instrument (money growth),

so the distinction between instrument- and target-based policy is rather tenuous.
   4 See, e.g., Amador and Weill (2010), Angeletos and Pavan (2007, 2009), Chahrour (2014), and Myatt and Wallace (2012).
   5 In this context, three papers deserve special mention. Angeletos and Pavan (2009) allows a policymaker to regulate the agents’

strategic interaction but maintain rational expectations and focus, instead, on the use and the aggregation of information. Cor-
nand and Heinemann (2015) introduces Level-k Thinking but abstract from policy and focus, instead, on the social value of
information. Finally, Bassetto (2019) emphasizes the interaction of signaling with commitment.
   6 This refers to the implausibly large effects that the basic New Keynesian model predicts for forward guidance at the ZLB.




                                                                4
2 Model

The economy is populated by a continuum of private agents, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], and a policymaker. Each
private agent chooses an action k i ∈ R, the average of which is denoted by K ≡ k i di . The policymaker
                                                                                R

controls a policy instrument τ ∈ R and is interested in manipulating an aggregate outcome Y ∈ R.
    The workings of the economy are described by two key equations. The first relates the aggregate out-
come to the policy instrument and the aggregate behavior of the agents:

                                               Y = (1 − α)τ + αK ,                                         (1)

where α ∈ (0, 1) parameterizes how much of the effect of τ on Y is channeled through the agents’ behavior
instead of being direct, or mechanical. The second describes the optimal behavior of the typical agent as
a function of her expectations of the policy and the outcome:

                                            k i = (1 − γ)Ei [τ] + γEi [Y ]                                 (2)

where Ei denotes the subjective (possibly non-rational) expectation of agent i and γ < 1 parameterizes how
much private incentives depend on expectations of the aggregate outcome and thereby on the choices of
others. In this sense, γ parameterizes the GE feedback.

Interpretation. Our primary application is forward guidance by a central bank during a liquidity trap. In
Section 6.1, after presenting our theoretical results, we will spell out the micro-foundations of this appli-
cation and its mapping to our abstract model. Here, we briefly preview the main ideas to provide context.
    Prices are sticky, a shock has pushed the natural rate of interest into negative territory, and the ZLB is
binding. K is aggregate spending during the liquidity trap, Y is aggregate income during and after the trap,
and τ is the extent of monetary loosening after the trap. The anticipation of such loosening stimulates
spending during the trap through both a partial equilibrium (PE) effect and two general equilibrium (GE)
effects. The PE effect captures the impact of lower interest rates on individual spending, holding aggregate
income and inflation constant. The two GE effects correspond to the equilibrium response of, respectively,
aggregate income and inflation.
    Because aggregate income and inflation are tied together via the applicable Philips curve, there is no
need to track inflation explicitly. Instead, the combination of the two GE effects can be represented by
a positive dependence of K on Y , as in equation (2). Accordingly, γ is positively related to the following
deep parameters: the marginal propensity to consume (MPC), or the slope of the Keynesian cross; and the
degree of price flexibility, or the slope of the Philips curve.
    In a second application, described in Appendix B, we consider tax policy in a Neoclassical environ-
ment. In this context, K is aggregate investment today, Y is aggregate output tomorrow, τ is the negative
of future taxation, and γ encapsulates two conflicting GE forces: competition for a scarce resource (labor)
and a real aggregate-demand externality. This example illustrates how a substantially different, flexible-
price mechanism could generate the basic structure of equations (1) and (2). It also allows for the GE
feedback to be either positive or negative, depending on which of the aforementioned GE forces domi-
nates.

                                                          5
       Both of the above applications center on consumers and firms instead of financial markets. The lat-
ter are certainly more attentive to the fine details of policy communications but could still be subject to
bounded rationality. In this context, K could be an aggregate measure of financial trades, or an asset price,
which both depends on and feeds into the real economy.7

Parametric restrictions. The main analysis restricts to γ > 0, or positive GE feedback, which is the rel-
evant case for our ZLB application. But as discussed in Section 5.1, our main result extends to γ < 0. We
                            1
also require that α <      2−γ .   This restriction guarantees that the equilibrium is unique in our setting, thus
bypassing the equilibrium selection issues that relate to the Taylor principle and are the subject of, inter
alia, Atkeson, Chari and Kehoe (2010). More fundamentally, this restriction is necessary and sufficient for
behavior not to be unduly sensitive to beliefs of infinite order. Without it, the model is ill-behaved: the REE
cannot be obtained from iteration of best responses, and tiny relaxations in the agents’ depth of knowledge
or depth rationality can have arbitrarily large effects on their behavior.

Policy objective. Let θ ∈ R be an exogenous random fundamental that determines the policymaker’s
ideal, or first-best, values for τ and Y . This maps to aggregate TFP in our ZLB application (Section 6),
and to the shadow cost of taxation in our Neoclassical variant (Appendix B). More generally, θ is a proxy
for the kind of state-contingencies that the existing policy literature emphasizes.
       The policymaker minimizes the rational expectation of the following quadratic loss function:
                                                                      ¢2
                                      L(τ, Y , θ) ≡ (1 − χ) τ − τ∗ (θ) + χ Y − Y ∗ (θ) 2
                                                           ¡              ¡           ¢
                                                                                                                               (3)

where τ∗ (θ) and Y ∗ (θ) denote the aforementioned ideal values and χ ∈ (0, 1) parametrizes the relative
importance of the corresponding gaps. In our ZLB application, these gaps maps to two output gaps (one
for the ZLB period and another for the period of subsequent monetary loosening).8
       For our main analysis, the following assumption is also made:

Assumption 1. Y ∗ (θ) = τ∗ (θ) = θ.

As we will make clear in the next section, imposing Y ∗ (θ) = τ∗ (θ) amounts to letting the first best outcome
be implementable under rational expectations but not generally otherwise. This restriction therefore al-
lows us to isolate bounded rationality as the only possible source of inefficiency. Conditional on this, the
additional restriction τ∗ (θ) = θ is a normalization.9 Finally, the assumption that θ does not appear in equa-
tions (1) and (2) is largely a simplification: it herein makes sure that there is no scope or need for informing
agents about θ per se, but can be relaxed by appropriately redefining K and Y , as we indeed do in Section
6.1.
  7 Here we have in mind the financial accelerator in Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), or

the positive feedback loop between household wealth and aggregate demand in Caballero and Simsek (2017). But a negative
feedback loop as in Caballero and Farhi (2017) could also be possible.
   8 To be precise, as shown in Section 6.1, the relevant micro-founded gaps map most closely to (τ − τ∗ (θ))2 and (K − K ∗ (θ))2 .

But this is inconsequential for our results: as shown in Section 5.2, Theorem 2 readily extends to this case.
  9 In fact, the essential assumption is only that any other distortion is separable from that caused by bounded rationality. The

logic is similar to that in Correia, Nicolini and Teles (2008) and explain the following subtlety: in the Neoclassical application
spelled out in Appendix B, τ∗ (θ) and Y ∗ (θ) correspond to a second best à la Barro (1979) and Lucas and Stokey (1983)


                                                                6
Timing. Play occurs in the following three stages, indexed by t ∈ {0, 1, 2}:

   0. The policymaker observes θ and, conditional on that, chooses whether to engage in “instrument
       communication,” announcing a commitment to set τ = τ̂ for the policy instrument, or “target com-
       munication,” announcing a commitment to achieve Y = Ŷ for the outcome.

   1. Each agent i hears the policymaker’s announcement, forms expectations (in one of the various ways
       described in the next section), and chooses k i according to best-response condition (2).

   2. K is publicly observed and the pair (τ, Y ) is determined as follows. In the case of instrument com-
       munication, τ = τ̂ and Y is given by condition (1). In the case of target communication, Y = Ŷ and τ
       is adjusted so that condition (1) holds with Y = Ŷ .

This structure embeds three assumptions, which are worth emphasizing.
    First, the policymaker always honors in stage 2 any promise made in stage 0. Forward guidance is
thus equated to commitment. The literature has referred to such commitments as “Odyssean” forward
guidance (e.g., Campbell et al., 2012).
    Second, the policymaker chooses what to say and do after observing θ. This amounts to letting policy
be freely contingent on any relevant exogenous shock, as in the textbook Ramsey paradigm.10 It also allows
forward guidance to reveal θ to the public. But because agents do not care to know θ per se, such signaling
is irrelevant. There is therefore no room for “Delphic” forward guidance, or for the “information effect” of
monetary policy (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018).
    Finally, we allow the policymaker to announce a value for either τ or Y , but not on a pair of values for
both of them. Such joint commitments do not make sense in the model, but for knife-edge cases, owing
to the fact that τ and Y have a fixed relationship at t = 2 once K is pre-determined. A related rationale,
shown in Appendix D, rules out a commitment to a value for K .11


3 Rational Expectations and Beyond

This section shows how rational expectations precludes a meaningful trade off between instrument and
target communication, recasts this benchmark in terms of infinite depth of knowledge and rationality, and
introduces a specific departure from this benchmark, under which we later derive our main results.
 10 In particular, if some of the relevant shocks are realized after stage 0 but prior to implementing any announced policy com-

mitment, and if this commitment can itself be contingent on such future shocks, then the analysis goes through. One merely has
to think of forward guidance as the description of how τ̂ or Ŷ will vary with the future shocks, as opposed to the announcement
of a single value for τ̂ or Ŷ . If, instead, some of the relevant contingencies are ruled out, then Poole (1970) come into the picture.
We abstract from this complication in the main analysis but return to it in Section 5.5.
 11 What remains viable, though, is commitment to a flexible relation between τ and Y , namely a function f such that τ = f (Y ; θ).

Appendix H explains why our insights are robust to this possibility.




                                                                   7
3.1 An Irrelevance Result

Say there is a representative agent, who knows the structure of the economy, observes the policy an-
nouncement, and forms rational expectations.12 In this benchmark, Ei [·] = E[·| X̂ ] for all i , where E[·| X̂ ]
is the common, rational expectation conditional on announcement X̂ , with X ∈ {τ, Y } depending on the
form of forward guidance. As a result, k i = K for all i and condition (2) reduces to the following condition:

                                            K = (1 − γ)E[τ| X̂ ] + γE[Y | X̂ ].                                      (4)

A rational expectations equilibrium (REE) is then defined in the usual fashion. In particular,

Definition 1. A quadruple ( X̂ , τ, K , Y ) constitutes a REE if and only if it satisfies conditions (1) and (4) along
with τ = X̂ in the case of instrument communication and Y = X̂ in the case of target communication.

    What matters to the policymaker is the set of combinations of τ and Y that can be implemented under
each form of forward guidance. We will later explain how implementability changes away from REE. For
now, we define and characterize implementability within this benchmark.

Definition 2. A pair (τ, Y ) is implementable under instrument communication if there is an announcement
X̂ for the policymaker and an action K for the representative agent such that ( X̂ , τ, K , Y ) constitutes a REE.

    Denote with Aτ∗ and AY∗ the sets of (τ, Y ) that are implementable under, respectively, instrument and
target communication. The policymaker’s problem can be expressed as follows:

                                                   min               E[L(τ, Y , θ)]                                  (5)
                                           A ∈{Aτ∗ ,AY∗ },(τ,Y )∈A

The choice A ∈ {Aτ∗ , AY∗ } captures the choice of the optimal form of forward guidance (instrument vs
target), whereas the choice (τ, Y ) ∈ A captures the optimal pair (τ, Y ) implemented under the given form
of forward guidance. Both of these choices are conditional on θ.
    We now proceed to show that Aτ∗ = AY∗ . Using condition (1) to compute E[Y ] and noting that E[K ] = K
(the representative agent knows his own action), we can restate condition (4) as

                                             K = (1 − αγ)E[τ| X̂ ] + αγK

Since αγ 6= 1, this implies that, in any REE,

                   K = E[τ| X̂ ],    Y = (1 − α)τ + αE[τ| X̂ ]           and          E[Y | X̂ ] = E[τ| X̂ ] = K

    These properties hold regardless of the form of forward guidance. With instrument communication,
we also have τ = τ̂ = E[τ| X̂ ]. It follows that, for any τ̂, the REE is unique and satisfies K = Y = τ = τ̂. With
target communication, on the other hand, we have Y = Ŷ = E[Y | X̂ ]. It follows that, for any Ŷ , the REE is
unique and satisfies K = Y = τ = Ŷ . Combining these facts, we infer that, regardless of the form of forward
guidance, a pair (τ, Y ) is implementable if and only if τ = Y . We thus reach the following two results, which
serve as benchmarks of comparison for our main analysis.
 12 Under the game representations provided in Lemma 1, this maps to imposing complete information and Nash equilibrium.



                                                             8
Proposition 1 (Irrelevance under REE). With rational expectations, the form of forward guidance is irrele-
vant for implementability:
                                          Aτ∗ = AY∗ = A ∗ ≡ {(τ, Y ) : τ = Y }.

    Combining this result with Assumption 1, we reach the following property, the first part of which veri-
fies the very meaning of this assumption and the second highlights the relevant policy lesson.

Corollary 1. The policymaker’s ideal, or first-best, combination of τ and Y is implementable under rational
expectations. Furthermore, the policymaker is indifferent between instrument and target communication:
he attains τ = Y = θ (and L = 0) by announcing τ̂ = θ, as well as by announcing Ŷ = θ.

    That A ∗ is a linear locus with slope 1 is a simplifying feature of our environment. The relevant point is
that implementability is invariant to the form of forward guidance, or to whether the policymaker commits
on a value for τ or a value for Y .


3.2 Unpacking the Assumptions

The kind of “flawless” GE reasoning alluded to above, and our subsequent relaxation of it, can be formal-
ized by recasting our REE benchmark as the combination of two assumptions. The first regards the agents’
own rationality and awareness, and the second regards the beliefs about others.

Assumption 2. Every agent is rational and attentive in the following sense: she is Bayesian, acts accord-
ing to condition (2), understands that Y is determined by condition (1) and that the policymaker has full
commitment and acts so as to minimize (3), and is aware of any policy communication.

Assumption 3. The aforementioned facts are common knowledge.

Proposition 2. The REE benchmark studied in the previous subsection is equivalent to the joint of Assump-
tions 2 and 3.

    This will become evident in Section 4.2 below, when we show how iteration of best responses converges
to the REE under the present assumptions on the agents’ depth of knowledge and rationality but not once
we relax them. With this in mind, we next discuss what Assumptions 2 and 3 mean and how they help
structure the forms of “bounded rationality” considered in the rest of the paper.
    Assumption 2 imposes that, for any i , agent i ’s subjective beliefs and behavior satisfy the following
three restrictions:

             Ei [X ] = X̂ ,   Ei [Y ] = (1 − α)Ei [τ] + αEi [K ],             k i = 1 − γ Ei [τ] + γEi [Y ],
                                                                                   ¡     ¢
                                                                    and                                        (6)

where X ∈ {τ, Y } depending on the form of forward guidance. The first restriction follows from the agent’s
attentiveness to policy communications and his knowledge of the policymaker’s commitment; the second
follows from his knowledge of condition (1); the third repeats the assumed best-response condition (2).
    Assumption 3, in turn, imposes that agents can reason, with full confidence and no mistakes, that the
above restrictions extend from their own behavior and beliefs to the behavior and the beliefs of others,

                                                            9
to the beliefs of others about the behavior and the beliefs of others, and so on, ad infinitum. It is such
infinite depth of knowledge and rationality that our REE benchmark and the textbook policy paradigm
alike impose—and that we instead relax by modifying Assumption 3 in the subsequent analysis.


3.3 Higher-Order Doubts

For our main analysis, we replace Assumption 3 with the following:

Assumption 4 (“Doubts about Others’ Awareness”). Every agent believes that all other agents are rational
but only a fraction λ ∈ [0, 1) of them is attentive to or aware of the policy message: every i believes that, for
every j 6= i , E j [X ] = Ei [X ] = X̂ with probability λ and E j [X ] = 0 with probability 1 − λ, where X ∈ {τ, Y }
depending on the form of forward guidance. This fact and the value of λ are common knowledge.

Relative to Assumption 3 (which can be nested as λ = 1), this drops common knowledge of the policy
communication and introduces a “crisis of confidence” about whether other agents will respond.
    The precise form of Assumption 4 draws from a large literature studying lack of common knowledge
in macroeconomics and finance. See Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003), Morris and Shin (1998, 2002), and
Woodford (2003) for early contributions and Angeletos and Lian (2018) and Wiederholt (2016) for recent
applications to the ZLB context. But whereas most of this literature confounds higher-order doubts with
noisy information or rational inattention, Assumption 4 isolates the former friction and equates it with a
departure from REE.13 As further explained in Section 5.4, it is the departure from REE, not noisy informa-
tion or rational inattention per se, that drives our main result.
    In so doing, Assumption 4 admits an immediate re-interpretation in terms of “shallow” reasoning. A
large literature documents such a phenomenon in the laboratory and accommodates it by replacing REE
with Level-k Thinking.14 The exact mapping for our setting is spelled out in Appendix C, but the basic
idea is quite simple: doubts about others’ rationality (Level-k Thinking) have nearly identical behavioral
implications as doubts about others’ awareness (Assumption 4). As explained in Appendix C, the only
difference is that our formulation avoids a certain “bug” that emerges when Level-k Thinking is imported
from games of strategic complementarity to games of strategic substitutability.
    The experimental literature on Level-k Thinking thus provides indirect empirical support for Assump-
tion 4. Additional support can be found in a large psychology literature that documents how people tend
to think they are “better than average” in a variety of contexts (see, e.g., Alicke and Govorun, 2005). The
analogue here is that the people think that others are less attentive, or less rational. Assumption 4 is also
a close cousin of the form of “cognitive discounting” proposed by Gabaix (2020). Finally, as we will show
shortly, Assumption 4 amounts to under-reaction of the average expectations of economic activity (K ) to
 13 Similar disentanglements of the role of higher-order beliefs from that of noisy information and first-order beliefs have been

employed in Angeletos and La’O (2009) and Angeletos, Collard and Dellas (2018), albeit for different purposes.
 14 For the development of this concept and the related experiments, see Stahl (1993), Nagel (1995) and Crawford, Costa-Gomes

and Iriberri (2013). This concept has been recently imported to the New Keynesian model by Garcıa-Schmidt and Woodford
(2019) and Farhi and Werning (2019); see also Iovino and Sergeyev (2019) for an application to Quantitative Easing.




                                                              10
the relevant news (the policy message). Evidence of such under-reaction has been documented by Coibion
and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015).


4 Main Results

This section contains our main results. We first show how the allowed departure from rational expectations
modifies implementability under each of the two forms of forward guidance, and how it breaks the earlier
irrelevance result. We then characterize the optimal communication strategy.


4.1 Implementability

With Assumption 4 in place of Assumption 3, we now revisit what pairs of (τ, Y ) the policymaker can im-
plement. Under rational expectations, these pairs were given by A ∗ = {(τ, Y ) : τ = Y } regardless of the
communication choice (Proposition 1). With higher-order doubts, we not only break the equivalence, we
also observe several economically interesting properties about the deviation from the rational expecta-
tions benchmark. These properties are summarized in the following result, which is proved in detail later.

Theorem 1 (Implementability). Let Aτ and AY denote the sets of the pairs (τ, Y ) that are implementable
under, respectively, instrument and target communication. Then,

                    Aτ = (τ, Y ) : τ = µτ (λ, γ)Y                AY = (τ, Y ) : τ = µY (λ, γ)Y ,
                        ©                         ª                  ©                        ª
                                                        and

where

                                  1 − αγ −1                           1 − 2α + α(1 − γ)λ + a 2 γ
                    µ                    ¶
         µτ (λ, γ) ≡ (1 − α) + α            ≥ 1 and µY (λ, γ) ≡ µY =                            ¢ ≤1
                                 1 − λαγ                             (1 − α) 1 − α + α(1 − γ)λ
                                                                            ¡


Moreover, the following properties hold for (µτ , µY ):

  (i) µY (λ, γ) < 1 < µτ (λ, γ) for any λ < 1 and γ ∈ (0, 1).

  (ii) µτ (λ, γ) increases in λ and µY (λ, γ) decreases in λ for every γ ∈ (0, 1).

 (iii) ¯1 − µτ (λ, γ)¯ increases with γ and ¯1 − µY (λ, γ)¯ decreases with γ for every λ ∈ [0, 1).
       ¯             ¯                      ¯             ¯


    The frictionless benchmark is nested by λ = 1 and results in µτ = 1 = µY . By contrast, for any λ < 1
and γ ∉ {0, 1}, we have µY < 1 < µτ and the two implementable sets cease to be the same. An immediate
corollary is the following:

Corollary 2. For any λ < 1 and γ ∈ (0, 1),the policymaker’s first best is not implementable under either mode
of communication.

    For generic loss functions, the policymaker will therefore experience a trade-off between the two forms
of forward guidance, owing to the different sets of implementable outcomes. The specific trade-off that
obtains under the assumed objective 3 and its optimal resolution will be characterized in Section 4.3. But


                                                          11
first, we expand on the economics behind Theorem 1. Because this result regards only implementability,
it applies regardless of the policy objective or welfare criterion.
    A key lesson, described as points (i) and (ii) of Theorem 1, is that the same friction in beliefs has op-
posite effects on implementability under the two strategies. A larger friction steepens the implementability
constraint under instrument communication (i.e., it raises µτ , the marginal change in τ needed to imple-
ment a marginal change in Y ) and flattens it under target communication (i.e., it lowers µY ).
    This lesson qualifies the common finding of Angeletos and Lian (2018), Farhi and Werning (2019),
Gabaix (2020), Garcıa-Schmidt and Woodford (2019) and Wiederholt (2016). These works have argued that
essentially the same friction as that studied here arrests the response of aggregate spending to forward
guidance at the ZLB (in our language, it steepens implementability). But whereas these works restrict
forward guidance to be instrument-based, our result clarifies that this prediction can be reversed with
target-based forward guidance.15
    However, what will prove important for our take-home message about optimal communication (the
upcoming Theorem 2) is not only the sign of the deviation from rational expectations but also its the com-
parative statics with respect to the GE feedback, described as point (iii) of Theorem 1. A higher GE feed-
back increases the distortion of the implementability constraint (i.e., the distance of µ X from its rational-
expectation counterpart) under instrument communication and decreases it under target communication.


4.2 Proof of Theorem 1: Under- vs Over-reaction, and the Role of GE Feedback

The proof of Theorem 1 builds upon several intermediate results, the combination of which comprises this
paper’s main economic intuitions. The first, and most primitive, such result is that the form of forward
guidance affects the agents’ strategic interaction and hence the type of reasoning they must engage in.
    Consider first the case in which the policymaker announces, and commits on, a value τ̂ for the instru-
ment. This anchors the agents’ beliefs of τ but lets them worry what Y will be. In particular, recall that
Assumption 2, which imposes individual rationality and attentiveness but allows arbitrary higher-order
beliefs, yields the three restrictions given in condition (6). Now that the policymaker has anchored the
agents’ beliefs of τ, the first restriction becomes Ei [τ] = τ̂ and the remaining two reduce to

                             k i = (1 − γ)τ̂ + γEi [Y ]     and        Ei [Y ] = (1 − α)τ̂ + αEi [K ].

To determine their best actions, agents therefore need to predict Y , which is the same as predicting K , or
the response of others. Moreover, for any given τ̂, a higher predicted K means higher predicted Y and
a higher action k i . In game-theoretic language, agents’ actions are strategic complements. And in the
language of our liquidity trap application, a consumer who is pessimistic about aggregate spending wants
 15 The kind of higher-order doubts or bounded rationality we have captured via Assumption 4 is the sole friction in Farhi and

Werning (2019) and Garcıa-Schmidt and Woodford (2019). But this is not the case for Angeletos and Lian (2018), Gabaix (2020)
and Wiederholt (2016), which combine the relevant rigidity in higher-order beliefs with a rigidity in first-order beliefs, due the
inclusion of noisy information, inattention, or “sparsity.” This additional friction, which we allow for in Section 5.4, contributes
toward a less effective forward guidance, or a lower response of K to X̂ , under both communication strategies. But it does not
upset our main lessons about their relative merits.


                                                                12
to spend less, because she understands that, for fixed nominal interest rates, lower aggregate spending
translates to lower income, lower inflation, and higher real rates.
    Consider next the case in which the policymaker announces, and commits on, a target Ŷ for the out-
come. In this case, Ei [Y ] = Ŷ and the remaining two restrictions from condition (6) can be rewritten as

                                                                                      1          α
                                k i = (1 − γ)Ei [τ] + γŶ      and        Ei [τ] =   1−α Ŷ   − 1−α Ei [K ].

Agents now know what the outcome will be but have to figure out the policy that will support it. Predicting
τ under target communication, like predicting Y in the previous case, also boils down to predicting K . But
the dependence of behavior on the beliefs of K is the opposite: for any given Ŷ , a higher expectation for
K maps to a lower expectation for the value of τ that will be needed to support Ŷ , and hence to a lower
action k i . In game-theoretic language, agents’ actions are strategic substitutes. And in the language of the
liquidity trap, a consumer who is pessimistic about aggregate spending wants to spend more, because she
understands that the policymaker’s commitment to deliver the announced income or employment target
will necessitate a more lax monetary policy, or lower interest rates when others spend less.
    The following Lemma summarizes the previous points and spells out the precise form of the game
played by the agents under the two forms of forward guidance.

Lemma 1 (Game representation). Say the policymaker announces X = X̂ for either X ∈ {τ, Y }. Agents’ be-
havior is given by
                                                    k i = (1 − δ X ) X̂ + δ X Ei [K ].                                             (7)

where
                                                                                   α
                                      δτ ≡ αγ ∈ (0, 1)          δY ≡ −(1 − γ)         ∈ (−1, 0)
                                                                                  1−α
The game induced by instrument communication therefore features strategic complementarity, and the
game induced by target communication features strategic substitutability.

    This insight is true, and Lemma 1 holds, with rational expectations as well. But simple algebra in (7)
reveals that the exact value of δ X ∈ (−1, 1) is irrelevant for determining the mapping of X̂ to K if and only if
equilibrium expectations are correct or, at least on average, Ei [K ] = K .16
    The important deviation in Assumption 4 is to break this irrelevance in a structured way. The following
Lemma demonstrates exactly how this assumption functions:

Lemma 2 (Under-estimating the response of others). For both modes of communication and for any value
X̂ of the policy message, Ei [K ] = Ēi [K ] = λK .
 16 The restriction δ
                        X ∈ (−1, 1) means that the equilibrium of both games can be obtained via iteration of best responses for any
λ ≤ 1, or that beliefs of arbitrarily high order do not have an explosive impact on behavior. Without this restriction, the REE
outcome itself is extremely fragile. For instance, Level-k thinking fails to recover it in the limit as k → ∞. This circles back to our
discussion of how our framework guarantees, not only a unique equilibrium, but also a vanishing effect of infinite-order beliefs.
                                                                                 1
See also Lemma 8 in the Appendix for the calculation of why δY > −1 maps to α < 2−γ .




                                                                   13
    A heuristic argument is the following. If the typical agent believes that only a fraction λ of the popu-
lation is aware of the policy message like herself, she also expects the same fraction to respond like her-
self, and the remaining fraction to stay put. That is, Ei [K ] = λk i for the typical agent and therefore also
Ē[K ] = λK in the aggregate. The more precise proof offered in Appendix A demonstrates the formal con-
nection to iteration of higher-order beliefs and makes clearer the intuitive relationship with limited depth
of knowledge and rationality.
    Combining Lemmas 1 and 2 pins down the behavior of K under instrument and target communication
and gets to the heart of the difference between the two methods:

Lemma 3 (Under- vs over-reaction, and the effect of γ). The realized aggregate action following announce-
ment X̂ is given by
                                                                               1 − δX
                                    K = κ X X̂     with        κ X (λ, γ) ≡            ,                   (8)
                                                                              1 − λδ X
where X ∈ {τ, Y } depending on the form of forward guidance and κτ ≤ 1 ≤ κY . Moreover, the following prop-
erties hold for (κτ , κY ):

   (i) κτ < 1 < κY for any λ < 1 and γ ∈ (0, 1)

  (ii) κτ (λ, γ) increases and κY (λ, γ) decreases in λ for every γ ∈ (0, 1).

 (iii) ¯1 − κτ (λ, γ)¯ increases with γ and ¯1 − κY (λ, γ)¯ decreases with γ for every λ ∈ [0, 1).
       ¯             ¯                      ¯             ¯


    This result parallels, and basically proves, Theorem 1. Point (i) shows that instrument and target com-
munication result in opposite distortions relative to the rational expectations case: the former leads K to
under-react to the announcement, while the latter leads K to over-react to the announcement. This is a
direct consequence of the previous discussion of strategic interaction. Point (ii) complements part (i) by
showing that a larger friction amplifies the distortion in both cases, increasing under-reaction under in-
strument communication and increasing over-reaction under target communication. Finally, point (iii)
studies how the distortion under each communication method varies with the GE feedback parameter γ.
This point, which is crucial for the upcoming characterization of the optimal communication strategy, re-
lates to the mapping from the primitive parameter γ to the strategic interaction parameters {δτ , δY } and
thereby to the role of higher-order beliefs.
    Under instrument communication, a higher γ maps to a larger degree of strategic complementarity,
or a more positive value for δτ . In the ZLB context, for example, a higher γ may correspond to a steeper
Keynesian cross, and hence to a larger feedback from aggregate spending to individual spending for given
interest rates, or a higher δτ . As this happens, any given under-estimation of the response of others’ con-
sumption (and hence of aggregate income) results in a larger reduction in individual spending. This maps
to a lower κτ , or equivalently to a larger deviation of κτ from its REE counterpart.
    By contrast, with target communication, a higher γ maps to a lower degree of strategic substitutability,
or to a less negative value for δY . To understand this, recall that under target communication the role
of forecasting K is to forecast the future τthat will support the Y target. As γ increases, expected policy



                                                          14
matters less for decisions, and so does the expected response to forward guidance via K . As such, there is
less opportunity for the friction to bite. That is, κY gets closer to its REE counterpart as γ increases.
    Proving Theorem 1 from this point requires only the following few additional lines of algebra. In the
case of instrument communication, replacing K = κτ τ̂ in (1) gives Y = (1 − α + ακτ ) τ̂, which together with
                                                                               1
τ = τ̂ yields the implementability constraint τ = µτ Y with µτ =            1−α+ακτ .    In the case of target communica-
                                                                                             1−ακY
tion, on the other hand, replacing K = κY Ŷ in (1) and solving for τ gives τ =               1−α    Ŷ , which together with
                                                                                 1−ακY
Y = Ŷ yields the implementability constraint τ = µY Y with µY =                  1−α    . The properties of (µτ , µY ) then
follow directly from the properties of (κτ , κY ).


4.3 Optimal Policy

We now turn to optimal policy. In particular, we show how the optimal choice between instrument and
target communication hinges on γ, or the ferocity of GE feedback. We think of this result as a gauge for
when, as a function of economic circumstances proxied by γ, a policymaker should prefer one form of
forward guidance to the other.
    As a prelude to this result, it is useful to consider two extreme cases: γ = 0 and γ = 1. Consider first the
case with γ = 0. In this case, condition (2) reduces to k i = Ei [τ], which means that agents care to know only
τ. When the policymaker commits on a value for τ, she tells agents everything they need to know, elimi-
nates their need to reason about the behavior of others, and neutralizes the bite of the friction on imple-
mentability (formally, Aτ (0, λ) = A ∗ for all λ < 1). By contrast, if the policymaker commits on a target for
Y , agents must reason what K will be in order to figure out the value of τ that will support the announced
target for Y , and the mistakes in such reasoning distort implementability (formally, AY (0, λ) 6= A ∗ for all
λ < 1). It follows that instrument communication is strictly optimal when γ = 0. Finally, everything flips
with γ = 1. In this case, agents only care to know Y and the only way to insulate the economy from belief
friction is to offer target-based forward guidance.
    These two cases are knife-edge in the sense that, as anticipated in Corollary 2, the first best is unattain-
able once γ ∈ (0, 1). But they illustrate the basic logic behind our main policy lesson: the optimal form of
forward guidance aims at minimizing, as much as possible, the agents’ need to reason about the economy.
Building on the comparative statics of the implementability constraints with respect to γ documented in
Theorem 1, we can indeed show that this logic extends to the general case as follows.

Theorem 2 (Optimal Forward Guidance). For any λ < 1, there exists a threshold γ̂ ∈ (0, 1) such that: when
γ ∈ (0, γ̂), instrument-based guidance is strictly optimal for all θ; and when γ ∈ (γ̂, 1), target-based guidance
is strictly optimal for all θ.


4.4 Proof of Theorem 2

Given θ, the policymaker chooses a set A ∈ {Aτ (λ), AY (λ)} and a pair (τ, Y ) ∈ A to minimize her loss:

                                                     min               L(τ, Y , θ)
                                         A ∈{Aτ (λ),AY (λ)},(τ,Y )∈A




                                                           15
where L(τ, Y , θ) = χ(τ − θ)2 − (1 − χ)(Y − θ)2 . We focus on λ < 1 and γ ∈ (0, 1), and let (A sb , τsb , Y sb ) be the
unique “second-best” triplet that attains the minimum.
    Given the specification of L and the characterization of the implementability sets in Theorem 1, we can
restate the choice of the form of forward guidance as the choice of a slope µ ∈ {µτ (λ, γ), µY (λ, γ)} for the
equilibrium mapping between τ and Y . Letting r ≡ τ/θ and substituting the implementability constraint,
we reach the following simpler representation of the policymaker’s problem:17

                                                                    (1 − χ)(r − 1)2 + χ(r µ−1 − 1)2
                                                                   £                                ¤
                                                  min                                                                               (9)
                                      µ∈{µτ (λ,γ),µY (λ,γ)},r ∈R

This makes clear that the optimal form of forward guidance is the same for all realizations of θ. It also lets
r identify the optimal covariation of τ with θ.
    It is simple to solve for the optimal r in closed form and arrive at the following representation of the
policymaker’s loss as a function of µ alone:

                                                                        ¤ χ(1 − χ)(1 − µ)2
                             L (µ) ≡ min (1 − χ)(r − 1)2 + χ(r µ−1 − 1)2 =
                                          £
                                                                                           ,
                                     r ∈R                                  µ2 (1 − χ) + χ

which is a U-shaped function of µ ∈ (0, ∞), with a minimum equal to 0 and attained at µ = 1 (the friction-
less case).18 The interpretation of this loss function is simple. The closer µ is to 1, the smaller would be
the distortion from the frictionless benchmark even if we were to hold r fixed at 1. The fact that the poli-
cymaker can adjust r as a function of µ moderates the distortion but does not upset the property that the
loss is smaller the closer µ is to 1.
    The optimal form of forward guidance can now be found by studying which of the two feasible values of
µ yields the smallest value for L (µ). Varying γ changes these two values without affecting the loss incurred
from any given µ. In particular, raising γ drives µτ further way from 1 and brings µY closer to 1 (part (iii) of
Theorem 1). It follows that L (µτ ) is an increasing function of γ, whereas L (µY ) is a decreasing function
of it.19 Next, note that both L (µτ ) and L (µY ) are continuous in γ and recall from our earlier discussion
about the extremes γ = 0 and γ = 1 that the following properties hold: L (µτ ) = 0 < L (µY ) when γ = 0, and
L (µτ ) > 0 = L (µY ) when γ = 1. It follows that there exists a threshold γ̂ strictly between 0 and 1 such that
L (µτ ) < L (µY ) for γ < γ̂, L (µτ ) = L (µY ) for γ = γ̂, and L (µτ ) > L (µY ) for γ > γ̂.
    Figure 1 illustrates this argument in a graph, with the slopes (µτ , µY ) in the left panel and the loss
functions (L (µτ ), L (µY )) on the right. In a nutshell, because a stronger GE feedback increases the dis-
tortion under instrument communication but reduces the distortion under target communication, target
communication is optimal if and only if the GE feedback is strong enough.
                                                        2
  17 The expression for the optimal r is r ∗ (µ) = µ (1−χ)+µχ . We can further deduce that, given χ ∈ (0, 1), r ∗ /µ > 1 for µ ∈ [0, 1],
                                                       µ2 (1−χ)+χ
r ∗ /µ < 1 for µ > 1, and r ∗ /µ = 1 for µ = 1. Further, r > 0 as long as µ > 0.
  18 Note that, from the envelope theorem, ∂L /µ = −2 · χ · r ∗ · (r ∗ /µ − 1)/µ2 . Combined with the previous footnote’s expression

for r ∗ , this suggests that ∂L /µ = 0 when µ = 1, ∂L /∂µ > 0 when µ > 1, and ∂L /∂µ < 0 when µ ∈ [0, 1]. Finally, note that we
                                                                                   1
guarantee µY > 0 for any possible λ ≤ 1 given the restriction of |δY | < 1 or α < 2−γ .
 19 This is true strictly away from γ ∈ {0, 1}.




                                                                       16
                         µτ
          slope




                                                                         loss
                                                                                    L (µY )                   L (µτ )

                         µY


                                         γ̂                                                            γ̂
                              GE feedback                                                 GE feedback

Figure 1: Slope of implementability constraint (left) and welfare loss (right) as function of GE feedback γ.


5 Extensions

This section explores the robustness of our results to the following extensions: negative GE feedback, alter-
native policy objectives, alternative departures from rational expectations, the introduction of inattention,
and the introduction of confounding shocks as in Poole (1970). Readers eager to see the application of our
theory to the Great Recession are invited to jump to Sections 6 and 7.


5.1 Negative GE Feedback

The restriction to positive GE feedback, or γ > 0, is consistent with our main application. But the opposite
scenario is possible in other contexts. For instance, in the Neoclassical example of Appendix B, γ < 0 is
obtained if the wage pressure due to competition for labor overcomes the aggregate demand externality.
And in the ZLB context, γ < 0 can obtain from competition for another scare resource, like safe assets as
in Caballero and Farhi (2017). Theorem 2 directly extends to such situations. This is readily verified by
noting that the proof of Theorem 2 does not actually use γ > 0.20 We thus have that target communication
is optimal if and only of if the GE feedback is both positive in sign and large enough in magnitude.


5.2 Alternative Policy Goals

Our main results focused on implementable pairs of (τ, Y ), and their deviations from their first-best coun-
terparts. But what if the policymaker cared also about K per se? The following result shows how to accom-
modate this possibility:

Proposition 3. Let the policymaker have the loss function

                                         L = χτ (τ − θ)2 + χY (Y − θ)2 + χK (K − θ)2                                       (10)

for some non-negative weights χτ , χY , χK . The optimal communication strategy has a threshold form for
some γ̂ ∈ (0, 1), as in Theorem 2, if at least two of the three weights are positive.
 20 The proof requires only the weaker restriction |δ | < 1, which means that beliefs of arbitrarily high order have a vanishing
                                                     X
effect on behavior. See Appendix E for additional details.


                                                              17
    Our neoclassical investment example, as shown in Appendix B, maps to (χτ , χY ) > 0 and χK = 0 and
is hence covered directly by Theorem 2. By contrast, our liquidity trap example, as shown in Section 6.1,
maps to (χτ , χK ) > 0 and χY = 0, hence it requires Proposition 3. Either way, the basic logic is the same.
When expectations are rational, the policymaker can close all gaps at once, and can do so with both forms
of forward guidance. Otherwise, a trade-off obtains. For instance, the policymaker can close the gap τ − θ
by announcing τ̂ = θ, but as long as λ 6= 1 this leads to both K 6= θ and Y 6= θ. And because this kind of
distortion increases with γ, a higher γ favors a switch from instruments to targets.21
    Things become more tricky only if we relax Assumption 1, that is, if we let the REE benchmark itself
deviate from the policymaker’s ideal point. In such circumstances, the logic “the optimal policy aims at
minimizing the bite of bounded rationality on implementability and welfare” does not necessarily hold.
Instead, the following version of the generic second-best argument applies: if the distortion induced by
bounded rationality happens to go in the opposite direction than another distortion, the policymaker may
want to leverage on the former to offset the latter.22
    However, the mere existence of another distortion does not necessarily upset our result. For instance,
in our Neoclassical example, the REE outcome is not first-best efficient because lump-sum taxes are un-
available. Still, our result goes through because the tax distortion is invariant to bounded rationality. This
guarantees that welfare can still be expressed as in (10), modulo a reinterpretation of the policymaker’s
ideal point: instead of representing the unconstrained first best, this point represents the kind of second
best characterized in Barro (1979) and Lucas and Stokey (1983). The essence of Assumption 1 is therefore
not to rule out all other distortions but rather to abstract from the possibility that the agents’ deviation
from full rationality is used by the policymaker as a tool for correcting other problems in the economy (as
it is the case, for instance, in Gabaix, 2020, and Farhi and Gabaix, 2020).


5.3 Arbitrary Mistakes in Reasoning

Our main specification equated agents’ bounded rationality to lack of common knowledge of others’ aware-
ness and rationality, which amounted to under-estimation of the responses of others. This captures the
common core feature of the theoretical literature on which we build (Angeletos and Lian, 2018; Farhi and
Werning, 2019; Gabaix, 2020; Garcıa-Schmidt and Woodford, 2019). But a policymaker themselves could
be forgiven for not having complete confidence that these theories are correct.
    Consider the following two alternative stories. The first is that individual agents will be startled and
over-estimate the response of the economy to the policy news. The second is that agents’ behavior will
be swayed by animal spirits (extrinsic waves of optimism and pessimism about the behavior of others)
 21 This holds, of course, as long as the policymaker cares about at least two of the gaps seen in (10). Otherwise, there is trivially

no trade off and the form of forward guidance is indeterminate.
 22 For instance, suppose that, due to a production externality or some other failure of the first welfare theorem, the rational-

expectations equilibrium itself exhibits over-reaction of K to τ relative to the first best, or the policymaker’s ideal point. Then,
instrument communication may bring the equilibrium closer to the first best by letting the belief friction induce the opposite
distortion. Furthermore, if this consideration happens to be more important when γ is large, this could overturn the comparative
statics of the optimal strategy with respect to γ.



                                                                 18
or by purely random errors in their reasoning about GE effects (such as, perhaps, those caused by a mis-
specified belief about the structure of the economy). To capture these possibilities in a structured yet
flexible manner, we now consider the following specification of the beliefs about others’ behavior:

Assumption 5 (General distorted reasoning). Average beliefs satisfy Ē[K ] = λK +σε for some λ > 0 (possibly
λ > 1) and σ ≥ 0, where ε is a unit-variance noise term unknown to the policymaker and independent of the
policy announcement.

    Unlike the main analysis, the friction is now introduced directly in the expectations of K as opposed to
in the depth of agents’ knowledge and rationality. This shortcut lets us focus on how the friction matters
for behavior as opposed to how it is micro-founded. But the missing details can easily be filled in.
    For instance, letting λ > 1 is akin to modifying the higher-order beliefs in Assumption 4 in the following
way: let agents believe that with positive probability others will be “startled” and over-react to the policy
message instead of being “sleepy” and under-reactive.23 Basically the same applies to Level-k Thinking
with a level-0 belief of the form η X̂ , for some η > 1. And just as λ < 1 captures the form of “cognitive dis-
counting” assumed in Gabaix (2020), λ > 1 captures the opposite bias, “cognitive hyperopia” or a form of
over-extrapolation (Bordalo, Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2017; Bordalo et al., 2018). As for σ > 0, this can be
micro-founded by introducing either or shocks to higher-order beliefs (Angeletos and La’O, 2013; Angele-
tos, Collard and Dellas, 2018) or an “erratic” level-0 belief; and it can be interpreted as random errors in
equilibrium reasoning, or as animal spirits operating within a unique equilibrium.
    The upshot for implementable sets is the following extension of Theorem 1:

Proposition 4. When Assumption 5 replaces Assumption 3, a pair (τ, Y ) is implementable if and only if

                                                τ = µ X (λ, γ)Y + ψ X (σ, γ)ε

where X ∈ {τ, Y } indexes the form of forward guidance, µτ (λ, γ) and µY (λ, γ) are as in Theorem 1, and

                                    αγ                                                          α2 (1 − γ)
          ψτ (σ, γ) ≡ −σα                                  and       ψY (σ, γ) ≡ −σ
                            1 − λαγ + α2 γ(λ − 1)                                      (1 − α)((1 − α) + λα(1 − γ))
    Compared to the case with under-reactive beliefs (λ < 1), the case with over-reactive beliefs (λ > 1)
flips the sign of distortion: implementability is now flattened under instrument communication (µτ < 1)
and steepened under target communication (µY > 1). Nevertheless, the comparative statics of the size of
distortion with respect to the strength of the GE feedback remain the same: as γ increases, the distortion
under instrument communication gets larger and that under target communication gets smaller.
    The distortions induced by random perturbations (σ > 0) share this comparative static, too. The com-
mon mechanism is that a higher γ increases the dependence of behavior on any mistakes about Y relative
to any mistakes about τ. This is true regardless of whether these mistakes are positively correlated, nega-
tively correlated, or uncorrelated with the announcement itself.
    Putting these ideas together, it is easy to show that our main policy result and the intuition about
minimizing the distortion also remain for any λ and σ.
 23 The only twist is that λ is no more the aforementioned probability, but rather a mixture of this probability and the perceived

over-reaction of others.


                                                               19
Proposition 5. When λ = 1 and σ = 0, the optimal form of forward guidance is indeterminate. When instead
λ 6= 1 and/or σ 6= 0, Theorem 2 continues to hold: there exists γ̂ ∈ (0, 1) such that target communication is
optimal if and only if γ > γ̂.

    The following corollary is then immediate:

Corollary 3 (Robustness to unknown distortions). Assume that, from the policymaker’s perspective, the
parameters (λ, σ) ∈ R2+ are random and drawn from some non-degenerate prior distribution. Then Theorem
2 continues to hold.

In this sense, a policymaker who suspects that the public has the wrong model of how policy works in GE
but is not sure of the precise model thereof could still apply our main result.


5.4 Inattention

An important simplification in our model is that agents hear forward guidance perfectly clearly. This con-
trasts with ample evidence of inattention and compatible theories (Sims, 2003; Gabaix, 2014). We now
explain why inattention per se, or noisy information, does not upset the irrelevance of the form of forward
guidance that served as our starting point in Section 3—it is only the departure from rational expectations
that breaks this irrelevance and that opens the door to the trade off .
    Consider the simplest example of rational inattention or noisy information, with Gaussian signals. Let
the fundamental θ be Gaussian with mean 0 and let the policy announcement X be linear in θ. Next,
let each agent receive only a noisy version of X , given by x i = X + u i , where u i is idiosyncratic Gaussian
noise. Finally, let x i have a fixed signal-to-noise ratio with respect to X , regardless of the form of forward
guidance. This can be justified as the optimal attention choice in a model where the cost of attention is an
increasing function of the Shannon mutual information between x i and X .
    In this model, which resembles Morris and Shin (2002), Woodford (2003), and the topical applications
of Angeletos and Lian (2018) and Wiederholt (2016), the following properties hold under rational expec-
tations. First, the first-order beliefs satisfy Ē[X ] = q X for some q < 1, with q being a positive transforma-
tion of the aforementioned signal-to-noise ratio (or of the parameter that regulates the cost of attention).
Second, the higher-order beliefs satisfy Ēh [X ] = λh−1 Ē[X ] for all h ≥ 2, with λ = q. And third, the imple-
mentable combinations of τ and Y are invariant to the form of forward guidance.
    The first two properties are commonplace in the literature. The third, which is central to our purposes
and is proved in Appendix G, clarifies that noisy information alone does not upset the irrelevance property
of the noiseless REE benchmark we studied in Section 3. A simple intuition is that, in the new context,
which has noisy but still rational expectations, τ and Y are both functions of the same fundamental and
these functions are themselves correctly understood by the agents. It follows that a signal of one is just as
good as a signal of the other and, as a result, there is still no meaningful trade-off between anchoring the
expectations of τ and anchoring the expectations of Y . We summarize this lesson below.

Proposition 6. Insofar as expectations remain rational, the introduction of noisy information or inatten-
tion, as modeled above, preserves the irrelevance of the form of forward guidance.

                                                      20
    By the same token, the crucial feature of Assumption 4 was not the rigidity in higher-order beliefs per
se (which is present in the above model) but rather the systematic error in equilibrium reasoning (which is
absent in the above model). This squares well with the basic premise that our paper is all about systematic
errors in equilibrium reasoning, as opposed to mere inattention or rational confusion.
    What if inattention coexists with flawed equilibrium reasoning? We study this case in detail in Ap-
pendix G. The upshot is the following. If inattention is rational and efficient, in line with the micro-
foundations put forward in Sims (2003, 2006) and the Welfare Theorems for inattentive economies proved
in Angeletos and Sastry (2019), the errors in equilibrium reasoning remain the only source of inefficiency
and our main lessons (Theorem 2, Proposition 5 and Corollary 3) go through. Otherwise, the second-best
argument “use one distortion to fight another” may once again become relevant.


5.5 A Bridge to Poole (1970): Imperfect Control and Additional Shocks

Much of the contemporary discussion of instrument and targets follows the durable logic of Poole (1970):
that the optimal implementation device is the one best hedged against confounding shocks. Such hedging
is front-and-center in actual policy design, and while our focus in this paper is transparently different, it is
useful to study whether the two justifications conflict with one another.
    In Appendix F, we enrich our model with two Poole-like elements. The first is “uncertainty about future
fundamentals,” or the existence of an unobserved shock to Y in (1) on which policy cannot be contingent.
Formally, we modify (1) as follows:
                                                   Y = (1 − α)τ + αK + u,                                                 (11)

where u is Gaussian, orthogonal to θ, and unobserved by both the policymaker and the private agents.
The second element is “imprecise implementation,” or noisy measurement of Y or τ. Formally, we let the
policymaker announce and commit to a value for τ̃ or Ỹ (instead of, respectively, τ or Y ), where

                                                τ̃ = τ + u τ ,        Ỹ = Y + u Y ,                                      (12)

and the u’s are independent Gaussian shocks, orthogonal to θ, and unpredictable by both the policymaker
and the private agents. The shock u τ may capture the policymaker’s imperfect control over mortgage rates
(the kind of interest rates that govern consumer spending), whereas the shock u Y may capture measure-
ment error in macroeconomic statistics, or other source of “noise” in the mapping from such statistics to
the true outcomes of interest.24
    Regardless of interpretation, the key assumption here is the lack of sufficiently flexible contingency
of the policy on the disturbances u, u τ and u Y . This assumption is at the heart of Poole (1970): if the
policymaker could freely condition the policy on these disturbances, the trade-off studied in that paper
would disappear and our own analysis could proceed as if these disturbances were absent. It is therefore
only the absence of such contingency that gives rise to the considerations articulated in Poole (1970).
 24 As an example, the Fed was very concerned in March 2014 that unemployment figures were falling toward the pre-committed

6.5% threshold for the “bad reason” that individuals were leaving the labor force, while primitive labor market conditions were
not improving so much (Blinder et al., 2017).


                                                                 21
    These considerations may naturally favor one or the other form of forward guidance, regardless of
whether expectations are rational or not. For instance, committing on a value for τ helps insure against
shocks that cause fluctuations in aggregate output but should not influence future interest rates. But,
unlike our approach, such considerations do not necessarily induce a dependence of the optimal policy
on the relative importance of PE and GE considerations, as captured by the structural parameter γ.

Proposition 7. Allow for the Poole-like elements described above. When expectations are rational, the op-
timal choice between instrument and target communication is invariant to γ. And otherwise, Theorem 2
continues to hold.

    What is more, the logic that the instrument-vs-target choice is irrelevant for implementability in the
rational-expectations benchmark (but not away from it) generalizes in the following “average” sense:

Proposition 8. Let Ep [τ] and Ep [Y ] be the policymaker’s expectation of τ and Y at stage 0, where the ex-
pectation is taken over the possible realizations of the future shocks or measurement errors. When λ = 1,
Ep [τ] = Ep [Y ] regardless of the policymaker’s strategy. When instead λ 6= 1, Ep [τ] = µτ Ep [Y ] under instru-
ment communication and Ep [τ] = µY Ep [Y ] under target communication, with µτ 6= µY . Furthermore, µτ
and µY are exactly the same as in our main analysis.

    With rational expectations, and from the policymaker’s perspective at the time she has to choose
whether to commit on a value for τ or a value for Y , there continues to exist no trade-off in terms of how
steep or flat the implementability constraint is. What varies between these two choices is only the extent
of insurance provided against future shocks or measurement error. By contrast, with bounded rationality,
implementability is fundamentally altered: the average relation between τ and Y depends on the form of
forward guidance, and on its interaction with γ, essentially in the same way as in our main analysis.25
    We close this section with another example of the novel considerations our approach brings to light.
In our baseline analysis, we assumed that the policymaker already knew all the shocks upon which the
optimal value of τ or Y should be conditioned on; and in the present extension, we relaxed this assumption
but, as in Poole (1970), prevented the policymaker from making state-contingent commitments for τ or Y .
Suppose now that such state-contingencies are allowed but are also hard to decipher by the agents, in
the sense that the inclusion of more contingencies makes agents more prone to mistakes in equilibrium
reasoning. Then, announcing and committing to a simple, non-contingent plan could be optimal for the
policymaker because it offers more “clarity,” or a smaller departure from rational expectations.
    This reasoning favors simple, sharp, communications such as Mario Draghi’s “do whatever it takes”
over the kind of more complicated plans, detailed with all kinds of contingencies, found in the typical
FOMC announcement. And it provides a novel rationale for curtailing state-contingencies, in addition
to previously established results related to time inconsistency (Athey, Atkeson and Kehoe, 2005). The full
exploration of these ideas seems an interesting angle for future research.
 25 A corollary of Proposition 8 is that, when and only when λ < 1, the switch from instrument to target communication is asso-

ciated with a reduction in the expected value of τ needed to achieve the desired target in Y . This anticipates a point we make in
Section 6: the 2012 shift in the Fed’s communication strategy may have, unintentionally but favorably, help shorten the time the
economy had to spend at the ZLB.


                                                               22
6 Application: Monetary Policy in a Liquidity Trap

In this section, we apply our insights to the main application of interest. We first show how to nest a
micro-founded New Keynesian economy at the ZLB in our abstract framework. We then translate our
main policy lesson, encapsulated in Theorem 2, into the following more practical lesson: that central banks
should switch from talking about interest rates to talking about unemployment when the Keynesian cross
is steeper or the deflationary spiral intensifies.


6.1 Micro-foundations

Consumers and Firms. There are countably infinite periods, indexed by t ∈ {1, 2, . . .}, and a unit measure
of households, or consumers, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. Household i consumes C i ,t of the good and works Ni ,t
hours in period t . Let βt = exp −ρ̄ − ρ t be each consumer’s subjective discount rate, parametrized by
                                ¡         ¢

a long-run level ρ̄ > 0 and a shock ρ t , and let Ei ,t [·] be an individual consumer’s subjective expectation
operator at t . Preferences are given by the following:
                                                          h³                       ´               i
                                         U i ,t = Ei ,t        logC i ,t − 12 Ni2,t + βt U i ,t +1                          (13)

Each consumer also faces the following, standard flow budget constraint:
                                                                         P t −1
                                             C i ,t + B i ,t = R t −1           B i ,t −1 + Yi ,t ,
                                                                          Pt
where Yi ,t is the consumer’s income, B i ,t is her savings in a one-period, risk-free bond, P t is the price level,
R t −1 is the nominal interest rate between t − 1 and t , and R t −1 PPt −1
                                                                         t
                                                                            is the corresponding real rate.
    There is also a continuum of intermediate goods firms, indexed by j ∈ [0, 1]. Each such firm hires N j ,t
units of labor and produces quantity X j ,t = N j ,t . Aggregate output is produced by a competitive firm with
technology Y t = e θt F ((X j ,t ) j ∈[0,1] ), where θt is an aggregate TFP shock and F (·) is a standard constant-
elasticity-of-substitution aggregator. The intermediate-goods firms thus face the same demand and oper-
ate the same technology. We let this symmetry extend to prices (P j ,t = P t for all j ) but add nominal rigidity
by imposing the following, ad hoc, backward-looking Phillips curve:

                                                            Pt        Y t −1 ξ
                                                                    µ        ¶
                                                      Πt ≡        =                                                         (14)
                                                           P t −1     Y t∗−1

where Πt is (one plus) the inflation rate, Y t∗ is the natural or first-best rate of output, Y t /Y t∗ is therefore a
measure of the output gap, and ξ ∈ [0, 1) is a slope parameter. Perfectly rigid prices are nested with ξ = 0.26

Fundamentals, First-best, and Liquidity Trap. We assume the following structure for the shocks (ρ t , θt ).
For all t ≥ 3, both the discount factor and aggregate productivity are at their steady-state values: ρ t = 0
and θt = 0. At t = 2, the discount factor is at its steady state, or ρ 2 = 0, but productivity is θ2 = θ for some
 26 This formulation mimics the hybrid Phillips curves that best fit the data (Galí and Gertler, 1999) and that populate the DSGE

literature (Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans, 2005), but simplifies the analysis by abstracting from forward-looking price set-
ting and from the distortionary effect of inflation on the cross-sectional allocation of resources. Also, as it will become clear
momentarily, the restriction ξ < 1 is needed in order to make sure that the inflation-spending spiral is not explosive.


                                                                       23
random θ. At t = 1, the discount factor is weakly higher than one, or ρ 1 = −ρ̄ − ∆, for some ∆ ≥ 0, and
productivity is the same as in period 2, or θ2 = θ1 = θ.
     Given these assumptions, the first-best level of output and the associated natural rate of interest are
                                                                                              
                                          θ       for t = 1                                    −∆         for t = 1
                                         
                                                                                              
                                                                                               
                          log Y t∗   =       θ     for t = 2         and        log R t∗   =       ρ̄ − θ   for t = 2                   (15)
                                                                                              
                                             ρ̄                                                      ρ̄
                                                                                              
                                                   for t ≥ 3                                                for t ≥ 3
                                                                                              

The zero-lower-bound (ZLB) constraint, on the other hand, requires R t ≥ 1. Without the constraint, the
first best would be implemented with R t = R t∗ and zero inflation. With the constraint, the policy in (15)
can still be implemented for t ≥ 2,27 but the ZLB necessarily binds at t = 1, weakly if ∆ = 0 and strictly if
∆ > 0. This situation defines a liquidity trap and motivates the study of the following policy problem.

The Policy Problem. The monetary authority is bound by the ZLB during the trap (R t = 1 at t = 1) and
is also committed to replicating flexible-price outcomes in the long run (R t = R t∗ and Y t = Y t∗ at t ≥ 3).
But it is free to lower R 2 below R 2∗ , and can offer forward guidance about any such plan at t = 1, in an
attempt to stimulate aggregate demand during the trap. Finally, the monetary authority chooses its form
of forward guidance—a commitment for R 2 versus a commitment for aggregate employment and output—
so as maximize the representative household’s welfare.


6.2 Mapping to the Abstract Model

Let all lowercase variables be in log deviations from a steady state in which ρ t = θt = 0, R t = exp ρ̄ and
                                                                                                     ¡ ¢

Πt = 1.28 Similarly to Angeletos and Lian (2018), optimal consumption can be expressed as follows:
                                 "                                                                #
                                                         X k         X k
                     c i t = Ei t (1 − β)b i t + (1 − β)  β y t +k −  β (r t +k − πt +k+1 − ρ t )                                       (16)
                                                                  k≥0             k≥0

where β ≡ exp −ρ̄ ∈ (0, 1) is the steady-state discount factor. This is the Permanent Income Hypothesis,
             ¡ ¢

modified to allow for a time-varying real interest rate and a discount-rate shock. Note in particular that
       k
  k≥0 β y t +k captures permanent income and (1−β) captures the marginal propensity to consume (MPC).
P

The following Lemma summarizes how we can use this elementary result along with market clearing and
the Philips curve (14) to derive simple expressions for aggregate income (equivalently, aggregate spending)
in periods 1 and 2.

Lemma 4. Aggregate income in periods 1 and 2 satisfy

                                                                                                               1
                    y 1 = Ē −β2 r 2 + (1 − β + βξ)(y 1 + βy 2 ) + M 1
                            £                                          ¤
                                                                                      and            y2 = −       r 2 + M2 ,            (17)
                                                                                                              1−ξ

up to constants (M 1 , M 2 ), which are functions of θ, ρ̄, and ∆ but are invariant to policy.
 27 For the ZLB not to bind at t = 2, and otherwise not matter as long as ρ ≡ 0, we assume that θ < ρ̄ always.
                                                                           t
 28 This rule holds with the exception of b
                                                  i t , which is defined as the simple, linear deviation from steady state, because the steady
state value of assets is zero.




                                                                        24
    The first equation is a modified Keynesian cross: it combines the GE feedback between income and
spending with the GE feedback between inflation, real interest rates, and spending. The second equation
shows that period 2 income is directly proportional to the policy instrument.
    To map to the abstract model, we define τ as a rescaling of −r 2 , the degree of policy looseness; k i as a
rescaling of c i 1 , spending during the liquidity trap; and Y as a rescaling of y 1 + βy 2 , the relevant notion of
permanent income. We can then derive the following result.

Lemma 5. The the liquidity-trap context described above maps to conditions (1) and (2) with parameters
                                                                                  1
                                   γ = 1 − β2 (1 − ξ)2      and        α=                 .                    (18)
                                                                             1 + β(1 − ξ)
And by implication, the degrees of strategic complementarity and substitutability in the games following
instrument and target communication are given by, respectively,

                                    δτ = 1 − β(1 − ξ)       and       δY = −β · (1 − ξ).                       (19)

    A higher MPC (lower β) and a steeper Phillips curve (higher ξ) thus both map to a more positive δτ and
a less negative δY , which via Lemma 3 translates to the following:

Lemma 6. A higher MPC and/or a steeper Phillips curve raises |κτ − 1|, the distortion in the response of K
to forward guidance under instrument communication, and reduces |κY − 1|, the corresponding distortion
under target communication.

    This offers a first clue about how to translate our earlier, abstract insights to the present context. But
to complete the translation, we must verify that the applicable policy objective can be represented in the
way assumed in our abstract analysis.
    The second-order approximation of welfare is

                                         W = W ∗ − (y 1 − y 1∗ )2 − β(y 2 − y 2∗ )2 ,

where W ∗ is the first-best level and y t − y t∗ is the output gap in period t . Using the fact that y 1∗ = y 2∗ = θ
and the applicable transformation of variables, we reach the following result:

Lemma 7. The welfare losses relative to the first best can be represented as

                                      L = (1 − χ)(K − θ − (1 − ξ)∆)2 + χ(τ − θ)2 ,                             (20)
             β(1−ξ)2
where χ ≡   1+β(1−ξ)2
                        and where, recall, ∆ measures the distance of the natural rate of interest at t = 1 from the
ZLB.

    This helps clarify the following two points. First, the policy objective obtained in (20) is nested in
Proposition 3 if and only if ∆ = 0, or the ZLB is “weakly” binding. This is the analogue of Assumption 1 in
the present context and its role is explored in the next subsection. Second, in the model considered thus
far, the β behind χ is the same as the β that regulates the MPC and enters γ and α. However, if we consider
an overlapping generations (OLG) extension along the lines of Del Negro, Giannoni and Patterson (2015),
Farhi and Werning (2019) and in particular Angeletos and Huo (2020, Section 7), we can disentangle the
two objects and interpret a high MPC, or a low β in (18) and (19) for given χ in (20), as a proxy for liquidity
constraints. We adopt this interpretation throughout.

                                                             25
6.3 Optimal Forward Guidance at the ZLB

Building on the above results, we reach the following translation of Theorem 2:

Proposition 9. Suppose λ 6= 1 and ∆ = 0, and let m measure the marginal propensity to consume. There
exists a critical threshold m̂ such that target communication is optimal if and only if m ≥ m̂. Furthermore,
m̂ decreases in ξ, the slope of the Phillips curve.

    In other words, “talking about unemployment rather than interest rates” becomes more desirable
when the Keynesian cross gets steeper, as in the case of worsening credit conditions, or the deflation-
ary spiral gets stronger. And although our model is too stylized for quantitative purposes, the following
back-of-the-envelope exercise offers a useful illustration.
    Interpret a period in our model as four years, so that the liquidity trap has a realistic length in light
of the Great Recession; let the policymaker weigh equally the output gaps during and after the trap; let
λ = .75, which amounts to assuming that 75% of the population are fully rational, level-∞ agents and the
remaining are unsophisticated, level-0 agents; and finally let ξ = 0, which amounts to assuming completely
rigid prices and unresponsive inflation. In this case, target-based forward guidance is optimal whenever
the annualized MPC exceeds 0.14.
    The typical estimate of the average annualized MPC in the US and other advanced countries is close
to 0.30 (e.g., Jappelli and Pistaferri, 2010), suggesting that the condition m > m̂ is likely to be satisfied in
practice. What is more, previous work has shown how realistic, joint heterogeneity in the MPC and the
business cycle exposure maps to a higher slope of the Keynesian cross (Patterson, 2019) and how this in
turn amplifies the importance of higher-order doubts (Section 7 in Angeletos and Huo, 2020). In the light
of our results, such HANK-like heterogeneity seems likely to favor target-based forward guidance.
    The above back-of-the envelope exercise assumed ξ = 0, or perfectly rigid prices. If instead we set the
slope of the Phillips curve to ξ = 4 × 0.1, which translates a 1% output shortfall to an annual deflation of
merely 0.1%, then the relevant threshold reduces to m̂ = 0: target communication is always preferred. This
illustrates how target-based forward guidance becomes more desirable as the deflationary spiral kicks in.
    Let us now consider the role of ∆. The translation of Theorem 2 offered in Proposition 9 relies on ∆ = 0,
which means that the ZLB is weakly binding, or equivalently that Assumption 1 holds. In the more realistic
case in which the ZLB is strictly binding (∆ > 0 and R 1∗ < 1), Assumption 1 no more holds. This of course
does not affect our results about implementability (Theorem 1 and Lemma 6),but enters the policymaker’s
calculation as follows:

Proposition 10. For λ < 1, increasing ∆ marginally from ∆ = 0 favors target communication if θ > 0 and
instrument communication if θ < 0. And the opposite is true for λ > 1.

That is, the influence of ∆ > 0 on the ranking between instruments and targets flips sign with the sign of
the productivity shock, as well as with the direction of the departure from rational expectations.
    Let us explain why. When ∆ > 0, the policymaker is combating an inefficient recession at t = 1, regard-
less of the value of θ. But the value of θ influences whether the policymaker would like the public to over-
or under-react. When θ > 0, the policymaker wants to engineer a boom at t = 2 and therefore has “good

                                                      26
news” to share with the economy. And because such good news can alleviate the inefficient recession at
t = 1, policymaker prefers on the margin that the public over-react to it. Target communication, in our
main specification of λ < 1, fulfills this role. When instead θ < 0, the policymaker would prefer for the “bad
news” to not overly affect behavior at t = 1; and with λ < 1, this goal is achieved with instrument commu-
nication. Finally, with λ > 1, the logic about how how the sign of θ influences the desirability of over- or
under-reaction remains valid, but the means of accomplishing such over- and under-reaction flip.
    In short, our take-home lesson remains valid at least “on average” (i.e., across realizations of θ or pa-
rameterizations of λ). One way to formalize this idea is the following:

Corollary 4. Suppose that the policymaker is restricted to using the same form of forward guidance across
all θ and to implementing a linear relation between θ and τ (or Y ) Then, Proposition 9 extends to any ∆ > 0,
and the threshold m̂ is invariant to ∆.

The above restriction forces the policymaker to calculate things “on average” (in expectation over realiza-
tions of θ), balances the θ-dependent effects of ∆ > 0, and recovers the result for ∆ = 0. The same applies
if we replace this restriction space with appropriate uncertainty about λ, the error in people’s reasoning.


6.4 Talking About Inflation or Other Targets

So far we have let the monetary authority communicate a commitment for either r 2 , the post-trap interest
rates, or y 1 + βy 2 , the cumulative income during and after the trap. This was the most direct mapping
between the application and our abstract framework. But the application raises the possibility that the
policymaker tries to communicate other kinds of commitments, such as about inflation.
    By the Phillips curve (14), a commitment for π3 is the same as a commitment for y 2 ; and by the second
part of Lemma 4, this is also the same as a commitment for r 2 . Talking about π3 or y 2 is therefore the same
as instrument communication. A commitment for π2 , on the other hand, is the same a commitment for
y 1 , or K . But as noted earlier (and explained in more detail in Appendix D.1), such a commitment is not
viable in our model. And a commitment for cumulative inflation, π2 + βπ3 , is the same as a commitment
for y 1 + βy 2 , that is, target communication.
    We conclude that, at least in the context of our stylized model, there is essentially no room for other
forms of forward guidance than those already considered. Reality is of course more complicated and future
extensions of our model may help shed further light on the finer details of optimal policy communication.
For instance, it seems useful to consider an extension that lets unobserved cost-push or other shocks to
drive a wedge between inflation and output gaps. We expect this to favor output or employment targets
over inflation targets, at least insofar as such shocks are essentially “noise” from the policymaker’s per-
spective. This circles back to our discussion of how our insights interact with those of Poole (1970).
    Another possibility, close to the spirit of our paper and also broadly consistent with the evidence re-
viewed in Candia, Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2020), is that people fail to understand the GE mapping
from inflation to real interest rates and aggregate demand and, instead, are likely to interpret a commit-
ment for higher inflation merely as bad news about real wages and purchasing power. This, too, seems
likely to favor “taking about unemployment” over “talking about inflation.”

                                                     27
7 The Fed’s Experiment with Target Communication

This paper’s analysis is normative rather than positive. Still, it is useful to relate our insights to actual
experience so as to further contextualize our results.
    The Fed’s initial approach to forward guidance during the Great Recession was based on a timeline for
interest rates to remain near zero. This is typified in the August 9, 2011, statement that economic condi-
tions merited “exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.” In December
2012, however, the Fed sharply pivoted to a strategy that highlighted a 6.5% unemployment rate as a spe-
cific pre-requisite for increasing interest rates.29
    While the actual statement hedged with goals for inflation and other contingencies, it is not unreason-
able to call this, in our language, as a switch from instrument communication to target communication.
As Alan S. Blinder (2018) wrote in a retrospective analysis, much of the public seemed only to hear the
following:

       The Fed would begin to raise rates as soon as the unemployment rate dipped below 6.5 per-
       cent. Period.

What is more, this seems to have been largely expected by the Fed, if not fully intended. During the De-
cember 2012 FOMC deliberations, San Francisco Fed President John C. Williams argued:

       We should recognize we are shining a very bright spotlight on the unemployment rate. . . .
       When we stated a specific date for lift-off, the spotlight was cast on the calendar, and that’s
       what everyone focused on, for better or for worse. Once we start talking in terms of an unem-
       ployment threshold, it will be the unemployment rate that takes center stage, commanding all
       of the attention of our audience.

Minneapolis Fed President Narayana Kocherlakota similarly commented that, absent “the perfect descrip-
tion of a reaction function,” attempting to describe more complicated contingencies would be “letting the
perfect be the enemy of the good.”
    Our theory offers a new way to think about these issues. The Great Recession was an unusual episode
during which two conditions were satisfied. First, GE feedbacks were amplified because of both the ZLB
and the credit crunch. Second, economic agents were presumably more likely to make mistakes in rea-
soning about how the economy works, or how other may respond to policy, simply because this time was
unprecedented. Under the lens of Theorem 2, such an episode is exactly the right time to “shine the spot-
light on unemployment.” And for the reasons alluded to at the end of Section 5.5, the attempt to describe
more complicated contingencies could have backfired by confusing people and amplifying the mistakes
in their equilibrium reasoning.
    The proximate cause of the switch may have been uncertainty about the length and severity of the
recession. But it is anyone’s guess whether this was merely uncertainty about the economy’s hard funda-
mentals, in the sense that may be best captured by a Poole (1970) model, or also uncertainty about when
 29 The strategy was popularly dubbed the “Evans rule” in reference to one of its chief proponents, Chicago Fed President Charles

Evans. For additional context and retrospective policy analysis, see reviews by Blinder et al. (2017) and Feroli et al. (2017).


                                                                 28
and how public confidence would be restored, which is the focus of our own analysis. To the extent that
the latter maps in the theory to higher-order beliefs or mistakes in equilibrium reasoning, the actual rea-
sons behind the switch may have been correlated with the issues considered in this paper, even though
policymakers at the time may not have reasoned through our theory.
    Did the switch work as predicted by our theory? While the data from this one episode is insufficient
to test our theory, there are hints of a trade-off between anchoring instrument and target expectations, in
line with our theory.
    Consider first the Fed’s explicit date-based guidance in late 2011 and early 2012. On the one hand,
the Fed was able to move expectations about interest rates to an extent that it could not during the pre-
vious, weaker regime of communication (see, e.g., Swanson and Williams, 2014; Williams, 2016). On the
other hand, Andrade et al. (2019) show in professional forecast data that the same focusing of interest rate
expectations coincided with an increase in the dispersion of GDP forecasts. This is consistent with our the-
ory’s claim that instrument communication is successful in anchoring expectations of interest rates only
at the expense of increasing the uncertainty about how the economy would respond to them.30
    Finally, the December 2012 shift in the Fed’s communication strategy coincided with a reduction in
GDP forecast dispersion (see again Andrade et al., 2019) at the expense of an increase in interest-rate fore-
cast dispersion. This is again consistent with our theory’s proposition that target communication helps
anchor expectations of outcomes. And it raises the possibility that the policy shift may have—perhaps
unintentionally but favorably—reduced the period of time that the economy had to be stuck at the ZLB.31


8 Conclusion

Should a policymaker offer clarity about policy instruments, for instance by outlining a time-path for in-
terest rates or a dollar amount for fiscal stimulus, or should she instead shine the spotlight on the relevant
outcome, for instance by promising to do whatever it takes to hit a target for unemployment?
    We first showed that this choice is irrelevant in a frictionless, Ramsey benchmark where the policy-
maker has full commitment, the relevant state-contingencies can be fully articulated, and the public is
unboundedly rational. We then relaxed the last assumption, allowing people to have a shallow or distorted
understanding of others’ behavior and of the GE implications of policy. We explained why and how this
breaks the aforementioned irrelevance and provided a new gauge for how forward guidance should be
conducted in such circumstances. This gauge is summarized below:

       The optimal strategy shifts from instrument-based to target-based forward guidance, or from
       anchoring expectations of interest rates to anchoring expectations of unemployment and in-
       come, as Keynesian multipliers, financial accelerators, and other GE feedbacks get larger.
 30 To be precise, the kind of anchoring featured in our theory manifests in the cross section of beliefs as soon as we introduce

heterogeneity in λ.
 31 This is the point we anticipated at the end of Section 5.5: the reduction in the expected value of τ needed to induce the

desired expected value of Y translates, in the present context, to less monetary loosening needed after the economy has exited
the liquidity trap, or a faster “lift-off” date, while achieving the same stimulating effect during the trap.


                                                                  29
    Why? Instrument-focused communication leaves the public to reason about the effect of interest rates
on aggregate employment and income. Target-focused communication does the opposite, sacrificing clar-
ity about the policy for more anchoring of the expectations of targeted outcome. A larger GE multiplier
makes expectations of aggregate outcomes such as employment and income more essential for private
decisions, and any mistakes thereof more detrimental for welfare, which tilts the balance toward target-
focused communication.
    The irrelevance result that served as our point of departure echo related results from the Ramsey litera-
ture about the equivalence of different implementations. From this perspective, a high-level contribution
of our paper is to illustrate both how such results hinge on infinite depth of knowledge and rationality,
and how more “sophisticated” policies can regulate the bite of bounded rationality. Exploring our insights
in other contexts, such as Ricardian equivalence (Barro, 1974) or the equivalence of monetary policy and
taxation (Correia, Nicolini and Teles, 2008; Correia et al., 2013), is left for future work.
    Our analysis focused on “Odyssean” forward guidance: we abstracted from signaling, or the “informa-
tion effect” of monetary policy, and equated different communication strategies with different commit-
ments. At the same time, our analysis abstracted from commitment problems: forward guidance was fully
credible. Commitment problems can exist with rational expectations and have been the topic of a large lit-
erature. Perhaps more intriguingly, our analysis has hinted at how the private sector’s bounded rationality
could itself be the source of time-inconsistency. The exploration of this issue, too, is left for future work.
    Another interesting direction for future research is the application of our insights to the theory of op-
timal policy rules, and in particular optimal Taylor rules for monetary policy. The conventional approach
is based on either the idea of replicating certain state-contingencies or the logic of Poole (1970). Our ap-
proach instead highlights how different policy rules can influence the strategic interaction among the pri-
vate agents and, thereby, the bite of higher-order beliefs and of related forms of bounded rationality.32
    Finally, our paper has provided a new theoretical context for a growing empirical literature on the ef-
fectiveness of central bank communication in moving the beliefs of both experts (Campbell et al., 2012;
Ehrmann et al., 2019) and the general public (Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Weber, 2019; Coibion et al.,
2019). Most of this literature focuses on information revelation—think, in particular, of the communica-
tion of the central bank’s forecasts about future economic conditions. We instead have focused on the
commitments embedded in central bank communications and have argued that such commitments may
fruitfully manage private sector expectations especially when the latter are not fully rational. We hope this
perspective can inform more empirical or experimental work.
 32 A formal treatment of this idea within our framework is offered in Online Appendix H. The application to richer, dynamic,

macroeconomic models remains to be done.




                                                            30
References

Abreu, Dilip, and Markus K Brunnermeier. 2003. “Bubbles and crashes.” Econometrica, 71(1): 173–204.
Alicke, Mark D, and Olesya Govorun. 2005. “The better-than-average effect.” The self in social judgment,
  1: 85–106.
Amador, Manuel, and Kyle Bagwell. 2013. “The Theory of Optimal Delegation With an Application to Tariff
  Caps.” Econometrica, 81(4): 1541–1599.
Amador, Manuel, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. 2010. “Learning from Prices: Public Communication and Wel-
  fare.” Journal of Political Economy, 118(5): 866–907.
Amador, Manuel, Iván Werning, and George-Marios Angeletos. 2006. “Commitment vs. Flexibility.”
  Econometrica, 74(2): 365–396.
Andrade, Philippe, Gaetano Gaballo, Eric Mengus, and Benoit Mojon. 2019. “Forward Guidance and Het-
  erogeneous Beliefs.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11(3): 1–29.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Alessandro Pavan. 2007. “Efficient Use of Information and Social Value of
  Information.” Econometrica, 75(4): 1103–1142.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Alessandro Pavan. 2009. “Policy with Dispersed Information.” Journal of
  the European Economic Association, 7(1): 11–60.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Chen Lian. 2018. “Forward Guidance without Common Knowledge.”
  American Economic Review, 108(9): 2477–2512.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Jennifer La’O. 2009. “Incomplete Information, Higher-order Beliefs and
  Price Inertia.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56: 19–37.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Jennifer La’O. 2013. “Sentiments.” Econometrica, 81(2): 739–779.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Karthik Sastry. 2019. “Inattentive Economies.” National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research Working Paper 26413.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Zhen Huo. 2020. “Myopia and Anchoring.” MIT mimeo.
Angeletos, George-Marios, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. 2018. “Quantifying Confidence.” Econo-
  metrica, 86(5): 1689–1726.
Athey, Susan, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2005. “The Optimal Degree of Discretion in Mone-
  tary Policy.” Econometrica, 73(5): 1431–1475.
Atkeson, Andrew, Varadarajan V. Chari, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2007. “On the optimal choice of a monetary
  policy instrument.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Atkeson, Andrew, Varadarajan V. Chari, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2010. “Sophisticated Monetary Policies.”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1): 47–89.
Barro, Robert J. 1974. “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy, 82(6): 1095–
  1117.
Barro, Robert J. 1979. “On the determination of the public debt.” Journal of Political Economy, 87(5, Part
  1): 940–971.
Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon. 1983. “Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary
  Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1): 101 – 121.


                                                    31
Bassetto, Marco. 2002. “A Game–Theoretic View of the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level.” Econometrica,
  70(6): 2167–2195.
Bassetto, Marco. 2019. “Forward guidance: Communication, commitment, or both?” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 108: 69 – 86.
Bernanke, Ben S, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. “The financial accelerator in a quantitative
  business cycle framework.” Handbook of Macroeconomics, 1: 1341–1393.
Blinder, Alan, Michael Ehrmann, Jakob de Haan, and David-Jan Jansen. 2017. “Necessity as the mother
  of invention: monetary policy after the crisis.” Economic Policy, 32(92): 707–755.
Blinder, Alan S. 2018. “Through a Crystal Ball Darkly: The Future of Monetary Policy Communication.”
  American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 108: 567–71.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2017. “Diagnostic Expectations and Credit Cycles.”
  The Journal of Finance, 73(1): 199–227.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer. 2018. “Over-reaction in Macroeco-
  nomic Expectations.” NBER Working Paper No. 24932.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Alp Simsek. 2017. “A Risk-centric Model of Demand Recessions and Macropru-
  dential Policy.” MIT miméo.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Alp Simsek. 2019. “Monetary Policy with Opinionated Markets.” MIT miméo.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2017. “The Safety Trap.” Review of Economic Studies, 85(1): 223–
  274.
Campbell, Jeffrey R., Jonas D. M. Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi. 2012. “Macroe-
  conomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 43(1
  (Spring)): 1–80.
Candia, Bernardo, Olivier Coibion, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2020. “Communication and the Beliefs of
  Agents.” Working Paper.
Chahrour, Ryan. 2014. “Public Communication and Information Acquisition.” American Economic Jour-
  nal: Macroeconomics, 6(3): 73–101.
Chari, Varadarajan V., and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1999. “Optimal fiscal and monetary policy.” Handbook of
  Macroeconomics, 1: 1671–1745.
Christiano, Lawrence J, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L Evans. 2005. “Nominal Rigidities and the
  Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1): 1–45.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about Information
  Rigidities?” Journal of Political Economy, 120(1): 116–159.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015. “Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation
  Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts.” American Economic Review, 105(8): 2644–78.
Coibion, Olivier, Dimitris Georgarakos, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber. 2019. “Forward Guid-
  ance and Household Expectations.” Mimeo.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber. 2019. “Monetary Policy Communications
  and Their Effects on Household Inflation Expectations.” Mimeo.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar, and Jane Ryngaert. 2018. “Do You Know That I

                                                    32
  Know That You Know...? Higher-Order Beliefs in Survey Data.” NBER Working Paper No. 24987.
Cornand, Camille, and Frank Heinemann. 2015. “Limited Higher Order Beliefs and the Welfare Effects of
  Public Information.” The Economic Journal, 118(528): 718–742.
Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. 2013. “Unconventional Fiscal
  Policy at the Zero Bound.” American Economic Review, 103(4): 1172–1211.
Correia, Isabel, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. 2008. “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy: Equiv-
  alence Results.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(1): 141–170.
Crawford, Vincent P, Miguel A Costa-Gomes, and Nagore Iriberri. 2013. “Structural Models of Nonequi-
  librium Strategic Thinking: Theory, Evidence, and Applications.” Journal of Economic Literature,
  51(1): 5–62.
Del Negro, Marco, Marc P Giannoni, and Christina Patterson. 2015. “The Forward Guidance Puzzle.” FRB
  of New York mimeo.
Ehrmann, Michael, Gaetano Gaballo, Peter Hoffmann, and Georg Strasser. 2019. “Can more public in-
  formation raise uncertainty? The international evidence on forward guidance.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 108: 93 – 112.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. 2019. “Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete Mar-
  kets.” American Economic Review, 109(11): 3887–3928.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix. 2020. “Optimal Taxation with Behavioral Agents.” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 110(1): 298–336.
Feroli, Michael, David Greenlaw, Peter Hooper, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Amir Sufi. 2017. “Language after
  liftoff: Fed communication away from the zero lower bound.” Research in Economics, 71(3): 452 – 490.
  Special issue on Macroeconomics.
Friedman, Benjamin M. 1990. “Targets and Instruments of Monetary Policy.” In Handbook of Monetary
  Economics. Vol. 2. 1 ed., , ed. B. M. Friedman and F. H. Hahn, Chapter 22, 1185–1230. Elsevier.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2014. “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  129(4): 1661–1710.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2020. “A Behavioral New Keynesian Model.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Galí, Jordi, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 44(2): 195–222.
Garcıa-Schmidt, Mariana, and Michael Woodford. 2019. “Are Low Interest Rates Deflationary? A Paradox
  of Perfect-Foresight Analysis.” American Economic Review, 109(1): 86–120.
Guesnerie, Roger. 2008. “Macroeconomic and monetary policies from the eductive viewpoint.” Central
  Banking, Analysis, and Economic Policies Book Series, 13: 171–202.
Halac, Marina, and Pierre Yared. 2018. “Instrument-Based vs. Target-Based Rules.” National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 24496.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent. 2007. Robustness. Princeton, NJ:Princeton University Press.
Iovino, Luigi, and Dmitriy Sergeyev. 2019. “Central Bank Balance Sheet Policies Without Rational Expec-
  tations.” Bocconi University mimeo.
Jappelli, Tullio, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2010. “The consumption response to income changes.” Annual Re-

                                                    33
  view of Economics, 2(1): 479–506.
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2018. “Monetary Policy According to HANK.”
  American Economic Review, 108(3): 697–743.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. “Credit Cycles.” The Journal of Political Economy, 105(2): 211–
  248.
Kocherlakota, Narayana. 2012. “Comments in the December 11-12, 2012, FOMC Meeting (Transcript).”
  Accessible at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20121212meeting.
  pdf.
Kohlhas, Alexandre, and Ansgar Walther. 2018. “Asymmetric Attention.” IIES miméo.
Kohlhas, Alexandre, and Tobias Broer. 2018. “Forecaster (Mis-)Behavior.” IIES miméo.
Kydland, Finn E, and Edward C Prescott. 1977. “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Op-
  timal Plans.” Journal of Political Economy, 85(3): 473–491.
Kydland, Finn E, and Edward C Prescott. 1982. “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Econometrica,
  50(6): 1345–1370.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr., and Nancy L. Stokey. 1983. “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary policy in an Economy with-
  out Capital.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1): 55–93.
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. 2016. “The Power of Forward Guidance Revisited.”
  American Economic Review, 106(10): 3133–3158.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. 1998. “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-fulfilling Currency
  Attacks.” American Economic Review, 587–597.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. 2002. “Social Value of Public Information.” American Economic
  Review, 92(5): 1521–1534.
Myatt, David P., and Chris Wallace. 2012. “Endogenous Information Acquisition in Coordination Games.”
  Review of Economic Studies, 79(1): 340–374.
Nagel, Rosemarie. 1995. “Unraveling in Guessing Games: An Experimental Study.” The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 85(5): 1313–1326.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson. 2018. “High-Frequency Identification of Monetary Non-Neutrality:
  The Information Effect.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3): 1283–1330.
Patterson, Christina. 2019. “The Matching Multiplier and the Amplification of Recessions.” Northwestern
  University mimeo.
Poole, William. 1970. “Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a Simple Stochastic Macro
  Model.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(2): 197–216.
Sims, Christopher A. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  50(3): 665–690.
Sims, Christopher A. 2006. “Rational inattention: Beyond the linear-quadratic case.” The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 96(2): 158–163.
Stahl, Dale. 1993. “Evolution of Smart Players.” Games and Economic Behavior, 5(4): 604–617.
Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams. 2014. “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium-
  and Longer-Term Interest Rates.” American Economic Review, 104(10): 3154–85.

                                                    34
Weitzman, Martin. 1974. “Prices vs. Quantities.” Review of Economic Studies, 41(4): 477–491.
Wiederholt, Mirko. 2016. “Empirical Properties of Inflation Expectations and the Zero Lower Bound.”
  Goethe University Frankfurt mimeo.
Williams, John C. 2012. “Comments in the December 11-12, 2012, FOMC Meeting (Transcript).” Accessible
  at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20121212meeting.pdf.
Williams, John C. 2016. “Discussion of "Language after Liftoff: Fed Communication Away from the Zero
  Lower Bound.” Remarks at the 2016 US Monetary Policy Forum.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy.” Knowl-
  edge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps.
Woodford, Michael. 2010. “Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy with Near-Rational Expectations.” American
  Economic Review, 100(1): 274–303.
Woodford, Michael. 2013. “Macroeconomic Analysis Without the Rational Expectations Hypothesis.” An-
  nual Review of Economics, 5: 303–346.




                                                   35
A Proofs

Proposition 1, Corollary 1, Theorem 1, Corollary 2, and Lemma 1

In main text.


Lemma 2

This proof supplements the simpler argument given in the main text and reveals the role of higher-order
beliefs. By iterating the best responses in the representation K = (1−δ X )X +δ X Ē[K ], provided that |δ X | < 1,
we can express the expectation of K as a weighted average of the higher-order beliefs about X :
                                             "                           #
                                                         ∞
                                                                 h−1 h
                                  Ē[K ] = Ē (1 − δ X )   (δ X ) Ē [X ] .
                                                         X
                                                                                                              (21)
                                                                h=1

Because we have let the typical agent believe that only a fraction λ of the other agents is aware of the policy
message, her second-order beliefs satisfy

                                  Ei Ē1 [X ] = Ei E j [X ] = λ X̂ + (1 − λ)0 = λ X̂ .
                                    £        ¤    £        ¤


By aggregation and induction, for any h ≥ 1,

                                                      Ēh [X ] = λh X̂ .                                      (22)

Relative to the frictionless benchmark (nested here with λ = 1), higher-order beliefs are therefore more
rigid (i.e., anchored to 0), and the more so the higher their order.
    It follows that Ē[K ], a weighted average of higher-order beliefs, is also rigid. By direct calculation, the
action K is
                                                            ∞
                                          K = (1 − δ X )          (δ X )h−1 Ēh [X ]
                                                            X
                                                            h=1
                                                             ∞                                                (23)
                                             = (1 − δ X )         (δ X )h−1 λh X
                                                            X
                                                            h=1
while the expectation thereof is               "                                        #
                                                              ∞
                                                                            h−1 h
                                        K = Ē (1 − δ X )                     Ē [X ]
                                                              X
                                                                   (δ X )
                                                             h=1
                                                          ∞
                                                                                                              (24)
                                           = (1 − δ X )         (δ X )h−1 λh+1 X
                                                          X
                                                          h=1

                                           = λK
The last line is the desired result.


Lemma 3

By direct calculation, using the best response K = (1 − δ X )X + δ X Ē[K ] and the result from Lemma 2 that
Ē[K ] = λK , we compute
                                                                    1 − δX
                                                   κ X (λ, γ) =                                               (25)
                                                                   1 − λδ X
for each communication method. Observe that:

                                                              36
   1. For λ < 1, κ X > 1 if and only if δ X < 0; otherwise, if δ X > 0, κ X < 1.

   2. The derivative of κ X in λ is
                                                                  ∂κ        (1 − δx )
                                                                     = δX                                 (26)
                                                                  ∂λ      (1 − λδ X )2
        which has the same sign as δ X provided that δ X < 1, which is always satisfied.

   3. The derivative of κ X in γ is
                                                                ∂κ   ∂κ ∂δ X
                                                                   =     ·
                                                                ∂γ ∂δ X ∂γ
                                                                                                          (27)
                                                                         1−λ          ∂δ X
                                                                   =−               ·
                                                                      (1 − λδ X ) 2    ∂γ
                                                     ∂δ X
        which has the opposite sign as                ∂γ    .

We now review how to apply the previous points to derive each of the results for instrument and target
communication.

Instrument Communication.

   1. δτ = αγ ∈ (0, 1) provided that α ∈ (0, 1) and γ ∈ (0, 1). Thus κτ < 1.

                                        ∂κ
   2. By the same argument,             ∂λ   < 0.

        ∂δ X                ∂κ
   3.    ∂γ    = α > 0 so   ∂γ   < 0. As κτ < 1, this implies |1 − κτ | increases in γ.

Target communication.

   1. δY = −(1 − γ)α/(1 − α) < 0 for any α ∈ (0, 1) and γ < 1. Thus κY > 1.

                                        ∂κ
   2. By the same argument,             ∂λ   > 0.

        ∂δ X                          ∂κ
   3.    ∂γ    = α/(1 − α) > 0 so     ∂γ   < 0. As κY > 1, this implies |1 − κY | decreases in γ.


Proposition 3

To prove this proposition, we will directly establish the monotonicity of the loss functions L τ (γ) and
L Y (γ), corresponding to the loss under method τ or Y , evaluated at the optimal announcement, as a
function of the underlying parameter γ for fixed values of all other parameters.
   Let the implementable outcomes under each communication method take the form

                                             B X = {(τ, K , Y ) : τ = r θ, K = a X τ, Y = b X τ}          (28)

for some r ∈ R and coefficients (a X , b X ). Observe that, based on previous calculations, a τ = κτ < 1, b τ =
µ−1
 τ < 1, a Y = κY µY > 1, and b Y = µY > 1.
                  −1                −1

   For a given set of coefficients (a X , b X ), the policy problem simplifies to choice of r :

                                     L X = max χτ (r − 1)2 + χY (r b X − 1)2 + χK (r a X − 1)2            (29)
                                                 r


                                                                        37
The optimal choice of r solves
                                                             χτ + χY b X + χK a X
                                                      r∗ =                                                                              (30)
                                                             χτ + χY b 2X + χK a 2X
Observe that r ∗ > 1 for instrument communication, owing to the fact that a τ < 1 and b τ < 1, and r ∗ ∈ (0, 1)
for target communication, owing to the fact that a Y > 1 and b Y >1.
    The derivative of L X in γ is the following, by the envelope theorem:

                                       ∂L X                     ∂b X                     ∂a X
                                            = 2χY r (r b X − 1)      + 2χK r (r a X − 1)                                                (31)
                                        ∂γ                       ∂γ                       ∂γ
Given that r > 0, observe that the sign of the above is the same as the sign of

                                                                ∂b X                  ∂a X
                                               χY (r b X − 1)        + χK (r a X − 1)                                                   (32)
                                                                 ∂γ                    ∂γ

                                                                                                                                 ∂L τ
Instrument communication. Observe first that L τ (0) = 0 as a τ = b τ = 1. It remains to establish                                ∂γ    >0
for γ ∈ (0, 1). This requires showing

                                                                ∂b τ                   ∂a τ
                                               χY (r b τ − 1)        > −χK (r a τ − 1)                                                  (33)
                                                                ∂γ                     ∂γ
            ∂a τ       ∂κτ                                                                                  ∂b τ
Note that   ∂γ     =   ∂γ    < 0, according to Lemma 3, that b τ = (1−α)+αa τ > ατ , and 0 >                ∂γ     = α ∂κ τ
                                                                                                                       ∂γ >
                                                                                                                              ∂a τ
                                                                                                                              ∂γ .   Hence
the above simplifies to
                                                      χK
                                                         (1 − r a τ ) > α(r b τ − 1)                                                    (34)
                                                      χY
Observe next that, since a τ < b τ , it is guaranteed that

                                              χτ + χY a τ b τ + χK a τ2       χτ + χY b τ2 + χK a τ2
                                     r aτ =                               <                            =1
                                               χτ + χY b τ2 + χK a τ2         χτ + χY b τ2 + χK a τ2

and hence the right condition is
                                                             χK    r bτ − 1
                                                                >α                                                                      (35)
                                                             χY    1 − r aτ
An immediate sufficient condition, which helps reveal the economics, is r b τ < 1: as long as the relation
between the optimal policy only partially offsets the distortion, so that Y remains less responsive to θ than
under REE, the result goes through. Otherwise, the result will still be true provided the relative importance
of the output gap is small. Direct calculation shows that (35) is equivalent to


                                        (1 − αλγ)χτ + (1 − α)(1 − αγ(λ + (1 − λ)α)) > 0                                                 (36)

which is verified in our parameter range.

Target communication. The argument for target communication is symmetric. Observe first that L Y (1) =
                                                     ∂L Y
0 as a Y = b Y = 1. It remains to establish           ∂γ    < 0 for γ ∈ (0, 1). This requires showing

                                                                ∂b τ                   ∂a τ
                                               χY (r b τ − 1)        > −χK (r a τ − 1)                                                  (37)
                                                                ∂γ                     ∂γ



                                                                     38
            ∂b Y             ∂µY                                                 κY (1−α)
Note that    ∂γ    = − µ12    ∂γ   > 0, by Theorem 1. Next a Y = κY µ−1
                                                                     Y =          1−ακY     > 0. By direct calculation,
                         Y


                                   ∂b Y    α(1 − α) ∂κY                       ∂a Y      1 − α ∂κY
                                        =                        and               =                                      (38)
                                    ∂γ    (1 − ακY )2 ∂γ                       ∂γ    (1 − ακY )2 ∂γ

It follows that the relevant condition is

                                                     χK
                                                        (r a τ − 1) > α(1 − r b τ )                                       (39)
                                                     χY

Observe next that, since a Y > b Y , it is guaranteed that r a Y > 1 and hence the right condition is, in direct
analogy to (35),
                                                          χK    r bY − 1
                                                             >α                                                           (40)
                                                          χY    1 − r aY
Direct calculation shows that (40) is true if and only if


                                                   1 + α(−2 + αγ + λ(1 − γ)) > 0                                          (41)

but the above is guaranteed, for all λ, by α < 1/(2 − γ) which was the pre-specified condition for stability.


Proposition 4

This is a simple calculation involving the following two steps. First, for each of instrument and target
communication, we solve the best-response fixed point

                                     K = κ X X + κεX ε = (1 − δ X )X + δ X (λ(κ X X + κεX ε) + σε)

where κ X coincides exactly with the values given in Lemma 3 and κεX is a new loading on the belief shock
given by
                                                                     σδ X
                                                           κεX =
                                                                   1 − λδ X
Then, to get the implementability constraints, we solve the fixed-point

                                                                1
                                          τ = µX Y + ψX ε =        (Y − α(κ X X + κεX ε))
                                                               1−α

Which has solutions µ X given in Proposition 1 and ψ X given by
                                                                     α
                                                       ψτ = −κετ
                                                                1 − α + ακτ
                                                              ε   α
                                                       ψY = −κY
                                                                1−α
The expressions given in the text follow from plugging the primitive parameters into the previous expres-
sion.




                                                                   39
Proposition 5

This is a simple extension of the proof of Theorem 2. Let us assume that λ ∈ [0, 1+1/α). This plays a similar
                                 2
role as the restriction α <     1−γ :    it ensures convergence of iterated best-responses and thereby also that
(µτ , µY ) ∈ R2+ .
     First, note that, using the same expressions from the proof of Proposition 1, µτ and µY both decrease
in γ for λ > 1. Importantly, the comparative statics in the distortion |µ X − 1| are the same.
     Second, consider the comparative statics for the variance contributions (ψτ , ψY ). Note that

                                             ∂ψτ            σα2
                                                 =− 2                      <0
                                              ∂γ   (α γ(λ − 1) − αγλ + 1)2

and ψτ ≤ 0 as long as λ < 1/α + 1. Finally, ψτ = 0 if γ = 0. Next,

                                               ∂ψY           σα2
                                                   =                      >0
                                                ∂γ   (α(1 − γ)λ + 1 − α)2

and ψY ≤ 0 for any value of λ. Finally, ψY = 0 if γ = 1.
     Consider now the policy loss function. After substituting in the implementability constraint, the loss
function under target communication for a given value of θ is given by
                                     ·                                              ¸
                                       2                2   2              2    2 2
                            L τ ≡ min θ (1 − χ)(r τ − 1) + θ χ(r τ /µτ − 1) + χψτ σ
                                    r τ ∈R

where we suppress the dependence on θ for simplicity. The same problem with an unconditional expec-
tation on θ (i.e., an ex ante choice of method) would replace θ 2 with the fundamental’s variance σ2θ .
     Let us now prove that, for fixed (θ, λ, σ), optimal policy is characterized by a threshold rule. For target
communication, the appropriate translation of the loss function is

                        L Y ≡ min θ 2 (1 − χ)(r Y − 1)2 + θ 2 χ(r Y /µY − 1)2 + (1 − χ)ψ2Y σ2
                                 £                                                            ¤
                                r Y ∈R

where we once again suppress the dependence on θ. Via an identical argument to the one pursued in the
proof of Theorem 2, each loss function is monotone in γ holding fixed the value of ψx . That is to say, if the
loss functions were each re-written in the form L X = ` X (µ X , ψ X ), then, for all θ,

                                             ∂`τ ∂µτ             ∂`Y ∂µY
                                                     >0                  <0                                 (42)
                                             ∂µτ ∂γ              ∂µY ∂γ

Showing the equivalent monotonicity via the second channel is simple using the previously proven com-
parative static for the ψ X :

                      ∂`τ ∂ψτ           ∂ψτ                      ∂`Y ∂ψY           ∂ψY
                              = 2χσ2 ψτ     >0                           = 2χσ2 ψY     <0                   (43)
                      ∂ψτ ∂γ             ∂γ                      ∂ψY ∂γ             ∂γ

and combining (42) and (43) is sufficient to prove

                                                  ∂`τ            ∂`Y
                                                      >0             <0
                                                  ∂γ              ∂γ


                                                            40
Finally, note that previous argument about continuity and extreme values from the proof of Theorem 2
also carries over. In particular, for all θ,

                                                        L τ |γ=0 = L Y |γ=1 = 0

and
                                                 L τ |γ=1 ≥ 0                      L Y |γ=0 ≥ 0

with the last two inequalities being strict so long as θ 6= 0 or σ > 0. Hence, generically speaking (for θ 6= 0 or
σ > 0), there exists a γ̂ ∈ (0, 1) such that target communication is strictly optimal when γ ∈ (γ̂, 1], instrument
communication is optimal when γ ∈ [0, γ̂), and the policymaker is indifferent at γ = γ̂.


Corollary 3

Let us finally consider the case of uncertain distortions. Note that, for every (λ, σ) and every value of θ 6= 0,
γ 7→ L τ (·; λ, σ) and γ 7→ L Y (·; λ, σ) have all the relevant monotonicity and limit-value properties because
of Proposition 5 (see also the proof thereof ). It follows that the average γ 7→ Eπ(λ,σ) [L X (·; λ, σ)], where
the relevant expectation is over possible values of (λ, σ) in accordance with prior π, maintains the same
properties. Hence these “expected loss functions” must cross at some γ̂ ∈ (0, 1), completing the proof.


Proposition 6

See Appendix G.


Propositions 7 and 8

See Appendix F.


Lemmas 4, 5, 6, and 7

We prove these results together by detailing the mapping to the abstract model step-by-step.
    The average consumption of agents at time t can be expressed as the following function of current and
future real interest rates, income, and discount rate shocks:
                                          ∞                               ∞
                          c t = (1 − β)          β j Ēt [y t + j ] + β          β j Ēt [−(r t + j − πt + j +1 − ρ t )]
                                          X                               X
                                                                                                                           (44)
                                          j =0                            j =0


where β ≡ exp −ρ̄ is the steady-state discount factor. This expression is obtained by substituting the
             ¡ ¢

consumer’s Euler equation into his lifetime budget constraint and solving for consumption. It represents
the optimal consumption in period t , as a function of the expected path of income and interest rates, and
identifies 1 − β with the marginal propensity to consume out of income.
    Inflation is
                                                          πt = ξ(y t −1 − θt −1 )                                          (45)

Note that y t = r t = πt +1 = 0 for t ≥ 3 as the economy returns to steady state.

                                                                      41
    Consider first aggregate consumption and income at t = 2. We assume that, at this point, all agents
have the same (rational) expectations. It is simple to apply forward-looking rational expectations in (44)
to get


                                           c 2 = −βr 2 + (1 − β + βξ)y 2 − βξθ

which solves, after imposing market clearing, to
                                                                1
                                                c2 = y 2 = −       (r 2 + ξθ)                                (46)
                                                               1−ξ
where the last step uses the fact that r s = 0 for all s ≥ 3.
    Next let us solve for individual consumption in period 1. In this case, (44) reduces to the following after
substituting out inflation rates as a function of the relevant output gaps:

                   c i ,1 = Ei (1 − β)b i ,1 − β2 r 2 + (1 − β + βξ)(y 1 + βy 2 ) + β(ρ + ρ̄) − β(1 + β)ξθ
                              £                                                  ¤
                                                                                                             (47)

Note that the first term disappears because we assume initial asset positions are symmetric, which along
with the fact that aggregate assets are zero gives b i 1 = 0 for all i .
    We can now derive the mapping to the abstract model. Let

                                                          τ ≡ −r 2                                           (48)

be the negative real interest rate at t = 2. A higher τ corresponds to looser monetary policy after the trap.
Next, let
                                                    K ≡ (1 − ξ)2 c + b k

be a normalized measure of aggregate spending during the crisis, defined up to constant b k = ξ(2 − ξ)θ −
(1 − ξ)(ρ + ρ̄). Finally, let
                                               1        ¡        ¢          bk
                                   Y ≡                    y1 + y2 +                                          (49)
                                         β + (1 − ξ) −1             β(1 − ξ)2 + (1 − ξ)
be a normalized measure of total output during and right after the liquidity trap.
    We can re-write the definition of Y in the following form:

                                                  β(1 − ξ)           1
                                          Y =                τ+              K,                              (50)
                                                1 + β(1 − ξ)    1 + β(1 − ξ)

which matches condition (1) in our abstract framework for
                                                               1
                                                     α=                .                                     (51)
                                                          1 + β(1 − ξ)

Condition (47), on the other hand, can be written as:

                                     k i = β2 (1 − ξ)2 Ei [τ] + (1 − β2 (1 − ξ)2 )Ei [Y ],                   (52)

which matches condition (2) in our abstract framework for

                                                    γ = 1 − β2 (1 − ξ)2 .                                    (53)

                                                               42
The expressions for δτ and δY follow from direct calculation. The implications for κτ and κY , described in
Lemma 6, follow from identical logic as the proof of Lemma 3.
    The final step is to calculate the welfare objective as in Lemma 7. We approximate the policymaker’s
utilitarian objective around the case in which the first-best is implemented by a (possibly infeasible) mon-
etary policy. In log deviations, this yields the following loss function, up to rescaling:

                                              L = (y 1 − θ)2 + β(y 2 − θ)2 .                            (54)

Each quadratic term incorporates both the concavity of the utility function and the disutility of labor. This
is because, for given θ, labor hours and output have a fixed proportion to one another.
    Plugging in our definitions of K and τ yields

                                  L = (K − θ + (1 − ξ)(ρ + ρ̄))2 + β(1 − ξ)2 (τ − θ)2 ,                 (55)

This is the same as (20), with

                                    β(1 − ξ)2
                             χ≡                 ∈ (0, 1)          and     ∆ ≡ −(ρ + ρ̄) ≥ 0.
                                  1 + β(1 − ξ)2

Proposition 9

Observe that
                                                                         α
                         δτ = αγ = 1 − β(1 − ξ)              δY ≡ −         (1 − γ) = −β(1 − ξ)         (56)
                                                                        1−α
And since β ∈ (0, 1) and ξ ∈ (0, 1),
                                                 −1 < δY < 0 < δτ < 1.

    As noted in the main text, both δτ and δY decrease in β and increase in ξ. Identical arguments to those
in Lemma 3, and the proof thereof, show that, under instrument communication, K = κτ τ where

                                                                β(1 − ξ)
                                             κτ (β, ξ) =                                                (57)
                                                           1 − λ + λβ(1 − ξ)

obeys the following properties for all λ ∈ (0, 1): κτ < 1 and |1 − κτ | decreases with −β and ξ. The imple-
mentable sets under instrument communication have the form

                                            Aτ = {(τ, K ) : τ = r θ, K = a τ τ}                         (58)

where a τ = κτ .
    Next, direct calculation shows that the implementable set under target communication is a locus

                                           AY = {(τ, K ) : τ = r θ, K = a Y τ}                          (59)

where
                                                                      1−α         1
                                       a Y (β, ξ) = κY (β, ξ) ·                 =                       (60)
                                                                  1 − ακY (β, ξ) λ
This slope therefore has no dependence on deep parameters (β, ξ).

                                                             43
    Let us now establish the two desired properties of the optimal communication strategy. Consider first
the dependence of optimal communication on the discount rate β. Let `τ (β, ξ; χ) denote the policymaker’s
                                                                                                         β̄(1−ξ̄)2
loss under target communication as a function of (β, ξ), holding fixed the value of χ =                               for some
                                                                                                        1+β̄(1−ξ̄)2
β̄ ∈ (0, 1) and ξ̄ ∈ (0, 1). This loss function can be re-written as

                                  `τ (β, ξ; χ) = min (1 − χ)(r − 1)2 + χ(a τ (β, ξ) · r − 1)2
                                                    £                                         ¤
                                                                                                                             (61)
                                                 r

where a τ depends on β and ξ. As in the proof of Theorem 2, after establishing that a τ (β, ξ) < 1 and a τ (β, ξ)·
r ∗ < 1, it is straightforward to show that ∂`τ /∂β has the same sign as ∂a τ /∂β. The latter is negative so the
former is negative: loss decreases as β increases.
    The analogous loss function defined for target communication,

                            `Y (β, ξ; χ) = min (1 − χ)(r − 1)2 + χ(1/λ · r − 1)2
                                              £                                  ¤
                                                                                                                             (62)
                                                     r

is invariant as a function of β. Let L(χ) denote its level. It follows that a decrease in β strictly increases the
difference `τ (β; χ) − `Y (β; χ) = `τ (β; χ) − L(χ) for any value of χ.
    Toward showing the desired threshold characterization of the optimal policy, observe there are three
possible cases:

   1. If `τ (1; χ) > L(χ), then `τ (β; χ) > L(χ) for all β ∈ (0, 1). Thus target communication is optimal over the
       entire parameter space, the critical threshold for β is β̂ = 1.

   2. If `τ (0; χ) < L(χ), then `τ (β; χ) < L(χ) for all β ∈ (0, 1). Thus instrument communication is optimal
       over the entire parameter space, β̂ = 0.

   3. If neither of the previous is true, then `τ (1; χ) < L < `τ (0; χ). Note also that and `τ (β; χ) is a contin-
       uous, increasing function of its first argument. It follows that there exists some threshold β̂ ∈ (0, 1)
       below which target communication is optimal.

    Next, we establish the comparative static in κ. Note first that, for a fixed policy objective, higher κ
favors target communication for the exact same reason described above. The log difference between loss
with instrument and target communication is

                                       D ≡ log `τ (β, ξ; χ) − log `Y (β, ξ; χ)
                                                 Ã           !      Ã                   !
                                                   1 − a τ−1          a τ−2 (1 − χ) + χ                                      (63)
                                         = 2 log               − log −2
                                                   1 − a Y−1          a Y (1 − χ) + χ
                                                                                  ∂D                                  ∂χ
Only the last term depends on χ, and since a τ < 1 and a Y > 1, then              ∂χ   > 0. Finally, observe that     ∂ξ   > 0, so
an increase in κ increases ∆ through its effect on the policy objective holding fixed its effect on (a τ , a Y ).
    Next, observe that `τ (β, ξ; χ) is a strictly increasing function of ξ, holding fixed preferences, according
to the same arguments used in the context of β; `Y (β, ξ; χ) is invariant in ξ; and hence `τ (β, ξ; χ)−`Y (β, ξ; χ)
strictly increases in ξ, holding fixed preferences.
    The two facts together establish that the preference for target communication increases in κ. Given the
previous characterization of optimal policy as a threshold in β̂, it must be the case that the aforementioned
threshold is non-increasing in ξ. Finally, to complete the proof, note that a threshold in β̂ can be trivially
translated into a threshold in the annualized MPC m = (1 − β)/T , where T is a period length.

                                                              44
Proposition 10

The objective function, up to terms outside the policymaker’s control, can be written as

                            L = min θ 2 (1 − χ)(r − 1)2 + θ 2 χ(a X r − 1)2 + 2χθ · ∆ · a X r
                                   £                                                          ¤
                                                                                                              (64)
                                        r

Let L X denote be the loss function under strategy X ,

                             L X = θ 2 (1 − χ)(r − 1)2 + θ 2 χ(a X r X − 1)2 + 2χθ · ∆ · a X r X              (65)

where r X solves the optimization in (64).
    By the envelope theorem, the change in objective from a marginal change in ∆ is

                                                               ∂L X
                                                                    = 2χθ · a X r X                           (66)
                                                                ∂∆
Applying the previous,

                                                       ∂(L τ − L Y )
                                                                     = 2χθ(a τ r τ − a Y r Y )                (67)
                                                           ∂∆
As established in the proof of Proposition 9, when ∆ = 0 and λ < 1, we have a τ r τ < 1 and a Y r Y > 1 for any
                                        ∂(L τ −L Y )
value of 1 − β or ξ, and hence              ∂∆         < 0.
    This implies that when ∆ marginally decreases, or |∆| marginally increases, then

   1. Losses marginally increase for instrument relative to target communication when θ > 0.

   2. Losses marginally decrease for instrument relative to target communication when θ < 0.

This implies that the region of parameters for which target communication is optimal increases in the first
case and the region of parameters for which target communication is optimal decreases in the second
case.
    Next, consider the case of λ > 1. It is straightforward to extend Lemma 6 and Proposition 9 to show
(i) a τ > 1 and a τ r τ > 1 and (ii) a Y < 1 and a Y r Y < 1 in this context. The results follow from reversing the
previous logic in this proof to this new case.


Corollary 4

Taking into account the implementability constraint, the policymaker’s problem can be re-expressed as
follows:                            Z
                                            £ 2
                                             θ (1 − χ)(r − 1)2 + θ 2 χ(a X r − 1)2 + 2χθ · ∆ · a X r dF (θ)
                                                                                                    ¤
                        min                                                                                   (68)
                      r,X ∈{τ,Y }

where F (θ) is the distribution from which θ is drawn. Given that θ has mean 0 and variance σ2θ , this
problem reduces to
                                             min σ2θ θ 2 (1 − χ)(r − 1)2 + θ 2 χ(a X r − 1)2
                                                    £                                        ¤
                                                                                                              (69)
                                         r,X ∈{τ,Y }

This is identical to the policy problem solved in Proposition 9. Hence all properties of the solution identi-
fied in Proposition 9 carry over.


                                                                        45
             Online Appendices [not intended for publication]

B A Neoclassical Application

Our primary application, spelled out in Section 6, concerns monetary policy and output gaps in a Keyne-
sian economy. The micro-foundation offered here differs in its approach (Neoclassical), policy instrument
(taxation), and key decision (investment).


B.1 Primitives

There are three periods, t ∈ {0, 1, 2}. A continuum of firms or entrepreneurs, i ∈ [0, 1], choose investment
at t = 1. Investment is an intermediate input that enters the production of a final good at t = 2, along
with the labor supply by a representative worker. The first period, t = 0, identifies only the time of policy
announcement. We now review each of these ingredients in turn.

Final good production at t = 2. The final-good firm operates at t = 2. Define the following constant
elasticity of substitution (CES) aggregator of the intermediate goods
                                                     µZ                 ¶    ε
                                                           1− 1             ε−1
                                                X≡        xi ε     di                                   (70)

where ε ∈ (1, ∞) is the inverse elasticity of substitution. The final goods firm operates with a Cobb-Douglas
technology over this intermediate and labor with capital share α:

                                                  Q = X α N 1−α                                         (71)

The firm operates competitively and has the following revenue
                                                    Z
                                          Q − w N − p i x i di                                          (72)

where w is the wage and the (p i )i ∈[0,1] are the prices of the intermediates.
    The final goods firm’s demand for intermediates is

                                                               1        − 1ε
                                                p i = αQ X ε −1 x i                                     (73)

and their demand for labor is
                                                                   Q
                                                  w = (1 − α)                                           (74)
                                                                   N
Representative worker. A representative worker lives only in period t = 2. They consume at level C w and
supply N hours of labor, to maximize their utility, given by

                                                                1
                                           U w = logC w −          N 1+φ                                (75)
                                                               1+φ

where φ > 0 parameterizes the Frisch elasticity of labor supply. Their income equals the sum of labor
earnings, taxed at rate z, and a transfer T :

                                                          46
                                                   C w ≤ w(1 − z)N + T

The transfer rebates the tax, or T = zw N . Labor supply has the following simple form:

                                                     w(1 − z) = N φC w                                   (76)

which, combined with (74), fully characterizes the labor market.

Entrepreneurs and investment at t = 1. At t = 1, the entrepreneur is endowed with one unit of the final
good, which they choose how to allocate between current consumption, c i ,1 , and investment, x i , into
the next-period production of an intermediate good. The technology is linear, and the productivity is
set to one for simplicity, so the quantity of the intermediate good produced and sold at t = 2 is also x i .
The entrepreneur’s consumption at t = 2 is given by the proceeds of selling the intermediate good, or
c i ,2 = p i x i . His preferences are linear:
                                                       U e = c i1 + c i2 .

It follows that
                                                    U e = 1 − xi + p i xi .

where p i is given by (B). The entrepreneur therefore chooses investment, x i , so as to maximize the net
payoff p i x i − x i , subject to (B). This yields the following optimality condition:
                                               1                h     1
                                                                                 i
                                            x iε = α(1 − ε−1 )Ei X α+ ε −1 N 1−α                         (77)

Policy preferences. For simplicity, the policymaker cares only about the representative worker’s welfare
but cannot directly transfer consumption from the entrepreneurs to the worker. Instead, she must use
the single available tax instrument, the proportional tax on the second-period final good, to balance two
objectives: encourage investment by the entrepreneurs so as to increase aggregate the consumption of
workers; and collect tax revenue so as to pay for a public good.
    The policymaker wishes to maximize the utility of the worker, but also has an external value for tax
revenues r w N . Assume that external benefit is linearly separable in the policymaker’s preferences, has
a log functional form, and has weight ξ relative to the worker’s welfare. The policymaker thus wishes to
maximize
                                                            N 1+φ
                                            W = logC w −          + ξ log(r w N ).                       (78)
                                                            1+φ
The primitive shock of interest in our model will be ξ, which is a pure shifter of the policymaker’s prefer-
ences.
    (78) can be justified as follows. Let the underlying government budget constraint take the form r w N ≥
g , where g is the exogenous and random level of government spending. Provided that g is bounded away
from zero, we can re-write this constraint as log(r w N ) ≥ log g . This yields (78) as the Lagrangian of this
problem, with ξ being positive and increasing in g . And since there is a one-to-one mapping between g
and ξ, we can treat the latter as the “fundamental” for our purposes.


                                                              47
B.2 Benchmark with REE and Optimal Policy

Assume rational expectations. Let us first characterize implementable equilibria indexed by the tax rate r .
In such an equilibrium, the agent will conjecture that x −i = x i ≡ X . Since everything is now known, we can
pull X out of the expectation and solve to get

                                                                              1
                                                   X i = X = (α(1 − ε−1 )) 1−α N

It is immediate that output is linear in labor:

                                                                                  α
                                           Q = X η N 1−η = (α(1 − ε−1 ))) 1−α N

and finally note from the worker’s budget constraint that consumer income equals consumer spending, or
C w = w N = (1 − α)Q.
   Setting labor supply to labor demand gives
                                                                          1
                                                          N = (1 − z) 1+φ                                (79)

which corresponds to output level

                                                                      α           1
                                               Q = (α(1 − ε−1 ))) 1−α (1 − z) 1+φ                        (80)

and investment level
                                                                          1           1
                                           X i = X = (α(1 − ε−1 )) 1−α (1 − z) 1+φ

   The policymaker chooses one of the implementable allocations, as described by (79) and (80), to max-
imize its objective function (78). We appeal to standard arguments to write the problem in the “dual”
form as a function of the policy instrument. Substituting out the production function gives the following
representation of the policy problem:

                                                         ¢ N 1+φ
                               ½                                                                 ¾
                         max (1 + ξ) log (1 − α)X α N 1−α −      + ξ log((1 − α)z)
                                        ¡
                                                                                                         (81)
                          r                                 1+φ

and further substituting in the implementability constraints for (X , N ) gives the following up to constants:

                                     max (1 + ξ) log(1 − z) + z + ξ(1 + φ) log z
                                        ©                                        ª
                                                                                                         (82)
                                       z

The first-order condition is
                                                           ξ(1 + φ) (1 + ξ)
                                                     1+            =                                     (83)
                                                              z      1−z
There are two solutions to this, and the relevant one that corresponds to a minimum of the objective is
                                                   µq                                        ¶
                                               1
                                   z ∗ (ξ) =            ξ2 (2 + φ)2 + 4(1 + φξ) − ξ(2 + φ)               (84)
                                               2
which increases in ξ, the government’s preference for raising revenue.




                                                                 48
B.3 Forward Guidance

At t = 0, the policymaker learns its preference shifter ξ and decides to levy a tax or subsidy. They have
two options. The first is to announce and commit to a fixed level of the tax z at t = 2. The second is to
commit to a given level of output, and adjust ex post the tax such that, for a pre-determined level of the
capital stock, the output target is met. Observe that, under rational expectations, the two approaches are
equivalent; but under non-rational expectations they may differ.


B.4 Mapping to the Abstract Behavioral Equations

Now consider a more general model in which agents do not form rational expectations, because of either
limited information or various behavioral biases. The fixed-point equation 77 can no longer be solved
without expectations. To make progress, we will take log-linear approximations around a case in which
the government preference shock is at a steady-state value, or ξ = ξ̄, and the tax is set at the (rational-
expectations-implementation) optimum that achieves the second-best, or z = z̄ = z ∗ (ξ̄). Let (Q̄, N̄ , X̄ )
denote output, labor, and investment evaluated at this point. Let Y = logQ − log Q̄, k i = (log x i − log X̄ ),
   R
K = i k i di , and n = log N − log N̄ be log deviations of the first two quantities. Further, define

                                                    1−z
                                                  µ        ¶
                                           1                     1
                                     τ=       log            ≈−     (z − z̄)
                                          1+φ       1 − z̄      1+φ

as a convenient transformation of the tax, which is higher when the tax is relatively low and lower when
the tax is relatively high.
    Aggregate production is log-linear, or Y = (1 − α)n + αK . And, up to log deviations, labor is the same as
the rescaled tax: n = τ. Hence we recover the abstract model’s equation


                                               Y = (1 − α)τ + αK                                          (85)

in which α has a structural interpretation as the capital share of income. The direct effect of policy, with
weight 1 − α, comes entirely through the expansion of labor demand.
    Let us now turn to the investment decision (77). To a log-linear approximation, it is


                                           k i = εEi [Y ] + (1 − ε)Ei [K ]

After substituting in equilibrium K from the production function, this simplifies to

                                           k i = 1 − γ Ei [τ] + γE[Y ]
                                                ¡     ¢
                                                                                                          (86)

for feedback parameter                                µ      ¶
                                                  1     1
                                               γ ≡ −ε     −1                                              (87)
                                                  α     α
This parameter is in the domain (−∞, 1], reaching the latter for ε = 1. It is positive if and only if


                                                     ε < 1+α


                                                         49
or the aggregate demand externality is sufficiently strong relative a threshold that decreases in the capital
share of income. Economically this means that the force of the aggregate demand externality, which works
only through the accumulation of capital in the model, offsets the GE force of resource scarcity in the labor
market.


B.5 Policy Objective

We approximate objective (78) around the aforemenioned steady-state with the second-best policy. This
results in the following loss function:

                          (1 + ξ)(Y − Y ∗ )2 + (1 + φ)2 φ(1 − r¯) + ξ(1 − r¯)2 ) (τ − τ∗ )2
                                                       ¡                        ¢
                                                                                                        (88)

which maps to our abstract problem for target weight

                                                            1+ξ
                                   χ≡                                                                   (89)
                                          (1 + φ)2 (φ(1 − r¯) + ξ(1 − r¯)2 ) + 1 + ξ

and ideal points
                                                                           1
                                           Y ∗ = τ∗ = θ ≡ (1 − z ∗ (ξ)) 1+φ                             (90)

   The policymaker cares both about hitting the second-best level of output and the second-best level
of the policy instrument. The former measures the payoffs to the policymaker via both the household’s
consumption and the additional amount of tax revenue for a fixed tax rate. The latter measures the benefit
of setting the right tax and not additionally distorting labor supply relative to the second-best benchmark.




                                                           50
                                                           Y                                                    Y
                                                           *                                                    *

              0          2            4            6                    0.0       0.2      0.4      0.6   0.8   1.0
                                 k


Figure 2: The implementability coefficients µτ and µY under Level-k Thinking (left) and our main specifi-
cation (right).


C Level-k Thinking

The key mechanism in the main analysis is agents’ under-forecasting of others’ responses to the policy
message: as demonstrated in Lemma 2, Ē[K ] moves less than K in response to variation in X̂ . One could
recast this as the consequence of agents’ bounded ability to calculate others’ responses or to comprehend
the GE effects of the policy.
    A simple formalization of such cognitive or computational bounds is Level-k Thinking. This concept
represents a relaxation of the part of Assumption 3 that imposes common knowledge of rationality: agents
play rationally themselves, but question the rationality of others. In particular, this concept is defined re-
cursively by letting the level-0 agent make an exogenously specified choice (this is the completely irrational
agent), the level-1 agent play optimally given the belief that others are level-0 (this agent is rational but be-
lieves that others are irrational), the level-2 agent play optimally given the belief that others are level-1,
and so on, up to some finite order k. Level-k Thinking therefore imposes a pecking order, with every agent
believing that others are less sophisticated than herself in the sense that they base their beliefs on fewer
iterations of the best responses than she does.
    To see the implications of this concept in our context, assume all agents think to the same order k ≥ 1
and let the “base case” (level-0 behavior) correspond to K = 0. Because level-k agents believe that all other
agents are of cognitive order k − 1, the expectation of K is now given by

                                                           k−1
                                     Ē[K ] = (1 − δ X )         (δ X )h X̂ = (1 − (δ X )k ) X̂ .
                                                           X
                                                                                                                      (91)
                                                           h=0

For even k and δ X ∈ (−1, 1), this always implies a dampened response of beliefs to the fundamental. Out-
comes K = ((1−δ X )+δ X (1−(δ X )k )) X̂ have dampened response to X̂ for δ X > 0 and amplified response for
δ X < 0. These distortions remain monotone in the extent of strategic interaction in either direction, |δ X |.
Intuitively, higher |δ X | puts higher weight on agents’ faulty reasoning. As such our core results readily
extend to this case.
    The equivalence, however, breaks down for any odd number k because Level-k Thinking displays a


                                                                  51
peculiar, “oscillatory” behavior in games of strategic substitutability. In our context, this problem emerges
with target communication, precisely because this induces a game of strategic substitutability.
   Let us explain. For any given announcement, an agent wants to invest more when he expects others
to investment less. Because the level-0 agent is assumed to be completely unresponsive, a level-1 agent
expects K to move less than in the frictionless benchmark and thus moves more himself. A level-2 agent
then expects K to move more than in the frictionless benchmark and therefore chooses to move less him-
self. That is, whereas k = 0 amplifies the actual response of investment relative to rational expectations,
k = 1 attenuates it. The left panel of Figure 2 shows that this oscillatory pattern continues for higher k,
and that this oscillation with target communication is the only qualitative difference between the present
specification and that studied as our baseline.
   We are not aware of any experimental evidence of this oscillatory pattern. We suspect that it is an unin-
tended “bug” of a solution concept that was originally developed and tested in the experimental literature
primarily for games of strategic complementarity and may not be applicable to games of strategic substi-
tutability without appropriate modification. Seen from this perspective, the formalization adopted in the
main text captures the essence of Level-k Thinking while bypassing its “pathological” feature.
   The same goal can be achieved with a “smooth” version of Level-k Thinking along the lines of Garcıa-
Schmidt and Woodford (2019). The concept of “cognitive discounting” introduced in Gabaix (2020) works
in a similar manner, too, because it directly postulates that the subjective expectations of endogenous
variables such as K move less than the rational expectations of it.




                                                     52
D Communicating Other Objects

Our focus on communicating τ or Y seemed natural for applications. But, for completeness, we discuss
here the possibilities of committing to a target for the aggregate action K or communicating the realized
value of θ along with (or perhaps instead of) a policy plan.


D.1 Communicating a target for K

Consider the scenario in which the policymaker commits to a target for K , instead of a value for τ or Y .
This option may be impractical if K stands for a complex set of decisions that is hard to measure. But even
abstracting from such measurement issues, this option is not well-posed in our model.
    Consider in particular the specification studied in Section 3.3 and let the policymaker announce and
commit to a value K̂ for aggregate investment. Assume that first-order beliefs about investment are correct
(Ē[K ] = K̂ ) and higher-order beliefs are sticky around zero (Ēh [K ] = λh−1 K̂ ). For the announcement to be
fulfilled in equilibrium, it must be the case that

                               K̂ = (1 − δ X )Ē[X ] + δ X Ē[K ] = (1 − δ X )Ē[X ] + δ X K̂

for either fundamental X ∈ {τ, Y }. The only first-order beliefs compatible with this announcement, then,
are Ē[τ] = Ē[Y ] = Ē[K ] = K̂ : on average (and, in fact, uniformly), agents believe that equilibrium will be
τ = Y = K . This is an ideal scenario for the policymaker.
    It turns out, however, that a rational agent who doubts the attentiveness of others will doubt that other
agents play the announcement, or that K = K̂ . If a given agent i thinks that agent j plays k j = K̂ , she is
implicitly taking a stand on agent j ’s beliefs about τ and Y . Specifically, agent i believes that agent j is
following her best response (here, written with X = τ ), namely

                                       Ei [k j ] = (1 − δτ )Ei E j [τ] + δτ Ei E j [K ]

We have assumed that Ei [k j ] = K̂ and Ei E j [K ] = λK̂ . This produces the following restriction on second-
order beliefs about τ:
                                                                1 − λδτ
                                                 Ei E j [τ] =           Kˆ .
                                                                 1 − δτ
This has a simple interpretation: to rationalize aggregate investment being K̂ despite the fact that fraction
(1 − λ) of agents were inattentive to the announcement, agent i thinks that a typical other agent has over-
forecasted the policy instrument τ.
    At the same time, agent i knows that, like himself, all attentive agents expect τ to coincide with K̂ . And
since agent i believes that the fraction of attentive agents is λ, the following restriction of second-order
beliefs also has to hold:
                                                     Ei E j [τ] = λK̂ .

    When λ = 1 (rational expectations), the above two restrictions are jointly satisfied for any K̂ . When
instead λ < 1, this is true only for K̂ = 0. This proves the claim made in the text that, as long as λ < 1, there
is no equilibrium in which is infeasible to announce and commit to any K̂ other than 0 (the default point).

                                                             53
    In a nutshell, the problem with communicating K is that the policymaker has no direct control over
it. From this perspective, output communication worked precisely because the policymaker had some
plausible commitment. Agents could rationalize Y = Ŷ regardless of their beliefs about K because there
always existed some level of τ that implemented Ŷ .


D.2 Expanding the message space

Return to the case in which the policymaker commits to a value for τ or Y (conditional on θ), but allow her
to provide an additional message of the form


                                                m = aθ + bε

where a, b ∈ R and ε is an arbitrary random variable. This could capture a perfect or imperfect signal of
the fundamental, a “justification for the policy choice,” or some other arbitrary message. Let Assumption
4 apply to the vector (θ, X ).
    It is obvious that the additional message plays no role in the best response (7) or the expansion (22);
does not enter the expression for K ; and thus does not affect the implementability constraint. Hence the
implementable sets are the same as the ones given for instrument and target communication in Proposi-
tion 1. The messages provide no extra flexibility.


D.2.1 Communicating only θ

What about communicating a message without a policy plan? In particular, what if the policymaker com-
municates only the value of θ? In general, agents may have no idea what θ means, or how to map its
announced value to an expectation for τ and Y . So, unless additional assumptions are made, this scenario
is ill-posed.
    One way to close this scenario is to assume that the agents have knowledge of the policymaker’s entire
problem, namely her objective as given in (3), her set of options (pick a value for τ or one for Y ), and
her beliefs about the structure of the economy. The agents could then use this knowledge along with the
announcement of θ to figure out the policymaker’s choices. This would only replicate the outcomes of our
baseline analysis, in a indirect and uninteresting way.
    This is is true, of course, insofar as the policymaker’s problem remains the same as in our baseline
analysis: the policymaker is still committing to a value for τ or Y , although “secretly” so. If, instead, the
policymaker lacks commitment, they will expect her to play a different strategy. This takes us to the ter-
ritory of Section H, where we explain why commitment is essential for regulating the bite of bounded
rationality.




                                                       54
E Convergent Higher-Order Beliefs
                                      1
Most of our analysis restricts α <   2−γ   so as to guarantee that −1 < δ X < 1 for both form of forward guidance.
The following technical lemma states and verifies this claim:

Lemma 8. Let γ ∈ (−∞, 1] and α ∈ (0, 1). The following statements are equivalent: |δ X | < 1 for X ∈ {τ, Y };
γ > 2 − 1/α; and α < 1/(2 − γ).

Proof. This is a very simple calculation. Note that δY < 0 for any γ ≤ 1, so δY < 1 is guaranteed. The
condition δY > −1 re-arranges to
                                                                α
                                               δY = −(1 − γ)       > −1
                                                               1−α
This re-arranges to 1 − γ < 1 − α1 given α ∈ (0, 1) and the previous re-arranges to γ > 2 − 1/α. Finally, solving
for α gives α < 1/(2−γ). Thus we have shown that |δY | < 1, γ > 2−1/α; and α < 1/(2−γ) are interchangeable
statements.
    Note next that δτ < 1 is guaranteed by α ∈ (0, 1). δτ > −1 requires γ > −1/α. But this is implied by
γ > 2 − 1/α and hence by δY > −1.

    This allows the characterization of beliefs and behavior by repeated iteration of the best responses. In
particular, in Section 3 it guarantees that the joint of Assumptions 2 and 3 replicates the REE benchmark;
in Appendix C, it guarantees that the Level-k outcome converges to the REE outcome as agents become
“infinitely rational” (k → ∞); and in Sections 3.3 and 5.3, it guarantees that Assumptions 4 and 5 yield
the corresponding PBE outcomes. On a more technical level, restricting to δY > −1 allows us to maintain
µY > 0, which is important to the proofs of Theorem 2 and Proposition 3. This is established below:

Lemma 9 (Sign of µY ). Fix a value for α and a domain γ ∈ G, with 0 ∈ G, such that δY > −1. Then µY > 0
on the same domain for all values of λ.

Proof. Note that µY > 0 when κY < 1/α. This reduces to to

                                               γα(λ − α) < 1 − α(2 − λ)

    Let’s consider three cases of this. First, assume that λ > α. Some algebraic manipulation yields the
condition
                                                            (1 − α)2
                                                   γ < 1+
                                                            α(λ − α)
which is obviously true for any γ < 1. Thus no more restrictions are required.
    Next, consider λ = α. The condition becomes

                                                     α(2 − α) < 1

which is always true for α = λ ∈ (0, 1).
    Finally, consider λ < α. In this case, the condition is

                                                        1 + α(λ − 2)
                                                   γ>
                                                          α(λ − α)

                                                          55
A strictly tighter condition is the same evaluated at λ = 0, which re-arranges to
                                                       µ      ¶
                                                    1       1
                                                γ>      2−                                              (92)
                                                    α       α

   Note that the restriction that δY > −1 encodes the following restriction for fixed α and all γ ∈ G

                                                           1
                                                  γ > 2−                                                (93)
                                                           α
as calculated in Lemma 8.
   Evaluating this at γ = 0, which is within the domain G over which the condition must apply, gives
α < 1/2. When α < 1/2, the right-hand-side of conditions (92) and (93) are both negative, and (93) implies
(92). Clearly, this must apply for all γ ∈ G and α such that (93) holds. This completes the proof.



   We think, for all the reasons above, it is most reasonable to restrict to |δ X | < 1. But for completeness
we discuss here what happens otherwise. Consider first an “adversarial” selection of outcome in this case.
This will only strengthen the case for the main results. For −1/α < γ < 2 − 1/α, we have δY < −1 and
δτ ∈ (−1, 1). Instrument communication would clearly be preferred to prevent arbitrarily poor outcomes
under target communication. To use an analogy which applies directly in our extension that considers
policy rules (Section H), this is like picking a policy that obeys the Taylor principle over one that does
not. For γ < −1/α, we have both δY < −1 and δτ < −1, so theory lacks a clear prediction under either
communication strategy.




                                                     56
F Connection to Poole (1970)

Our baseline model included exogenous shocks to the preferences of the policymaker but excluded such
shocks from conditions (1) and (2). This is without loss of generality if the other shocks are common
knowledge and observed by the policymaker. These assumptions are extreme, but common in the Ramsey
policy paradigm. In our context, they guarantee that implementability results remain true provided that
the quantities (τ, Y ) are re-defined to be “partialed out” from the extra shocks.
    A more plausible scenario, perhaps, is that other shocks are unobserved and the policymaker cannot
condition on them. This introduces into our analysis similar considerations as those in Poole (1970). The
latter focused on how two different policies—fixing the interest rate or fixing the money supply—differed
in their robustness to external shocks. Primitive shocks (to supply and demand) had different effects on
the policy objective (output gap) depending on the slope of the model equations and the policy choice.
Poole could do comparative statics of optimal policy in these slopes as well as the relative variance of the
shocks.
    Such “Poole considerations” can be inserted into our framework and will naturally affect the choice be-
tween fixing τ and fixing Y . However, such consideration matter even in the REE benchmark and, roughly
speaking, are separable from the mechanism we have identified in our paper.

Shocks to output. Consider now a model in which output contains a random component:

                                                   Y = (1 − α)τ + αK + u,

where u is drawn from a Normal distribution with mean 0 and variance σ2u , is orthogonal to θ, and is
unobserved by both the policymaker and the private agents. In this case, announcing and committing
to a value for Y stabilizes output at the expense of letting the tax distortion fluctuate with u. Conversely,
announcing and committing to a value for τ stabilizes the tax distortion at the expense of letting output
fluctuate with u. It follows that, even in the frictionless benchmark (λ = 1), the policymaker is no more
indifferent between the two. In particular, target communication is preferable if and only if the welfare
cost of the fluctuations in Y exceeds that of the fluctuations in τ, which is in turn is the case whenever χ is
high enough.33
    While these possibilities are interesting on their own right, they are orthogonal to the message of our
paper. Indeed, the shock considered above does not affect the strategic interaction of the private agents
under either the form of forward guidance: Lemma 1 remains the same. By the same token, when λ = 1,
the sets of the implementable (τ, Y ) pairs remain invariant to γ, even though they now depend on the
realization of u. It then also follows that, as long as λ = 1, the optimal communication strategy does not
depend on γ.
 33 The above scenario has maintained that the ideal level of output is Y fb = θ. What if instead Y fb = θ+u? This could correspond

to a micro-founded business-cycle model in which technology shocks that have symmetric effects on equilibrium and first-best
allocations. Under this scenario, it becomes desirable to let output fluctuate with u, which in turn implies that instrument com-
munication always dominates target communication with rational expectations. A non-trivial trade off between the two could
then be recovered by adding unobserved shocks to the tax distortion. The optimal strategy is then determined by the relative
variance of the two unobserved shocks and the relative importance of the resulting fluctuations, along the lines of Poole (1970).


                                                               57
    As soon as λ < 1, the implementability sets and the optimal communication strategy start depend-
ing on γ, for exactly the same reasons as those explained before. To make this more clear, note that the
implementable set for instrument communication is

                                                  (τ, Y ) : Y = µ−1
                                                                 τ τ+u
                                                 ©                     ª


which means the policymaker, free to choose announcement τ = r τ θ, can implement (τ, Y ) pairs of the
           τ θ, r τ θ + u).
form (r τ µ−1
    Consider a policymaker who must commit ex ante, before the realization of θ, to either instrument
or target communication and a mapping from θ to their announcement X̂ . This is a slightly different
assumption than our main analysis, but an appropriate translation of the classic Poole problem. We could
just as easily have assumed contingency on θ but not u, with the minor change that optimal policy now
depends on the realization of θ in place of its ex ante variance.
    The appropriate translation of the loss function is
                                        ·                                           ¸
                                          2                 2                2    2
                               L τ ≡ min σθ (1 − χ)(r τ − 1) + χ(r τ /µτ − 1) + χσu
                                            £                                  ¤
                                    r τ ∈R


where (σ2u , σ2θ ) are the respective variances of u and θ. To re-iterate, were policy contingent on realized θ,
the same would apply with θ 2 in place of σ2θ .
    For target communication, the implementable set is
                                             n                           u o
                                                 (τ, Y ) : τ = µY Y −
                                                                        1−α

which means that, for announcement Y = r Y θ, the policymaker can implement (τ, Y ) pairs of the form
(r Y µY θ − u/(1 − α), r Y θ). The appropriate translation of the loss function is

                                                                               1−χ 2
                                       ·                                                 ¸¸
                          L Y ≡ min σ2θ (1 − χ)(r Y − 1)2 + χ(r Y /µY − 1)2 +         σ
                                         £                                 ¤
                                r Y ∈R                                        (1 − α)2 u

Note that the extra terms that appear in the loss functions for σ2u > 0 have no dependence on γ. To map
to the loss functions plotted in Figure 1 as a function of γ, each loss function is shifted above, but neither
“twists” or loses its monotonicity in γ.
    Finally, note that in expectation both implementable sets are the same as the ones that are presented
in Theorem 1. This demonstrates Proposition 8. In particular, when λ = 1 and µτ = µY = 1, the imple-
mentable sets are the same as the rational-expectations ones in Proposition 1. This demonstrates Propo-
sition 7.

Measurement errors and trembles. The same logic as above applies if we introduce measurement errors
in the policymaker’s observation of τ and Y , or equivalently trembles in her control of these objects. To see
this, consider a variant of our framework that lets the policymaker control either τ̃ or Ỹ , where

                                             τ̃ = τ + u τ ,        Ỹ = Y + u Y ,



                                                              58
and the u’s are independent Gaussian shocks, orthogonal to θ, and unpredictable by both the policymaker
and the private agents. Instrument communication now amounts to announcing and committing to a
value for τ̃, whereas target communication amounts to announcing and committing to a value for Ỹ .
   By combining the above with condition (1), we infer that, under both form of forward guidance, the
following restriction has to hold:
                                            Ỹ = (1 − α)τ̃ + αK + ũ,

where
                                             ũ ≡ −(1 − α)u τ + u Y .

At the same time, because the u’s are unpredictable, the best response of the agents can be restated as

                                          k i = (1 − γ)Ei [τ̃] + γEi [Ỹ ].

This maps directly to the version with unobserved shocks just discussed above if we simply reinterpret τ̃,
Ỹ , and ũ as, respectively, the actual tax rate, the actual level of output, and the unobserved output shock.
   To sum up, the presence of unobserved shocks and measurement error can tilt the optimal strategy of
the policymaker one way or another in manners already studied in the literature that has followed the lead
of Poole (1970). This, however, does not interfere with the essence of our paper’s main message regarding
the choice of a communication strategy as a means for regulating the impact of strategic uncertainty and
the bite of the considered forms of bounded rationality.




                                                        59
G Inattention vs. Distorted Reasoning

Our main analysis allows people to imperfectly reason about equilibrium, which is the friction of inter-
est, but abstracts from the possibility that people are inattentive to forward guidance. In this appendix,
we accommodate this possibility and study how it matters, or does not matter, for our paper’s lessons. In
particular, we show that our main result (Theorem 2) remains intact if we let people be rationally inatten-
tive and maintain our working hypothesis that the policymaker aims at getting the economy as close as
possible to the rational-expectations outcome. But we also explore what happens away from this case.


G.1 Implementability and distortions

We start with a reduced-form specification that let us flexibly incorporate both inattention and imperfect
equilibrium reasoning. A specific micro-foundation in terms of information and priors will be provided in
the next subsection.
      Maintain that higher-order beliefs have the structure from Section 3.3, or

                                               Ēh [X ] = λh−1 Ē[X ],

for some λ ∈ (0, 1] and all h ≥ 2. But now let first-order beliefs satisfy

                                                    Ē[X ] = q X ,

for some parameter q ∈ (0, 1]. Our analysis so far is nested by q = 1. Inattention, rational or not, is in-
troduced by letting q < 1. Alternatively, q < 1 can be interpreted as the main specification of “sparsity”
employed in Gabaix (2014) and Gabaix (2020).
      Behavior is still determined by the solution to the following game:

                                           k i = Ei [(1 − δ X )X + δ X K ] ,

with X ∈ {τ, Y } depending on the form of forward guidance. Aggregating this and replacing Ē[X ] = q, we
get
                                           K = (1 − δ X )q X + δ X Ē[K ],

which makes clear that aggregate behavior depends, not only on the average beliefs of K , but also on
the average belief of X , which now moves less than to one-to-one with X insofar as q < 1. That said, the
following property still holds:
                                                    Ē[K ] = λK .

This makes clear that λ alone pins down the perceived responsiveness of others relative the truth.
      Theorem 1 readily extends modulo the following change in the slopes of the implementability con-
straints:                                ¶−1
                               1 − αγ                                1 − α + α(1 − γ)λ − α(1 − αγ)q
                     µ
                 µτ = 1 − α +         αq           and        µY =                               ¢ .   (94)
                              1 − αγλ                                   (1 − α) 1 − α + α(1 − γ)λ
                                                                               ¡




                                                         60
Instrument communication necessarily produces attenuation, or µτ > 1, because both frictions (q < 1 and
λ < 1) work in the same direction. By contrast, the case for target communication is ambiguous (µY ≶ 1),
because the amplification induced by rigid higher-order beliefs (λ < 1) opposes the attenuation induced by
inattention (q < 1). Which effect dominates depends on the belief parameters (q, λ) and the GE feedback
γ, because the last interacts with rigid higher-order beliefs as explained in our main analysis.34
    Finally, note that µτ = µY if and only if q = λ. In this knife-edge case, agents’ perception of all vari-
ables, communicated directly or not, is uniformly dampened by a single parameter and, as a result, we
recover irrelevance of the instrument-versus-target choice. We allude to this fact in our discussion of clar-
ity and confidence in Section 7—a model with “plain” inattention does not capture our desired feature of
relaxing the most essential property of (full information) rational expectations equilibrium, which is the
interchangeability of different objects that appear in the equilibrium allocation.


G.2 A signal extraction model

To provide a more specific structure for what q and λ mean as independent parameters, consider the
following model of inattention with a behavioral twist. Let the announcement X be Gaussian with mean
0 and known variance σ2X .35 Each agent, because of their inattention, observes in effect a noisy signal
s i = X +u i , where u i is idiosyncratic Gaussian noise with mean 0. Agent i perceives u i to have variance ω2 ;
the noise actually has variance ξ2 , where ξ may or may not be the same as ω depending on whether the
agent has the correct prior about his cognitive capacities. It follows, from simple signal-extraction math,
that the agent’s own expectation of X is

                                                                σ2X
                                                  Ei [X ] =              (X + u i ).
                                                              σ2X + ω2

This expression, averaged and then mapped to the reduced-form model for average expectations intro-
duced in the previous subsection, gives Ē[X ] = q X with

                                                                  σ2X
                                                         q≡                .
                                                                σ2X + ω2

    When agents perceive their internal representations to have more noise (i.e., ω2 is higher), q becomes
smaller and first-order beliefs are more attenuated. Note that there is no direct role for the actual noise
variance ξ2 in determining the mean belief, which is sufficient for characterizing implementable alloca-
tions. Nonetheless, we can also define a “rational” signal-to-noise ratio, or

                                                                   σ2X
                                                        q∗ ≡                ,
                                                                σ2X + ξ2

 34 Indeed, attenuation is obtained with target communication (i.e., µ > 1) if and only if q < q̃(λ, γ) ≡ 1−α(1−(1−γ)λ) . The
                                                                      Y                                       1−αγ
threshold q̃ is increasing in both λ and γ, always exceeds λ, and reaches 1 when either λ = 1 or γ = 1.
  35 This property will be maintained in the policy problem we consider if the underlying shock θ is Gaussian with known variance,

because X is itself proportional to θ in equilibrium




                                                                 61
which is a benchmark to which we can compare the actual outcome whenever subjective perceptions
diverge from reality.When agents over-estimate their cognitive capacities or the precision of their infor-
mation, ω2 < ξ2 and q > q ∗ . When they make the opposite mistake, ω2 > ξ2 and q < q ∗ .
    The above completes the description of how agents think about themselves. Let us now turn to how
they think about others. Agent i perceives any other agent j to receive a signal of the form X + u j , where
u j has mean 0 and variance ω̃2 , which again may not equal the true variance ξ2 . Agent i believes further
that agent j will associate variance ω̃2 with the signals of agents k 6= j , and so forth. It is simple to show
that second-order beliefs thus satisfy

                                                        ν2                      ν2
                                                  ·                       ¸ µ          ¶
                             Ei [E j [X ]] = Ei                (X + u j )  =             Ei [X ]
                                                      ν2 + ω̃2                ν2 + ω̃2
Averaging and iterating this argument, we get Ēh [X ] = λh−1 Ē[X ] with

                                                                 ν2
                                                          λ≡            .
                                                               ν2 + ω̃2

This scalar therefore depends exclusively on what each agent perceives to be the quality of others’ infor-
mation.
    Note now that q ∈ (0, 1) and λ ∈ (0, 1) are guaranteed respectively by ω2 > 0 and ω̃2 > 0, or positive per-
ceived variances. The case q > λ is guaranteed by ω2 > ω̃2 , or a given agent believing he is more informed
and/or attentive than the average other agent. The opposite case, q < λ, is associated with the opposite,
or a given agent’s belief that others are more likely to be paying attention.
    The canonical noisy rational expectations case is nested for ω̃2 = ω2 = ξ2 , or λ = q = q ∗ . But ω2 = ω̃2 ,
or λ = q, alone is necessary for a model that, in terms of the equivalence between instrument and target
communication irrelevance outcomes, is isomorphic to the noisy rational-expectations model.
    Going back to the analysis of the previous subsection, recall that the implementability constraints de-
pend only on q and λ, not on q ∗ . This is because, in a linear model such as ours, the actual level, or the
value of q ∗ , does not matter at all for the positive properties of aggregate behavior; what matters is only
people’s subjective view of the world. But as we explain below, q ∗ matters for judging the normative im-
plications of any given behavior.


G.3 Rational inattention or “one-distortion case”

Our baseline analysis and the loss function (3) compared all allocations to the full-information, rational-
expectations allocation. This may not be appropriate in an environment with rational inattention, as in
Sims (2003) and large follow up literature. Angeletos and Sastry (2019) show that the introduction of such
inattention alone does not upset the Welfare Theorems: there is no policy that can improve upon market
outcomes. .
    The basic intuition is that there is no good reason for the policymaker to try to correct people’s behavior
if any “friction” in it is merely the product of the agents’ optimal use of limited information or limited
cognitive capacity. To capture this idea in reduced form, we now consider an altered policy problem that


                                                                62
is “re-centered” around the rational expectations equilibrium (i.e., the one with correct perceptions of the
noise variance).
    Let us first consider the simplest such case, in which mis-perception of others’ precision of information
is the only behavioral distortion. This means q = q ∗ , or agents correctly perceive their own precision,
but λ 6= q = q ∗ , or agents mis-perceive others’ precision. Let µin be the slope of the implementability
constraint in a counterfactual world in which λ = q = q ∗ . Re-centering the policymaker’s objective around
this reference point amounts to the following modification of the loss function:

                                   L(τ, Y , θ) ≡ (1 − χ)(τ − θ)2 + χ(Y − θ/µin )2 .                           (95)

This problem features only one distortion, relative over or under confidence, and thus resembles our base-
line policy problem with a new “center point.” Given this adjustment in the relevant benchmark for opti-
mality, we can prove that our main result is once again generic for λ 6= q:

Proposition 11. Assume the combination of first and higher-order uncertainty described above and a policy
objective that treats the noisy rational expectations equilibrium as the first-best. For q ≤ 1 and λ 6= q, there
exists some critical threshold γ̂ ∈ [0, 1) such that target communication is strictly preferred for γ > γ̂.

    This result, and all others in this section, are proved in a final subsection. The result intuitively “re-
isolates” our main friction of interest as the only source of distortion.


G.4 Irrational inattention or “two-distortion case”

Let us now consider a situation in which there is a second competing distortion induced by irrational
inattention or some other “wedge” in first-order beliefs.
    A first path forward for evaluating optimal policy is to treat inattention and the behavioral bias as joint
sources of inefficiency. This is tantamount to evaluating µin in (95) with q ∗ = 1, or continuing to use the
original objective (3). Provided λ < q, the paternalistic planner again uses a threshold strategy:

Proposition 12. Let c(γ) ≡ I{A ∗ = AY } be a 0 or 1 indicator for using target communication. For λ < q ≤
q ∗ = 1, c(γ) weakly increases on the domain [0, 1].

    In this case, target communication may be preferred on the entire domain. This has the opposite
intuition from the previous result: some over-reaction in GE reasoning helps offset the attenuation from
incomplete information.
    Note that the previous two propositions do not cover the case of q < λ < q ∗ = 1, with agents believing
they are “worse than average.” In such a case, the considerations of canceling out the friction in higher-
order reasoning and “fighting” the wedge in first-order beliefs do not stack with one another. Instead, there
is now room for the familiar second-best logic of using one distortion to fight another.
    Next, consider the case of q ∗ < 1 but q > q ∗ . There is optimally some inattention, but agents over-
perceive the precision of their own signals. As discussed later, the empirical evidence in Kohlhas and Broer
(2018) and Bordalo et al. (2018) supports such a case in the data. We now consider a policy problem with


                                                         63
the objective 95, but with µin evaluated at q = q ∗ and λ = q ∗ . In such a case, we can show that if λ < q our
result extends in the following sense:

Proposition 13. Let c(γ) ≡ I{A ∗ = AY } be a 0 or 1 indicator for using target communication. For λ < q ≤ 1
and q ∗ < q, c(γ) weakly increases on the domain [0, 1].

Empirical (and psychological) context. The combination of the evidence provided in Bordalo et al. (2018),
Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015), Coibion et al. (2018), Kohlhas and Broer (2018), and Kohlhas
and Walther (2018) from various surveys of macroeconomic forecasts rejects the representative-agent,
rational-expectations benchmark. Much of this evidence concentrates on professional forecasters, but
some of it covers firms and consumers as well. Notwithstanding the difficulty of extrapolating from such
broad-scope evidence to the specific counterfactual studied in our paper, we now explain why this evi-
dence points towards the following combination of parameters, which (per Proposition 13) suffices for our
main result to survive even when inattention is irrational:

    • q < 1, meaning that people are inattentive or imperfectly informed;

    • q ∗ < q, meaning that people over-estimate the precision of their information relative to the truth;
       and

    • λ < q, meaning that people under-estimate the precision of others’ information relative to their own.

The first property is documented in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015) by showing that average
forecasts under-react to news. These papers also offer a structural interpretation of this fact in terms of
models with dispersed noisy information and rational expectations, along the lines of Morris and Shin
(2002) and Woodford (2003). But they do not contain any evidence that would help support this hypothesis
against the richer alternative. That is, they presume q = λ = q ∗ < 1, but the provided evidence actually only
proves q < 1 and λ < 1, leaving the q −λ gap and the value of q ∗ free. Accordingly, Gabaix (2020) interprets
the same fact as evidence of a certain form of irrational inattention, or in terms of a model where q < 1 but
q ∗ = 1.
    This ambiguity is resolved by the combination of Bordalo et al. (2018) and Kohlhas and Broer (2018).
These papers provide evidence that, whereas forecast errors are positively related to past forecast revisions
at the aggregate level (as originally shown in Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2015), they are negatively related
at the individual level.
    The second fact, by itself, rejects rational expectations: with rational expectations, an individual’s fore-
cast error cannot be forecastable by his own past information. Furthermore, the sign of the documented
bias points towards individual over-reaction to own information. Kohlhas and Broer (2018) attribute such
over-reaction to the tendency of an individual to think that his information is more precisely than it ac-
tually is (“absolute over-confidence”). In the language of the simple model presented above, this means
q > q ∗ . Bordalo et al. (2018) propose a variant explanation, based on “representativeness bias,” which
though works in essentially the same way and, for our purposes, can also be captured by q > q ∗ .



                                                      64
    To match the first fact, or the under-reaction of the average forecasts, it is then necessary to have dis-
persed noisy information. To understand why, recall that this fact alone could be explained either by dis-
persed noisy information, as originally shown by Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015) themselves, or
by a bias that causes individual beliefs to under-react, as suggested by Gabaix (2020). But we just argued
that the bias in individual beliefs, as evidenced in the second fact, is of the opposite kind. The two facts
together therefore point towards the combination of over-confidence and dispersed noisy information,
which in the language of the model presented above means q ∗ < q < 1.
    Both Bordalo et al. (2018) and Kohlhas and Broer (2018) reach basically the same conclusion. Angeletos
and Huo (2020) further clarify why information has to be not only noisy but also dispersed: the aforemen-
tioned facts together imply one agent’s forecast error is predictable by the another agent’s information.
Angeletos and Huo (2020) also develop the precise mapping between these facts and a model that has a
similar formal structure as our framework—and that adds various extra features that are needed for quan-
titative purposes, including richer micro-foundations, long horizons and learning dynamics, but are of
course beyond the scope of our paper.
    More importantly for the present purposes,Kohlhas and Broer (2018) provide a third fact, which points
towards λ < q: individual forecasts over-react to consensus forecasts. This is consistent with the hy-
pothesis that the typical individual under-estimates the information of others and is thus “relatively over-
confident” in their own assessment. As mentioned in the main text, such a perception in being “better than
average” is described by psychologists in various contexts (see, for instance, Alicke and Govorun, 2005). In
our context, it translates into a lack of confidence in other agents’ attentiveness to forward guidance, or
λ < q.
    Of course, the literature reviewed here may not be the final word on what the best structural interpreta-
tion of the available evidence on expectations is. Also, this evidence need not be directly importable to the
context of interest. In particular, Garcıa-Schmidt and Woodford (2019) and Farhi and Werning (2019) argue
that, because this was the first time the United States had hit the ZLB context and nobody could draw from
past data to infer the GE effects of the various unconventional policies the Fed had to experiment with,
people may have naturally resorted to introspection and deductive (iterative) reasoning, of the kind seen
in experiments. If this argument is valid, it offers offers a more direct justification for our baseline anal-
ysis. Still, the evidence discussed above is complementary: not only it rejects the representative-agent,
rational-expectations benchmark but also favors, within the extension presented in this appendix,the par-
ticular scenario of λ < q and q ∗ < q, which in turn suffices for our main policy prescription to continue to
hold (Proposition 13) despite the presence of confounding distortions.


G.5 Proofs

Proof of Proposition 11

Note first the following properties of (µin , µτ , µY ), which can be verified by direct calculation:

   1. µτ = µin when γ = 0, and µτ > µin when γ ∈ (0, 1].



                                                        65
   2. µY = µin when γ = 1, and µY < µin when γ ∈ [0, 1)

Note finally that µY > 0 if and only if λ > 1 + q − 1/α, which by the same argument provided in Lemma 9
is always true if we have specified |δY | < 1 for all γ ∈ [0, 1]. As with the main result, we will focus on such a
case in the proof.
    Assume that the policymaker’s objective function is given by (95), where µin defines the slope of the
implementability constraint in the noisy rational expectations case of a given model (i.e., in which λ is set
equal to q).
    The objective in terms of the message slope r and the implementability slope µ is


                                        (1 − χ)(r − 1)2 + χ(r /µ − 1/µin )2

The optimal r in closed-form, as a function of other parameters, is
                                                                      µ
                                                       (1 − χ)µ2 + χ µin
                                             r (µ) =
                                                        (1 − χ)µ2 + χ

and the new objective function, in terms of (µ, µin ), is a function `0 :

                                                                    (µ − µin )2
                                   L = `(µ, µin ) ≡ χ(1 − χ)                                                 (96)
                                                               µin (µ2 (1 − χ) + χ)
                                                                2

    Note that the derivative of the loss function f with respect to γ comes through two components, and is

                                            ∂` ∂` ∂µ   ∂` ∂µin
                                              =      +                                                       (97)
                                            ∂γ ∂µ ∂γ ∂µin ∂γ
The two partial derivatives of ` are

                                   ∂`               (µ − µin )(µµin (1 − χ) + χ)
                                      = 2(1 − χ)(χ)
                                   ∂µ                   µ2 (µ2 (1 − χ) + χ)2
which is positive if and only if µ > µin , and

                                    ∂`                  µ       (µ − µin )
                                        = −2(1 − χ)(χ)    · 2 2
                                   ∂µin                µin µin (µ (1 − χ) + χ)
which is positive if µ < µin .
    Plugging the previous expressions into (97), we have that ∂`/∂γ > 0 is positive if µ > µin and

                                          ∂µ   µ µ2 (1 − χ) + χ ∂µin
                                             >                                                               (98)
                                          ∂γ µin µµin (1 − χ) + χ ∂γ
or if µ < µin and

                                          ∂µ   µ µ2 (1 − χ) + χ ∂µin
                                             <                                                               (99)
                                          ∂γ µin µµin (1 − χ) + χ ∂γ
    Finally, note that the partial derivative of µin with respect to γ is

                                         ∂µin        α2 (1 − q)λ
                                              =                      >0
                                          ∂γ    (1 − α + αq(1 − q))2

                                                          66
Monotonicity of loss with instrument communication. Note that the derivative of µτ in γ is given by
                                  ∂µτ               qα2 (1 − λ)
                                      =                                    >0
                                  ∂γ    (1 − α + qα(1 − αγ) − αγλ(1 − α))2
    Consider first this case q > λ which entails µτ > µin . A looser version of (98) is
                                             ∂µτ      µτ 2 ∂µin
                                                    µ     ¶
                                                  >
                                              ∂γ      µin      ∂γ
and this can be verified by “brute force”: the previous expression is

                                               (1 − λ) (1 − λαγ)2
                                                      >                                                    (100)
                                               (1 − q) (1 − qαγ)2
Note that an upper bound for the right-hand-side is given for γ = 1, or

                                                (1 − λ) (1 − λα)2
                                                       >
                                                (1 − q) (1 − qα)2
But this is guaranteed if we impose α < 1/2, which was consistent with |δY | > −1 on the entire domain of
study.
    Now consider q < λ. The loose version of (99) is

                                                ∂µτ     µτ 2 ∂µin
                                                      µ     ¶
                                                    <
                                                ∂γ      µin   ∂γ
because for µτ < µin the right-hand-side is a lower bound. From the exact same math of (100), the key
condition is now

                                               (1 − λ) (1 − λαγ)2
                                                      <                                                    (101)
                                               (1 − q) (1 − qαγ)2
which is satisfied for the exact same reason.
    Together, these arguments suffice to show that in any case, `(µτ , µin ) increases in γ. Note finally that
this loss function is 0 at γ = 0, where µτ = µin , and strictly positive at γ = 1, where µτ 6= µin .

Monotonicity of loss with target communication. The derivative of µY in γ is given by

                                          ∂µY        qα2 (1 − λ)
                                              =                      >0
                                           ∂γ   (1 − α + αλ(1 − γ))2
                                                                                                           ∂µY
First consider q > λ, which entails µY < µin . It is simple to show that (99) is never satisfied because    ∂γ   >
∂µin
 ∂γ , since

                                 ∂µY   (1 − λ) (1 − α + αq(1 − γ))2 ∂µin ∂µin
                                     =                                  >
                                  ∂γ   (1 − q) (1 − α + αλ(1 − γ))2 ∂γ    ∂γ
    Next consider the case q < λ, which entails µY > µin . Note that condition (98) is violated because

                         ∂µY   (1 − λ) (1 − α + αq(1 − γ))2 ∂µin ∂µin     µY 2 ∂µin
                                                                        µ     ¶
                             =                                  <     <
                          ∂γ   (1 − q) (1 − α + αλ(1 − γ))2 ∂γ    ∂γ      µin   ∂γ
Together, these arguments suffice to show that `(µY , µin ) decreases in γ. Note finally that this loss function
is 0 at γ = 1, where µY = µin , and strictly positive at γ = 0, where µY 6= µin .

                                                         67
Proving the threshold strategy. Given the monotonicities established above, proving the sought-after
result—that target communication is optimal if and only if γ > γ̂, for some γ̂ ∈ (0, 1)—requires only using
continuity arguments like in the proof of Theorem 2.


Proof of Proposition 12

First, we note the monotonicity of (µτ , µY ) in γ. The derivative of µτ with respect to γ is

                                                ∂µτ   1 αq(1 − λ)
                                                    = 2           >0
                                                ∂γ   µτ (1 − λγ)2
and the derivative of µY is
                                       ∂µY   1    αq(1 − α)(1 − λ)
                                           = 2                         >0
                                        ∂γ  µY (αq(δY − 1) − λδY + 1)2
    Next, we want to show that µτ > µY . The correct condition in terms of parameters is
                                   λα(1−γ)          1−αγ
                              1+    1−α      − αq    1−α                   1 − λαγ
                                                           ≤
                               1 − α + λα(1 − γ)               (1 − α)(1 − λαγ) + αq(1 − αγ)
Given that µY > 0, which is guaranteed like just as in Lemma 9, the left denominator is positive. The
other three terms are necessarily positive. Thus an equivalent statement, after cross-multiplying, is the
following:
                                                        αq(1 − αγ)
                                           µ                       ¶
             (1 − λαγ)(1 − α + λα(1 − γ)) ≥ (1 − λαγ) +              (1 − α + λα(1 − γ) − αq(1 − αγ)
                                                          1−α
Subtracting like terms from each side, and dividing by α > 0, yields the following condition:

                                                     (q − λ)(1 − αγ) ≥ 0

Hence q > λ and αγ < 1 are a sufficient condition for µτ > µY , and either q = λ or αγ = 1 are a sufficient
condition for µτ = µY .
    Finally, let us return to the proof of optimality. It is straightforward to solve the expression for µY for
some γ̃Y (α, λ, q) ∈ (0, 1] such that µY |γ=γ̃Y = 1. One can apply the argument in the proof of Theorem 2 to
the loss functions L τ (γ) and L Y (γ) on the domain [0, γ̃Y ]. There is some γ̂ ∈ [0, γ̃Y ) where the functions
cross.
    For γ ∈ (γ̃Y , 1), we know that (i) µY and µτ both increase in γ and (ii) µτ > µY . It is straightforward to
deduce that µτ > µ y > 1 for γ > γ̃Y (and hence L Y < L τ ), which shows the optimality of target communi-
cation and completes the proof.


Proof of Proposition 13

We proceed with the same parameter restriction assumed in the proof of Proposition 11. Note also that
the same expressions for the loss functions, the partial derivatives thereof, and sufficient conditions for
monotonicity of the loss function in γ still apply.
    Applying arguments from the proof of Proposition 11, it is simple also to show that µτ > µY and µin >
µY on this domain.

                                                                68
Case 1: q ∗ ≤ λ < q. In this case, µτ ≤ µin with equality only for q ∗ = λ and γ = 1, verified by the direct
calculation

                                                   1 − αλγ                1 − αq ∗ γ
                                                                    ≤                                             (102)
                                       (1 − α)(1 − αλγ) − qα(1 − αγ) 1 − α − q ∗ α(1 − γ)
In this case, we have µY < µτ ≤ µin , and all three increasing in γ. It follows that instrument communication
always produces less loss and is preferred on the entire domain γ ∈ [0, 1]. To see this, note that for µ < µin ,
the loss function is decreasing in µ.
                             q
Case 2: λ < q ∗ ≤         1+α(q−λ)   < q. Re-arrangement of (102), with this condition, again shows µτ ≤ µin with
                                                q
equality only at γ = 1 and q ∗ =             1+α(q−λ) .    Again, instrument communication is preferred on the entire
domain.
               q
Case 3:     1+α(q−λ)     < q ∗ < q and λ < q ∗ . In this final case, there exists a γ̌ such that µτ > µin for γ > γ̌ and
µτ ≤ µin for γ ≤ γ̌. The previous argument applies to show the optimality for instrument communication
for γ ≤ γ̌. For γ > γ̌, we want to show that the loss for instrument communication strictly increases and the
loss from target communication strictly decreases.
    From the proof of Proposition (11), a sufficient condition for the first is that

                                                           ∂µτ     µτ 2 ∂µin
                                                                 µ     ¶
                                                               >
                                                           ∂γ      µin   ∂γ
This condition simplifies to

                                                       q (1 − λ)       (1 − λαγ)2
                                                                     >
                                                       q ∗ (1 − q ∗ ) (1 − q ∗ αγ)2
Taking a lower bound on the left (with q/q ∗ ≥ 1) and an upper bound on the right (evaluating at γ = 1)
gives

                                                           (1 − λ)    (1 − λα)2
                                                                    >
                                                          (1 − q ∗ ) (1 − q ∗ α)2
which, as used in the proof of Proposition 11, will always hold for λ < q ∗ and α < 1/2. Thus we have shown
that Lτ (γ), the loss function associated with instrument communication, strictly increases for γ > γ̌.
    Next, a sufficient condition for LY (γ), the loss function from target communication, to decrease for
            ∂µY       ∂µin
γ > γ̌ is    ∂γ   >    ∂γ .   By direct calculation,

                                       ∂µY   q (1 − λ) (1 − α + αq ∗ (1 − γ))2 ∂µin ∂µin
                                           = ∗                                     >
                                        ∂γ  q (1 − q ∗ ) (1 − α + αλ(1 − γ))2 ∂γ     ∂γ
so this is always true.
    We have thus established that the difference in loss between target and instrument communication,
or ∆ ≡ LY (τ) − Lτ (τ), decreases in γ for γ > γ̌.
    Let the choice of target communication be a 0 or 1 indicator variable, c ≡ I{A ∗ = AY } = I{∆ < 0}. c
weakly decreases in ∆, so the choice of target communication weakly increases in γ for γ ∈ (γ̌, 1]. Because
c = 0 for any γ ∈ [0, γ̌], this completes the proof that c weakly increases in γ in [0, 1].


                                                                    69
H Sophisticated Forward Guidance and Policy Rules

H.1 Set-up

Assume that, after observing θ, the policymaker can commit to and communicate a flexible relation be-
tween the instrument τ and the outcome Y , given by

                                                            τ = T (Y ; θ),

for some function T : R2 → R.36 Without serious loss of generality, we restrict attention to linear reaction
functions of the form

                               T (Y ; θ) = a + bY ,        with        a = A(θ) and b = B (θ),                                (103)

                                                                         1+αγ
for arbitrary A(·) : R → R and B (·) : R → (b, 1), where b ≡           1−2α+αγ   < −1. The bounds on b are necessary and
sufficient for “reasoning to converge,” or for infinite-order beliefs not to have undue influence on behav-
ior.37 The simpler strategies considered in our baseline analysis are nested with b = 0 and a = τ̂ for instru-
ment communication, and b → −∞ and −a/b → Ŷ for target communication. With the flexibility added
here, forward guidance amounts to announcing, conditional on θ, a pair of numbers (a, b) = (A(θ), B (θ)),
or an intercept and a slope for the reaction function, instead of a single number τ̂ or Ŷ .38
    All assumptions about depth of knowledge and rationality now relate to agents’ understanding of the
function T, or the pair (a, b). In particular, Assumption 4 is adapted as follows: agents believe that only a
fraction λ ∈ [0, 1] of the others are both rational and aware of the actual (a, b), like themselves; the rest are
expected to play the “default” action k = 0, either because of inattention or because of irrationality.39


H.2 Optimal policy

In our main analysis, we contrasted how the choice between instrument and target communication was
irrelevant in the rational-expectations benchmark (λ = 1) to how it became crucial in managing expecta-
tions once we accommodated bounded rationality (λ < 1). The next result generalizes this insight to the
richer policy strategy space allowed here.
 36 Clearly, the outcomes implemented with such a policy rule coincide with those implemented with a rule of the form τ =

T (K ; θ), since Y is a (fixed) function of τ and K .
  37 See the proof of Proposition 15 for the details. In the New Keynesian framework, the analogue of b < 1 is the Taylor principle,

and the analogue of b > b is the additional bound on the slope of the Taylor rule identified by Guesnerie (2008) as necessary and
sufficient for the unique linear REE of that model to be also the unique rationalizable outcome.
  38 This interpretation is under the maintained timing, which has the policymaker choose and communicate the scalars (a, b) af-

ter observing θ. But the same outcomes obtain also with an alternative timing that has the policymaker choose and communicate
the entire mappings (A(·), B (·)) prior to observing θ. The first perspective seems more natural in the context of forward guidance
and under the interpretation of θ as the policymaker’s current assessment of the best thing to do. The second perspective is more
appropriate for connecting to the macroeconomic literature on policy rules and for re-interpreting θ as a future shock. Finally,
note that for now we are allowing both the intercept and the slope of the policy rule to vary with θ, but below we will show that
optimality requires that only the intercept varies with θ.
 39 This specification imposes λ ≤ 1. But the results stated below readily extend to λ > 1, or a situation where agents over-estimate

the responses of others and the GE effects of policy, along the lines of Section 5.3.


                                                                  70
Proposition 14. Consider a reaction function T and let Y (θ) and τ(θ) be, respectively, the induced equilib-
rium values of the outcomes and the supporting policies (together, “allocations”). Next, consider any other
reaction function T 0 such that T 0 (Y (θ), θ) = T (Y (θ), θ) for all θ.

   (i) When λ = 1, T 0 induces the same equilibrium outcomes and policies as T.

  (ii) When instead λ < 1, T 0 induces different equilibrium outcomes and policies than T.

    Part (i) is familiar from the existing literature on Ramsey problems, in which there is often a large
family of policy rules that implement the same equilibrium allocations and policies. The analogue of this
property in the 3-equation New Keynesian model is also well known: there are multiple combinations of a
state-contingent intercept and a slope for the Taylor rule that implement the same equilibrium paths for
output, inflation, and interest rates.40
    Part (ii) shows that this kind of irrelevance breaks once we bound agents’ depth of knowledge and ratio-
nality. Fix T and let θ 7→ (τ∗ (θ), Y ∗ (θ)) be the equilibrium mapping from states to allocations implemented
by T. Next take any other T 0 that satisfies T 0 (Y ∗ (θ), θ) = τ∗ (θ). This property guarantees that agents find it
optimal to play the same action under T 0 as under T insofar as long as they conjecture that T 0 continues
to induce the same allocations as T. When λ = 1, one can close the loop to prove this conjecture is self-
fulfilling and hence that T 0 induces the same behavior as T. But once λ < 1, agents doubt that others make
the same conjecture. This causes them to form different expectations about K under T 0 than under under
T, which in turn leads them to follow different behavior under T 0 than under T .
    In short, the above result generalizes our earlier insights about the role of policy in regulating the error
in the public’s reasoning and its footprint on actual behavior. The upshot for optimality is given below:

Proposition 15.          (i) When λ = 1, the optimal rule is indeterminate and its slope can be anything: the
       first best is implemented if and only if the intercept satisfies a = (1 − b)θ, for an arbitrary (possibly
       θ-contingent) slope b.

  (ii) When instead λ 6= 1, the optimal rule is unique and its slope is inversely related to the GE feedback: the
       first best is implemented if and only if

                                                     γ                          1
                                             b=−                and       a=       θ         ∀θ.                     (104)
                                                    1−γ                        1−γ

    With rational expectations, optimality requires that τ = Y = θ, but there is a continuum of policy rules
that induce this as an equilibrium. The analogue in the New Keynesian model (without a binding ZLB
and markup shocks) is that the first best can be implemented with a continuum of Taylor rules, whose
state-contingent intercept tracks the natural rate of interest and whose non-contingent slope with respect
to inflation or the output gap is indeterminate.
    With bounded rationality, this indeterminacy disappears. The slope of the optimal rule is now inversely
tied to the strength of the GE feedback, in a way that smooths out our baseline main result (Theorem 2): as
 40 The most applied segment of the New Keynesian literature (e.g., that on estimated DSGE models) often removes the state-

contingency of the intercept of the Taylor rule. We return to this issue at the end of this section.


                                                                  71
γ increases, the policymaker gives more emphasis on anchoring the public’s expectations of Y rather than
their expectations of τ.
    To see this more clearly, let us first re-express the optimal rule as follows:
                                                                   γ
                                                       τ−θ = −        (Y − θ).
                                                                  1−γ

From this perspective, the optimal forward guidance consists of two components: the policymaker’s as-
sessment of the “fundamentals” and of the corresponding “rational” outcome (e.g., the central bank’s fore-
cast about the natural rate of output) in the form of θ; and a commitment about how much she will tolerate
a gap in terms of τ versus a gap in terms of Y . Building on our discussion of categorizing policy commu-
nication in Appendix XX, the former piece might be reflected in the policymaker’s overall outlook (e.g., as
reflected in the Summary of Economic Projections and dot plots), whereas the latter requires an explicit
discussion of policy’s contingency on different outcomes. The latter piece, our analysis shows, is required
to achieve the first best—forecasts, by themselves, cannot do the job.
    The next result expands on how policy optimally manages the expectations of interest rates and aggre-
gate employment when both of them are distorted due to bounded rationality:

Proposition 16. Let f τ (γ) ≡ |τ − Ē[τ]| and f Y (γ) ≡ |Y − Ē[Y ]| denote the aggregate errors in the expectations
of, respectively, the instrument and the outcome, evaluated at the optimal policy, as functions of γ. Then, for
all γ ∈ (0, 1): (i) f τ (γ) > 0 and f Y (γ) > 0; (ii) f τ0 (·) > 0, and f Y0 (·) < 0.

    The first property shows that, away from the extreme values of γ, the optimal policy is never completely
clear: it does not eliminate the mistakes in either kind of expectations. This might be surprising given
the previous discussion of “forecasts plus commitments”—in this interpretation, if the Fed had provided
forecasts and a dot plot that described τ = Y = θ, its optimal forward guidance would induce the public to
think something else.
    The second property shows that policy shifts clarity from τ to Y as the GE feedback increases. This
makes even clearer how the optimal policy rule “smooths out” the main insight of Theorem 2 about switch-
ing the spotlight from instruments to targets, or from interest rates to unemployment.
    Although the optimal rule does not eliminate the mistakes in people’s reasoning about equilibrium,
under the assumptions made thus far it insulates their actual behavior from such reasoning and recovers
the policymaker’s first best. The intuition is similar to the one developed for the extremes γ = 0 and γ = 1
in our baseline analysis, except that it now extends to interior γ: the optimal rule zeros out equilibrium
reasoning about others’ reactions.41
    One should not take the present result too literally. First, there may be costs (left outside our analy-
sis) for communicating sophisticated strategies. Second, if the policymaker is uncertain about the precise
value of γ, the policymaker implements a “second-best approximation” of the policy described in Propo-
sition 15: the first best is not attainable any more, but the optimal b increases (in the sense of first-order
 41 In the language of best-response condition (7), the optimal rule ensures a zero slope on E [K ]. This implements the first best
                                                                                              i
without correctly anchoring beliefs about either the instrument or target, but instead by making sure that the distortions in those
beliefs are exactly irrelevant for choices.


                                                                   72
stochastic dominance) in the policymaker’s beliefs about γ. We expect a related result to hold in a multi-
decision extension with limited policy instruments: the policymaker would try to eliminate the distortion
in all decisions, but might succeed in doing so for only some.
    But the basic logic is always the same. The optimal policy aims at minimizing the public’s need to
reason about the economy. And this is achieved by shifting emphasis from anchoring the public’s ex-
pectations of τ (“interest rates”) to anchoring the public’s expectations of Y (“unemployment”) as the GE
feedback increases.


H.3 Optimal policy without commitment

We now expand on the role played by commitment. In the absence of commitment, the policymaker
chooses τ in stage 2 so as to minimize L subject to condition (1), taking K as given. This gives the following
optimality condition, which trades off the marginal effect of the policy on the two “gaps:”

                                      (1 − χ)(τ − θ) + χ(Y − θ)(1 − α) = 0;

Rearranging gives the follow ex post optimal reaction function:

                                                  1−αχ    χ(1−α)
                                             τ=    1−χ θ − 1−χ Y .                                            (105)

The coefficients of this reaction function do not depend on the parameter γ, which determined how ex-
pectations of τ and Y mapped to K , because K itself is already determined. By contrast, the optimal policy
rule with commitment, given in (104), depends on γ precisely because it internalizes the effect it has on
public reasoning and thereby on K .
                                               χ(1−α)        γ
    Except for the knife-edge case in which     1−χ     =   1−γ ,   the two rules are different. Commitment is nec-
essary for implementing the first best—but only insofar as there is a distortion in equilibrium reasoning
(λ 6= 1). When instead λ = 1, the following class of rules implements the first best under full commitment
and rational expectations:
                                           τ = (1 + b) − bY , for any b
                                          ©                             ª


But this class now includes the policy rule in (105), which means that commitment is not needed under
rational expectations.
    When the policymaker follows (105) and agents have rational expectations, agents correctly expect that
all others will play K = θ and that this together with (105) will induce τ = Y = θ. But once λ 6= 1, this rule
causes agents to believe that K 6= θ, which in turn distorts their behavior away from the first best. The only
way to fix this distortion is to make sure that agents find it optimal to play the first best action regardless
of their beliefs of K (or regardless of their higher-order beliefs), which in turn is possible if and only if the
policymaker commits to the rule described in (105).
    We summarize these lessons below.

Proposition 17. In the absence of commitment, the unique optimal policy rule is given by

                                                  1−αχ    χ(1−α)
                                             τ=    1−χ θ − 1−χ Y .                                            (106)

                                                        73
                                                                                                         χ(1−α)
This implements the first best when λ = 1 but not when λ 6= 1 (except for the knife-edge case in which    1−χ     =
 γ
1−γ   or θ = 0).

Corollary 5. Commitment is valuable only when λ 6= 1 (away from rational expectations). In these circum-
stances, the rule described in (105) is ex ante optimal, even though ex post suboptimal, because and only
because the commitment embedded in it helps regulate the distortion in equilibrium reasoning.

      Of course, the property that commitment is useless under rational expectations is special to our model.
There is a large literature in macroeconomics studying time-inconsistency issues under rational expecta-
tions in the context of both flexible policy rules (Kydland and Prescott, 1977; Barro and Gordon, 1983) and
simpler, instruments-versus-targets implementations (Atkeson, Chari and Kehoe, 2007; Halac and Yared,
2018). But by assuming away these familiar considerations, we have illustrated a new function that com-
mitment can play away from rational expectations.
      Circling back to our baseline analysis, this also makes clear the following point: what was crucial about
the two kinds of forward guidance studied there is that they communicated a policy plan (i.e., a com-
mitment to get something done) as opposed to information about fundamentals (e.g., the central bank’s
forecasts of future fundamentals).


H.4 Proofs

Proofs of Propositions 14 and 15

For a policy rule to implement the first best, it is necessary that T (θ, θ) = θ, which restricts a and b as
follows:
                                                     a = (1 − b)θ.

We can henceforth focus on the class of policy rules that satisfy this restriction. This is a one-dimensional
class indexed by b.
      Solving (103) and (1) jointly for τ and Y , using a = (1 − b)θ, and substituting the solution into (2), we
obtain the following game representation for the agents’ behavior in stage 1:

                                               k i = (1 − δ)θ + δEi [K ]                                    (107)

where
                                                            α(γ + b(1 − γ))
                                         δ = δ(b; α, γ) ≡                   .
                                                             1 − (1 − α)b
                                                                  1+αγ
Note that δ ∈ (−1, +1) if and only if b ∈ (b, +1), where b ≡    1−2α+αγ    < −1. This explains the assumed bounds
imposed on b : outside these bounds, “reasoning fails to converge” (this is the present analogue of the
restriction δ X ∈ (−1, +1), X ∈ {τ, Y }, in the baseline analysis).
      Consider now the case with rigid beliefs from higher-order doubts, as in Section 3.3. Iterating the best
response (107) yields the unique equilibrium average action as
                                               ∞                      1−δ
                                                    δh−1 λh−1 ζθ =          θ,
                                               X
                                         K=                                                                 (108)
                                              h=1                    1 − λδ

                                                          74
with δ = δ(b; α, γ) defined above. For this to coincide with the first best action, it is therefore necessary and
sufficient that
                                                              1−δ
                                                                    =1
                                                             1 − λδ
Clearly, this is automatically satisfied when λ = 1 (rational expectations), regardless the value of δ, or equiv-
alently of b. This verifies the indeterminacy of the optimal policy rule under rational expectations. When
instead λ < 1, the above is satisfied if and only if δ = 0, or equivalently b = −γ/(1−γ). Along with a = (1−b)θ,
this completes the characterization of the unique policy rule that implements the first best once λ < 1.42


Proof of Proposition 16

Note that Ē[K ] = Ei [K ] = λK by an argument essentially identical to the one supporting Lemma 2. Eval-
uated at the equilibrium under optimal policy, this is Ē[K ] = λθ. The expected policy instrument and
outcome, evaluated at the optimal rule, are

                                                              θ   γ
                                                   Ē[τ] =      −    Ē[Y ]
                                                             1−γ 1−γ
                                                   Ē[Y ] = (1 − α)Ē[τ] + αλθ

Solving this system of equations gives

                                                          1 − λαγ
                                                  Ē[τ] =          ·θ
                                                           1 − αγ
                                                          1 − α + αλ(1 − γ)
                                                 Ē[Y ] =                   ·θ
                                                                1 − αγ

Recall also that the equilibrium satisfies τ = Y = θ.
    The instrument forecast gap as a function of γ is

                                                                      ¯ (1 − λ) ¯
                                                                      ¯           ¯
                                             f τ (γ) ≡ |τ − Ē[τ]| = ¯¯        αγ¯¯ · |θ|
                                                                        1 − αγ

which satisfies f τ (0) = 0 and f τ0 (γ) > 0 for γ ∈ (0, 1). This obviously implies f τ (γ) > 0 for γ ∈ (0, 1). Similarly
the target forecast gap is
                                                                  ¯ (1 − λ)
                                                                  ¯                  ¯
                                         f Y (γ) ≡ |Y − Ē[Y ]| = ¯         α(1 − γ)¯¯ · |θ|
                                                                                     ¯
                                                                  ¯
                                                                    1 − αγ
which satisfies f Y (1) = 0 and f Y0 (γ) < 0 for γ ∈ (0, 1). This obviously implies f Y (γ) > 0 for γ ∈ (0, 1).
    Finally, going slightly beyond the original statement of the Proposition, it is simple to see that the
instrument gap is always smaller for γ < 0: f τ (γ) > f Y (γ) since |1 − γ| > |γ|. This generalizes our results for
the optimality of instrument communication with negative GE effects.




 42 Clearly, the argument extends to λ > 1, modulo the re-interpretation of the friction along the lines of Section 5.3.



                                                                 75
