NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BLOCKCHAIN ECONOMICS
Joseph Abadi
Markus Brunnermeier
Working Paper 25407
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25407

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2018

We are grateful for an insightful discussion by Gur Huberman and helpful comments from
Zhiguo He, Stephen Morris, Ulrich Müller, Wolfgang Pesendorfer, and seminar participants at
the NYU Five Star Conference, the SEC, the University of Chicago, the Wharton School at the
University of Pennsylvania, the Princeton Department of Computer Science, the St. Louis Fed,
the Princeton Department of Economics, the NYU Intermediation Conference, and the BIS. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25407.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2018 by Joseph Abadi and Markus Brunnermeier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Blockchain Economics
Joseph Abadi and Markus Brunnermeier
NBER Working Paper No. 25407
December 2018
JEL No. D82,E42,G29
ABSTRACT
When is record-keeping better arranged through a blockchain than through a traditional
centralized intermediary? The ideal qualities of any record-keeping system are (i) correctness, (ii)
decentralization, and (iii) cost efficiency. We point out a blockchain trilemma: no ledger can
satisfy all three properties simultaneously. A centralized record-keeper extracts rents due to its
monopoly on the ledger. Its franchise value dynamically incentivizes correct reporting.
Blockchains drive down rents by allowing for free entry of record-keepers and portability of
information to competing “forks.” Blockchains must, therefore, provide static incentives for
correctness through computationally expensive proof-of-work algorithms and permit recordkeepers to roll back history in order to undo fraudulent reports. While blockchains can keep track
of ownership transfers, enforcement of possession rights is often better complemented by
centralized record-keeping.

Joseph Abadi
Princeton University
jaabadi@Princeton.EDU
Markus Brunnermeier
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08544
and CEPR
and also NBER
markus@princeton.edu

1

Introduction
Traditionally, records have been maintained by centralized entities. Blockchain has pro-

vided us with a radical alternative to record information. It has the potential to be as
groundbreaking as the invention of double-entry bookkeeping in fourteenth-century Italy.
Blockchain could revolutionize record-keeping of financial transactions and ownership data.
It is of paramount importance that a ledger record all information correctly, i.e., it should
be devoid of fraud. In this paper we point out a “blockchain trilemma”: a ledger’s correctness
requires either the remittance of rents to a centralized entity or a pure waste of physical
resources. Hence, it is impossible for any ledger to simultaneously satisfy the following three
properties (depicted in Figure 1): (i) correctness, (ii) decentralization, and (iii) cost efficiency.

Figure 1: The blockchain trilemma.
Centralized record-keeping systems provide incentives to report honestly through the
managing entity’s franchise value. That is, this entity is dynamically incentivized to report
honestly because it fears jeopardizing its future profits. As a result, centralized ledgers are
often managed by monopolists that extract distortionary rents from the ledger’s users.
Centralized record-keeping limits competition in two ways. First, only one entity is permitted to write on the ledger, so record-keepers cannot enter freely. Thus, the record-keeper
cannot be disciplined internally: its incentives must stem from users’ ability to switch to an
outside ledger. Second, information is not portable: an entrant is not necessarily able to
introduce a competing ledger containing all the information in the incumbent’s. The lack
2

of information portability induces increased switching costs for users. These two features
protect centralized record-keepers and promote the extraction of rent.
Blockchains are a type of distributed ledger written by decentralized and usually anonymous groups of agents rather than known centralized parties. This novel method of recordkeeping has introduced two economic innovations that overcome the two limitations of competition among centralized ledgers. There is free entry of record-keepers: any agent may
write on the ledger so long as they follow a certain set of established rules. Furthermore, information on an existing blockchain is portable to a competing one. A software developer can
propose to “fork off” an existing blockchain to establish one with different policies while retaining all the information contained in the original blockchain. Fork competition eliminates
the inefficiencies arising from switching costs in centralized record-keeping systems.
The features of blockchains that allow for enhanced competition are a double-edged sword.
While centralized record-keepers are incentivized dynamically through their rents, free entry
erodes these rents and necessitates a static mechanism to discipline bad actors. Since anybody can become a record-keeper (or miner) for a public blockchain, a consensus mechanism
is needed to determine the true history written on the ledger (and reject fraudulent reports).
Applying a majority rule is complicated by the fact that individual entities can masquerade
as a large number of entities for free, subverting the democratic nature of the blockchain.
Incentives to report honestly are instead provided through the imposition of a physical resource cost to write on the blockchain, making it costly to distort the ledger. Record-keepers
must typically perform computationally expensive tasks in order to record information and
validate others’ reports. This consensus algorithm, known as proof-of-work (PoW), is responsible for the recent emergence of blockchains. It accomplishes the reduction of distortionary
rents only by replacing those rents with socially wasteful electricity costs.
The PoW consensus algorithm is facilitated by the third economically important innovation of blockchains: the ability to roll back history. Those who attempt to commit fraud,
censor information on the blockchain, or unilaterally change the rules are disciplined by other
record-keepers, who may refuse to validate their reports. The community of record-keepers
simply needs to identify the time of the attack and ignore all information reported after that
time, thereby reverting the blockchain to a previous state. Such discipline may even be applied after a “51% attack” in which a record-keeper with a large amount of computational
power attempts to report a valid history of events that conflicts with previous reports. This
ability to roll back can be viewed as a conceptually distinct type of forking, where instead of
creating new rules, the blockchain community creates a fork to undo the effects of a distortion of the ledger. The ease of rebuffing an attack provides strong static incentives to follow
protocol. This internal discipline of dishonest reporting is significantly more robust than the

3

security guarantees of centralized ledgers, which rely on the existence of some external option
to which users may switch if the ledger writer acts dishonestly.
In addition to analyzing the fundamental differences between blockchains and centralized
ledgers, we apply our model of ledger competition to evaluate the benefits of blockchain in
several applications of interest. While in most of our analysis we assume that users use
only one ledger for analytical tractability, our qualitative results extend to an environment
in which users can exchange several different currencies. We show that fork competition
among cryptocurrencies is much fiercer than traditional currency competition (à la Hayek).
Fork competition endows users of an established cryptocurrency with equal amounts of the
newly created one, giving them a greater incentive to acquire information about and adopt
the competing currency. By contrast, if users of an established currency are required to
purchase the new currency from an outside issuer as in Hayekian competition, there is less
of an incentive to adopt, which renders coordination on the new currency more difficult.
In between the polar cases of completely centralized traditional ledgers and completely decentralized blockchains, there is a third type of ledger called a “permissioned” blockchain that
shows promise in many practical settings. The record-keepers of a permissioned blockchain
are known agents rather than anonymous miners, so proof-of-work is unnecessary. Permissioned blockchains then seemingly break the trilemma: they allow for fork competition, like
anonymous blockchains, but completely eliminate the waste of resources. We show that the
impediments to entry of record-keepers on a permissioned blockchain substantially weaken
fork competition. Permissioned record-keepers have franchise values and therefore can collude to prevent competing forks from surviving, whereas dynamic punishment schemes that
sustain collusion are impossible when there is free entry of record-keepers.
Finally, we make the important point that while blockchains guarantee transfers of ownership, some sort of enforcement is required to ensure transfers of possession. For example,
in a housing market, the owner of the house is the person whose name is on the deed, but
the possessor of the house is the person who resides in it. The buyer of the deed needs to
be certain that once she holds the deed, her ownership of the house will be enforced. In the
stock market, the purchaser of a share has ownership of future dividends but not necessarily
possession, since the delivery of dividends needs to be enforced. Broadly, blockchains can
record obligations. Punishing those who default on their obligations is another matter. While
it is difficult to provide static incentives for blockchain record-keepers to impose discipline
on users of the ledger, centralized intermediaries’ incentives can be appropriately aligned: if
a centralized intermediary fails to guarantee transfers of possession, the ledger’s users can
abandon the ledger, destroying the intermediary’s franchise value.
Blockchains have applications that reach far beyond the realm of cryptocurrencies and

4

tokens. For instance, blockchains could be used in the fintech space to track consumers’
transaction and credit histories. Permissioned blockchains have also been suggested as a tool
to manage supply chains and track the delivery of items in real time. There are several
potential applications of blockchains that, if pursued, will require enforcement by intermediaries or legal entities. Banks could use blockchains to track interbank loans or manage their
clients’ collateral, both of which require mechanisms to ensure debtors will repay their creditors. Governments may also turn to blockchains to maintain land registries, which could be
useful in developing countries where the primary institutional friction is overly bureaucratic
record-keeping processes, but this seems unlikely to be helpful when the issue is instead that
the government enforces ownership selectively.
Related Literature. Our paper is related to the emergent literature on the economic
properties and implications of blockchains. The paper most closely related to ours is that
by Biais et al. (2017), which studies coordination among miners in a blockchain-based system. They show that while the strategy of mining the longest chain proposed by Nakamoto
(2008) is in fact an equilibrium, there are other equilibria in which the blockchain forks, as
observed empirically. In that model, forks occur for several reasons and are interpreted as
causing instability. Record-keepers’ payoffs when forking depend exogenously on the number
of record-keepers who choose a given branch of the fork. In our model, we instead place
most of the focus on coordination among users. Record-keepers’ payoffs are determined by
users’ actions, and a global games refinement of the game played among users puts more
discipline on exactly how and when a fork may occur. Budish (2018) studies the costs of
incentivizing honesty for cryptocurrency blockchains in isolation, whereas our work compares
the cost of securing a blockchain to that of securing a centralized ledger. Cong and He (2017)
focus mostly on the issue of how ledger transparency leads to a greater scope for collusion
between users of the system. In contrast, we consider collusion between the blockchain’s
record-keepers rather than between users and show that collusion can occur only when entry
of record-keepers is constrained.
Our framework uses a global game of the type pioneered by Carlsson and van Damme
(1993) in order to select a unique equilibrium of the coordination game played by users.
Rather than review the massive literature on global games here, we refer the reader to Morris
and Shin (2001) for an extensive and general analysis of the global games framework. We
use techniques from the more recent literature on global games with non-Gaussian private
values pioneered by Sakovics and Steiner (2012) and advanced by Drozd and Serrano-Padial
(2017). This framework is extended and generalized in Serrano-Padial (2018). Our work is
also related to the recent literature on the importance of network externalities in blockchain
payment systems. Sockin and Xiong (2018) show that strategic complementarities in cryp-

5

tocurrency holdings lead to fragile equilibria with different cryptocurrency prices. Cong, Li,
and Wang (2018) argue that expectations of growth in a blockchain’s participation impact the
current price of its native token. Our paper differs from these studies in that we analyze the
importance of network externalities for arbitrary blockchains rather than just cryptocurrency
blockchains and show that these externalities interact with the replicability of information
on a blockchain in an important way.
Some of the recent literature on blockchains in economics focuses on the security and
the costs of the system. Huberman, Leshno, and Moallemi (2017) study transaction fees
in Bitcoin and compare that environment to one with a monopolistic intermediary, as we
do. They also emphasize the role of free entry and conclude that the blockchain market
structure completely eliminates the rents that a monopolist would extract in an identical
market. Easley, O’Hara, and Basu (2017) use a game-theoretic framework to analyze the
emergence of transaction fees in Bitcoin and the implications of these fees for mining costs.
The R&D race between Bitcoin mining pools is described in Gans, Ma, and Tourky (2018),
who argue that regulation of Bitcoin mining would reduce the overall costs of the system
and improve welfare. We depart from these analyses by endogenizing the mechanism used
by the blockchain: in our model, users of the system essentially choose between competing
mechanisms on different branches of a blockchain fork. The cost of implementing a given
mechanism is pinned down by the free-entry condition.
We also relate to the literature on cryptocurrencies. Chiu and Koeppl (2017) develop a
macroeconomic model in which the sizes of cryptocurrency transactions are capped by the
possibility of a double-spend attack and derive optimal compensation schemes for recordkeepers. Schilling and Uhlig (2018) study cryptocurrency pricing in a monetary model and
derive necessary conditions for speculation to occur in equilibrium. Pagnotta and Buraschi
(2018) derive a pricing framework for cryptocurrencies that explicitly accounts for the interplay between demand for the currency and the cryptographic security provided by miners.
Recent computer science literature has studied blockchain security extensively. Most
papers in computer science, such as that by Gervais et al. (2016), study how to defend
against “double-spend” attacks or other types of attacks that could be undertaken by a
single individual who holds control over a large portion of the network’s computing power.
The conclusion of studies in the computer science literature is that a large fraction of the
blockchain record-keepers must always play honestly in order for the network to be secure.
In contrast, we do not assume any record-keepers are compelled to play honestly and study
a slightly more general class of attacks in which one record-keeper overwhelms the rest of
the network. Our model shows that the cost of operating a blockchain is intrinsically linked
to the cost of preventing attacks, no matter what they may be. Furthermore, the ability to

6

roll back history acts as an additional safeguard against attacks: the community of users and
record-keepers may coordinate to ignore an attacker’s reports even if those reports follow the
protocols outlined in the blockchain’s source code. That is, even if a given reported history is
cryptographically sound, it may be the case that market participants recognize that everyone
would be better off reverting to an earlier state.
Finally, our paper is related to the literature on optimal intermediation structures. Most
notably, Diamond (1984) shows that when monitoring is costly, it is most efficient to use
a single intermediary. In contrast, in our framework it may be optimal to have several
intermediaries because competition in writing on the ledger yields outcomes that are more
desirable for the blockchain’s users. In the computer science literature, Wüst and Gervais
(2017) study the applicability of blockchain to several markets from an informal standpoint.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the basics of blockchain
technology. In Section 3, we present the baseline model of a static choice between ledgers and
illustrate how rents emerge under centralized record-keeping without information portability.
We analyze a specific example where agents choose between two branches of a blockchain fork
and another example in which agents choose between traditional ledgers in order to spell out
the tradeoff between decentralization and cost efficiency. Section 4 discusses how free entry
of record-keepers benefits competition. Section 5 presents a model of ledger security and
investigates the incentive mechanisms required to ensure correctness for both a centralized
ledger and a blockchain. Section 6 examines the distinction between ownership and possession
as well as the feasibility of enforcing contracts recorded on a blockchain. Section 7 concludes.

2

Blockchain Technology
In this section we outline how blockchains work and discuss the distinguishing features of

blockchains with anonymous record-keepers.

2.1

What is a blockchain?

A blockchain is a ledger in which agents known as nodes (or miners, or record-keepers) take
turns recording information sequentially in data structures known as blocks. This information
could consist of payment histories, contracts outlining wagers between anonymous parties, or
data on ownership of domain names, among other applications. In principle, it is possible to
use a blockchain in any application where it is necessary to record information. As will be
discussed later, there are many possible algorithms to select the current record-keeper. The
ledger consists of a tree of blocks that contains all the information recorded by miners starting

7

from the first block, which is called the genesis block. Each branch of the tree corresponds
to a chain leading back to the genesis block (hence the name “blockchain”).
On any blockchain, there are some rules that users and record-keepers tacitly agree to
follow. These rules are written into the code distributed by the software developers for that
blockchain. They include (but are not limited to) the cryptographic standards that must
be followed when recording information, the types of information that may be recorded in
a block, and the miners’ compensation scheme. In general, blockchain security algorithms
make it inexpensive for record-keepers to confirm that the rules are being followed. Nakamoto
(2008) specifies that all other record-keepers should ignore any chain containing a block that
does not conform to the proposed rules.
A chain of blocks leading back to the genesis summarizes a state. Ledger users and recordkeepers must reach a consensus about which state is considered to be the current state. Hence,
the rules followed by nodes must constitute a consensus algorithm. The consensus algorithm
must coordinate nodes even when the network has some latency and not all nodes receive
messages in the same order. Typically, the community coordinates on the longest valid
chain of blocks as the current state, as suggested in Nakamoto (2008). Each record-keeper
is periodically allowed to add a block to the tree. Record-keepers usually extend only the
consensus chain, and users will act only in response to events on that chain. A record-keeper’s
decision to extend a given chain can be seen as a signal that the record-keeper accepts that
chain as valid; that is, it is a tacit “vote” in favor of that chain. Record-keepers are rewarded
for achieving consensus through users’ acceptance of the chain extended. In general, recordkeepers accrue rewards (stemming from the system) and record-keeping fees (paid by users)
for each block added to the tree, so these rewards are realized only if those fees are on the
consensus chain.
In principle, however, it is possible for users and record-keepers to coordinate on a chain
other than the longest one or even for different communities to coordinate on separate chains.
A hard fork occurs when part (or all) of the community decides to change the rules governing
the blockchain. To do so, they start a competing blockchain that builds off of the old chain,
but they ignore any record-keepers who do not follow the new rules. Similarly, record-keepers
who use the old rules will ignore all record-keepers who use the new ones, so the blockchain
effectively forks and becomes two blockchains: one blockchain that uses the established rules
and a competing blockchain that uses the new ones. The data contained in the established
blockchain up until the point of the competing blockchain’s birth is included in the competing blockchain, but neither blockchain uses data that was recorded on the other after the
fork occurred. Hard forks will feature prominently in our model and will intensify competition between ledgers by allowing information from the original blockchain to be ported to a

8

competing ledger.
Several important hard forks have taken place in cryptocurrency blockchains. For example, in 2016 the Ethereum community split after a hack that stole $55 million from investors
in a contract on that blockchain. Some Ethereum users argued that the currency should be
returned to the investors, whereas others believed the blockchain should be immutable. The
users who believed the currency should be returned ignored all blocks occurring after the
hack and built their own chain on which the hack never occurred. After this point, both sides
began ignoring the blocks built by the other side, and each part of the community considered
only its own chain to be the valid chain. Other examples include the hard forks that created
Bitcoin Gold and Bitcoin Cash, two cryptocurrencies that modified the rules governing the
original Bitcoin blockchain.
In our model we also consider attacks on the blockchain. An attack on a blockchain
involves the addition of blocks that are somehow invalid or reverse previous accepted transactions. Either the blocks contain outright fraudulent transactions, or they are added somewhere other than the end of the longest valid chain. It is clear that attackers stand to gain
by adding fraudulent transactions to their blocks simply because such a strategy allows them
to steal from others as long as other users and record-keepers go along with the attack, but
these attacks are usually detected automatically by all users of the system. It is perhaps less
obvious why an attacker would want to add valid blocks somewhere other than at the end of
the longest chain. The key observation is that this type of attack permits dishonest actors to
reverse transactions or records written on the longest valid chain. If an attacker or group of
attackers controls the majority of the network’s computing power, eventually the length of
the attackers’ chain will exceed that of the other chain. At this point it becomes the longest
valid chain. All record-keepers, both the honest ones and the attackers, then write on the
attackers’ chain.
In cryptocurrency blockchains, this type of attack is commonly referred to as a “doublespend.” An attacker will spend some currency on the longest valid chain, wait to obtain the
goods purchased, and then begin building an alternative chain on which the currency was
never spent, absconding with both the goods and the money. Double-spends are one of the
largest security concerns of the cryptocurrency community. This type of attack is also possible
when the blockchain in question handles assets other than currency. For example, a financial
institution that loses money on a trade may wish to reverse the history of transactions
including that trade. Our model embeds double spending, but it encompasses a broader class
of attacks.1
1

For instance, one could also consider an attack on light clients (such as the ones used on mobile devices)
that do not store and thus are unable to verify the entire history of transactions. An attacker could, in theory,
bombard these clients with fraudulent messages that they cannot detect as invalid.

9

2.2

The types of blockchains

There are three main types of blockchains. In a private blockchain, a single centralized
entity has complete control over what is written on the ledger. That is, there is only one
record-keeper. The users in this situation could be the public, the entity’s clients, or a
regulator. Different groups may also have different types of read privileges on the ledger:
for example, a regulator would likely need to see the entire ledger, whereas a client may be
content to see only those transactions that are relevant to her. There is no need for identity
management with a private blockchain, since only one entity is permitted to write on the
ledger. Therefore, there are no computational costs and the system functions similarly to
a privately maintained database that gives read privileges to outsiders. In this system, the
record-keeper is disciplined entirely by the users, who may decide to punish the record-keeper
in some way if the record-keeper changes the ledger’s rules (or fee structure) or if they detect
some sort of fraudulent activity. One way in which this sort of punishment could arise in
reality is if an online platform like Amazon decides to raise subscription rates for vendors,
and vendors respond by switching to a competitor.
A permissioned blockchain is one in which the ledger’s write privilege is granted not to
one entity, but to a consortium of entities. These entities govern the policies of the blockchain
and are the only ones permitted to propagate and verify transactions. The read privilege may
be granted to the public or kept private to some extent. The permissioned record-keepers
take turns adding blocks to the chain according to a predefined algorithm, so again costly
identity management is unnecessary. The record-keepers on a permissioned blockchain are
disciplined by users, just as in a private blockchain, but they are also disciplined by other
record-keepers. If one record-keeper deviates and begins validating fraudulent ledger entries
by including them in his block, other record-keepers may ignore him and refuse to extend his
chain. If a record-keeper proposes a change to the blockchain’s policies, other record-keepers
may prevent such a change by keeping records according to the existing policies.
The third and most common type of blockchain is a public blockchain. In a public
blockchain, both the read and write privileges are completely unrestricted. Record-keepers
are disciplined exactly as in permissioned blockchains. All users of the network are anonymous. However, when record-keepers are allowed to be anonymous, some sort of identity
management is necessary. Otherwise, it would be possible for a small entity to pretend to
be a large entity, allowing it to add blocks more often than others and hence giving it significant power over which chain of transactions is accepted as valid. This type of attack is
known as a “Sybil attack.” The typical approach to identity management is to force recordkeepers to prove they have accomplished a computationally difficult task before permitting
them to write on the ledger. This method is known as proof-of-work and is used by most
10

major cryptocurrency blockchains such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Litecoin. In order to incentivize record-keepers to perform these expensive computations, they are usually rewarded
with seignorage and transaction fees for each block added to the chain. The structure of
a blockchain’s rewards gives rise to the free-entry condition for that particular blockchain.
The costs of record-keepers’ rewards tend to be economically large. For example, the Bitcoin
blockchain currently uses more electricity than Hungary.

2.3

Differences between blockchains and centralized ledgers

The computer science literature stresses several differences between public blockchains and
traditional systems of record-keeping. For one, public blockchains tend to be more transparent
than centralized ledgers given that anyone can read or write on the blockchain.2 Another
advantage of blockchains is that they have the potential to be more efficient at achieving
consensus than existing systems (e.g., settlement in financial markets). Public blockchains
are also immutable in the sense that it is costly to rewrite history on a blockchain, and they
are typically shielded from operational risk because there is no single point of failure.
Many of these features of public blockchains, however, are incidental. For example, there
is no reason why PoW (or another identity management system) should be necessary in order
to achieve fast settlement or transparency. These features could be implemented simply by
moving existing systems over to publicly viewable electronic databases maintained by a known
group of entities.
In contrast to the previous literature, our paper emphasizes three economically relevant
differences between public blockchains and traditional centralized ledgers. First, recordkeepers enter freely: any agent who wishes to write on the ledger may do so by following
a given set of rules. Free entry of anonymous record-keepers is “trustless” and thus requires identity management. Public blockchains typically solve the trust problem by forcing
record-keepers to pay a cost to record information and requiring that future record-keepers
validate those reports. By contrast, record-keepers in centralized systems are known, and
their privileged positions allow them to extract rents. Inasmuch as they fear losing the
benefits stemming from record-keeping, centralized record-keepers are “trusted.”
Second, the information in a public blockchain is portable: an agent who wishes to launch
a competing ledger may propose a hard fork, thereby replicating all the information in the
existing blockchain.3 Importantly, to the extent that the information in the ledger is used
to coordinate users’ actions (as in the case of cryptocurrency and other applications), it is
2

This assertion comes with a caveat. Recent developments in cryptography have led to proposals of
blockchains that operate using “zero-knowledge proofs” that permit information to be verified without being
made public.

11

critical that users can be confident that all of the information in the ledger is ported over
to the competing blockchain, not just their own personal information.4 The guarantee that
all information is portable to a new blockchain will imply that users can respond to others’
actions in the same way as they did when using the old blockchain.
Third, any group of record-keepers that detects fraudulent activity may roll back the
history of the blockchain to a state preceding the attack and create a fork in which the attack
never occurred. While the first two technological differences we highlighted are applicable to
almost any type of distributed ledger, the rollback feature is specific to blockchains. The ability to revert to a previous state is a result of the lack of finality characteristic of blockchains.
We show that a lack of finality can, in fact, enhance a blockchain’s security. It is a desirable
feature of blockchains rather than a bug.
In our model, we focus on these three economically relevant differences and explore their
implications for competition between ledgers.

3

Model of Ledger Choice
In this section, we present a general static model of ledger choice as a coordination game.

Our objective is to capture a variety of settings in which users choose among competing ledgers
with different rules or policies. The main results explain how the features of a record-keeping
system influence users’ ability to coordinate on a ledger and the intensity of competition
among ledgers. Hence, the static model we present in this section describes the emergence
of rents. Our leading example applies our model to the study of competition between two
branches of a blockchain fork. We then contrast the model of two competing blockchains
with a model in which two traditional ledgers compete. The specific examples of competition
between different types of ledgers illustrate how decentralization attenuates rent extraction.
We focus on the importance of coordination among users because many types of ledgers
are useful only if they are widely used.5 For example, agents will be willing to accept a
fiat currency only if it is accepted by others. Another situation in which coordination is
important is when the ledger contains information about users’ creditworthiness (such as
Alibaba’s Sesame credit score system). Users will not have an incentive to build up their
4

While it would in principle be possible for a private blockchain to permit forking, we show that it would
be strictly suboptimal for the agent who owns the blockchain to do so, meaning that lack of ownership of the
blockchain is necessary for portability of information to be relevant.
4
This distinguishes our notion of information portability from the notion of data ownership referenced in
proposals such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). By the same token, it is not necessarily
crucial that the information in the ledger be publicly viewable. The data in the ledger could be encrypted,
as with cryptocurrencies that use zero-knowledge proofs. All that is needed, in principle, is some method of
using the ledger to prove a minimal set of statements that sustain an equilibrium of a game played among
users.

12

credit score if there are no lenders. Throughout, we will abstract from the specific details of
the coordination motive.
There are two ledgers, A and B. There is a continuum of agents i ∈ [0, 1] known as
users, who are users of the service offered by the ledger. There is a set of agents j ∈ M
known as record-keepers. These agents correspond to those who maintain the ledger. For
a cryptocurrency blockchain, these agents would be miners. For a traditional payments
ledger, a single centralized intermediary (such as the Federal Reserve or a bank) is usually
the sole record-keeper. Finally, there are two agents known as proposers, P A and P B . These
proposers are responsible for choosing the rules under which the ledger operates. Software
developers are the “proposers” for a blockchain. When a part of the community wants to fork
the blockchain, a developer will write commonly accepted code that implements the desired
changes to the rules. On the other hand, for a traditional centralized ledger, the proposer is
also the record-keeper. That is, the monopolist who runs the ledger also decides on the rules.
In what follows, we will allow for the possibility that some record-keeper j ∈ M is also one
of the proposers.
Users must choose the extent to which they participate on ledgers A and B. User i
B
2
l
chooses an action ϕi = (ϕA
i , ϕi ) ∈ [0, 1] , where ϕi represents the intensity of i’s usage of

ledger l ∈ {A, B}. Users will desire to coordinate with other users, so their utility functions
R1
will depend on φl ≡ ϕli di for l ∈ {A, B}.
0

Users are heterogeneous in their fundamental preferences for ledgers. Each user is assigned
B
l
a type si = (sA
i , si ). Here, si is meant to represent the stake that user i has in ledger l. The

stake that a user has in a given ledger should be interpreted as the amount of information
pertaining to that user that is encoded in the ledger. For any ledger that keeps track of
asset holdings, a user’s stake is simply the set of assets held by that user, with larger asset
holdings being interpreted as a higher stake. However, a user’s stake does not necessarily
have to represent the market value of some asset. A user with a high stake may also be a
consumer who has built up a high credit score in a credit registry or a financial institution
with a complex set of contracts with other institutions written down in a particular ledger.
Stakes could even be interpreted as ratings on e-commerce websites or as contacts on social
media platforms. We denote the population CDF of stakes s by Q(s).
There is also a common value component ζ in users’ preferences. This component can
be understood as parametrizing differences between fundamental features of the two ledgers,
5

Other papers in the literature examine coordination among record-keepers instead. There is a vast computer science literature that analyzes the equilibria of the game played by blockchain miners, and Biais et
al. (2017) provide a proof in a formal game-theoretic model that there is an equilibrium in which all miners
choose the longest chain.

13

such as technological efficiency. When ζ > 0, the common value induces a preference for A
among all users, and when ζ < 0, users prefer B. While parameter ζ itself does not play a
significant role in our analysis, the introduction of uncertainty about this parameter will lead
to equilibrium selection.
Each proposer P l chooses a fundamental parameter Ll ∈ Ll determining the revenues
earned by record-keepers and charged to users. A simple way of thinking about Ll is as an
explicit fee charged to users by the record-keeper(s) of the ledger, but more broadly Ll could
be interpreted as an implicit fee. Such implicit fees could arise, for instance, if a monopolist
who runs a ledger chooses to sell users’ data to an outside party. The fundamental parameter
Ll could also represent a goverment’s choice of policy, such as inflation. For example, a
government may wish to inflate away its debt, but doing so could be costly for people who hold
the currency, who may then collectively decide to abandon the national currency altogether
(as in Zimbabwe). Parameter Ll could also be interpreted as a choice of mechanism that
leads to a certain utility for users and record-keepers. Henceforth, for ease of exposition we
will refer to Ll as a fee.
Record-keeper j chooses a ledger l ∈ Wj ⊂ {A, B} and takes an action aj ∈ Aj to
write on the ledger. In our applications, the action aj will refer either to an expenditure of
computational resources to ensure cryptographic security of the ledger (proof-of-work), or an
action taken by a dishonest record-keeper to distort the ledger (such as a double-spend or
outright fraud by a monopolist). That is, the actions taken by record-keepers will capture
two points of the blockchain trilemma: cost efficiency and correctness.
A user’s utility depends on (i) her own action ϕ, (ii) her stakes s, (iii) others’ participation
choices φ = (φA , φB ), (iv) the common value ζ, (v) the fundamental parameter L = (LA , LB )
chosen by proposers, and (vi) actions a taken by record-keepers. In general, a user’s utility
function can be written as
u(ϕ, s, φ, ζ, L, a).
A record-keeper’s utility when writing on ledger l depends on the action alj taken by that
record-keeper, the actions al−j taken by other record-keepers on the same ledger, usage of the
ledger φl , and the fee Ll . The corresponding utility function will be denoted by
wl (alj , al−j , φl , Ll ).
Finally, the utility of proposer P l is given by a function v(φl , Ll ).
The game is played in periods t = 0, 1, 2, . . . . Each period has three subperiods τ = 0, 1, 2.
The timing of the game is as follows:
• τ = 0: Proposers P A and P B choose LA and LB , respectively.
14

• τ = 1: Users first observe previous actions and their own types si . They then choose
actions ϕ.
• τ = 2: Record-keepers observe previous actions, choose a ledger l ∈ Wj , and take
actions aj ∈ A.6 Payoffs are realized.
For the remainder of this section, we focus on the static Nash equilibria of the stage game
played in each period t. Later, we will analyze the equilibria of the full dynamic game.

3.1

Characterization of equilibrium with arbitrary competing ledgers

We now prove properties of equilibrium that will hold in all of the settings we consider.
First, we show that as noise about the common value vanishes, users’ play is uniquely pinned
down in equilibrium. We then characterize the way in which users coordinate and connect
our results to the rents that can be extracted from them. Here, we restrict attention to
pure-strategy perfect Bayesian equilibria of the ledger-choice game. For a formal definition
of perfect Bayesian equilibrium, we refer the user to Fudenberg and Tirole (1991).
In the following analysis, we impose the restriction that, when choosing a ledger, users
must choose either A or B, not both. In the notation of the previous section, they choose
ϕ ∈ {(1, 0), (0, 1)}. Under this assumption, it is natural to consider
ũ(s, φ, ζ, L, a) ≡ u(A, s, φ, ζ, L, a) − u(B, s, φ, ζ, L, a)
(with some abuse of notation). Users choose A when they expect ũ to be positive and B
when they expect ũ to be negative. For ease of notation, we will henceforth denote a choice
R
of A as ϕ = 1 or ϕ = A and set φ = ϕi di to be the proportion of users who choose A.
i

We will also take record-keepers’ actions (as a function of φ and L) to be known by
users at τ = 1. That is, users take as given a function a(φ, L). In our main applications,
users will know the actions record-keepers must take in equilibrium at τ = 2 by backward
induction. In this section, then, we focus on the equilibrium of the game played by users.
We defer the discussion of the equilibrium among proposers until later, as it will depend on
the particular application. Finally, we render users’ individual types one-dimensional rather
6

Although it would be natural in some cases to assume that record-keepers move before users or that the
two groups move simultaneously, most of our results are robust to these alternative specifications. We impose
this sequence of moves for ease of exposition and because we wish to focus on how coordination among users
of a blockchain system differs from coordination among users of a centralized ledger. Furthermore, it is often
reasonable to assume that record-keepers may condition on users’ actions (such as with blockchain systems
where miners condition effort on cryptocurrency prices).

15

B
than two-dimensional by assuming that u depends on the stakes sA
i and si only through
B
7
their difference sA
i − si . Henceforth, we denote this difference by si .

The assumptions that users may choose only one ledger and that users’ stakes are fixed
and nontransferable are stark and merit further discussion. Although users may choose only
one ledger in our benchmark model, in the Appendix we extend the model to allow users to
use both ledgers simultaneously, and most of our main results carry over in that framework.
For ease of exposition, we assume that users choose only one ledger.
The assumption that users’ stakes are nontransferable is suitable in some cases, such as
when the ledger contains information about the types or reputations of users. For example,
vendors on online platforms cannot trade their reputation scores to other vendors, and users
of credit registries cannot transfer their credit scores among themselves. However, in the
case of currency, this assumption is completely counterfactual: if two people with stakes in
different currencies trade those currencies with each other, they relinquish their stakes in one
ledger to obtain a stake in another. We remedy this issue by later presenting a more explicit
model in which the ledger contains currency holdings, showing that, although the results
are somewhat more complicated, the main intuition regarding the importance of information
portability and free entry of record-keepers continues to hold.
In the following results, we will focus on the case where network externalities are strong
in the sense that the only stable equilibria are those in which all users choose A or all choose
B.8 These cases are particularly important because there are multiple equilibria, so we will
need to develop a method of selecting among them. In our applications of the model, we will
also consider cases in which network externalities are weak, but in those cases the equilibrium
will be unique regardless, meaning equilibrium selection is irrelevant.
Concretely, we focus on regions of the parameter space where if all users play the same
action, it is individually rational for any type s to follow suit. Furthermore, mixed equilibria
where some users play A and others play B are not robust to small perturbations of strategies.
To select among equilibria, we use a global games framework and introduce incomplete
information about the common value ζ. Formally, we assume that each user i receives a
signal xi = ζ + σηi , where η is uniformly distributed on [− 12 , 12 ]. We typically work in the
limit σ → 0, so there is an arbitrarily small amount of noise in agents’ signals.9 Incomplete
information about this value could be motivated by, for example, uncertainty about the
properties of the ledger’s technology. With incomplete information about ζ, users’ types
become two-dimensional. An individual user’s type can be summarized by θi = (xi , si ).
In order to prove statements about equilibria in this environment, it will be useful to
make the following assumption:
7

This assumption will apply to all models in our applications.

16

Assumption 1. There exist ζ and ζ such that it is strictly dominant for all types si to play
A whenever ζ > ζ and B when ζ < ζ.
This type of assumption is typical in the global games literature. It states that there exist
“dominance regions” in which fundamentals favor one action so heavily that agents find it
optimal to play that action even if no other agent does so.
The main property of equilibria that we can prove at this point is that equilibria will take
a “cutoff” form: there will be threshold values k(s) such that all agents with xi < k(si ) choose
ledger B and all users with xi > k(si ) choose ledger A. These cutoffs will be decreasing in s,
meaning agents with larger stakes in ledger A will be more likely to choose A. This is true
as long as the actions taken by record-keepers are the same on ledgers A and B. That is,
users sort themselves across ledgers according to their preferences. Those whose fundamental
preferences for A are above a certain bound will choose A and all other users will switch to
B.
Proposition 1. Under Assumption 3.1, for sufficiently small σ, there is an essentially unique
equilibrium of the game played by users at τ = 1, holding fixed the actions of record-keepers
at t = 2. There exist weakly monotonically decreasing cutoffs k(s) such that all users with
xi > k(si ) choose ϕi = A, and all users with xi < k(si ) choose ϕi = B.
Proofs are relegated to the Appendix. The proof of Proposition 1 relies on standard
techniques from the global games literature with heterogeneous preferences, as in Sakovics
and Steiner (2012) or Drozd and Serrano-Padial (2017). The logic behind the proof is as
follows. In this setup, there are certain types s whose fundamental preferences for ledger A
are so strong that it is a dominant action to choose A even if all other agents choose B. We
call this set of types a “dominance region.” Then some other types who strongly prefer A will
choose A as well, since on top of their fundamental preference for A they know that all types
in the dominance region choose A. This logic can be iterated to derive a unique equilibrium
under certain conditions. The actions of types with extreme fundamental preferences are
contagious and induce even types with mild preferences for one ledger over the other to take
a given action. It is possible to find the set of types who choose B in exactly the same way.
We can provide a sharper characterization of equilibrium when network externalities are
strong. Before doing so, we define an important symmetry property of users’ utility functions.
Definition 1. Let χ = (ζ, L, a(φ, L)). Define ũ to be symmetric at χ if ũ(s = 0, φ, χ) =
−ũ(s = 0, 1 − φ, χ) for all (ϕ, φ). Define ũ to be asymmetric towards A (resp. B) at χ if
there exists a symmetric utility function ũ0 6= ũ such that ũ ≥ ũ0 (resp. ũ ≤ ũ).
9

Users’ priors over ζ become irrelevant in this limit. See Frankel, Morris, and Pauzner (2003).

17

When ũ is symmetric, it simply means that users consider the fundamentals of the two
ledgers to be equivalent, so differences in the utilities they obtain from using the two ledgers
are due only to differences in stakes and participation on each ledger. By contrast, when ũ
is asymmetric toward A, users prefer the fundamentals of A to those of B.
Equipped with this definition of symmetry, we may prove our main result regarding the
properties of the equilibrium played by users.
Proposition 2. When network externalities are strong, all types s ∈ supp Q share the same
cutoff k. This cutoff satisfies two properties.
1. Let χ = (ζ, L, a) and consider the type s = 0 (types with the same stake in A and B).
If u is symmetric at χ, then when supp Q = {0}, k = ζ.
2. If ũ is symmetric, supp Q ⊂ R+ , and Q(0) < 1, then k < ζ.
The characterization of equilibria in games with strong network externalities demonstrated by Proposition 2 is actually quite natural. First, the proposition states that when
network externalities are strong, all agents must use the same cutoff k (so that all users choose
the same ledger in equilibrium). If there exist fundamentals (ζ, L, a) of the two ledgers such
that users would be indifferent between them in the absence of network externalities, the cutoff k is equal to ζ as long as all users’ stakes are equal to zero. Put simply, users coordinate
on the ledger with more favorable fundamentals when their stakes do not anchor them to one
ledger. Hence, there is essentially perfect competition between ledgers in this setting. On
the other hand, when users’ stakes in A are larger than their stakes in B, k < ζ, meaning
users may coordinate on A even when the fundamentals (ζ, L, a) favor B.
When users have larger stakes on one of the two ledgers, that ledger has a competitive
advantage in the coordination game played by users. For example, if A is an established ledger
and B is a newly proposed one, A will have an advantage over B unless the information from
A is ported over to B. When A has a competitive advantage, it will be able to win out
over B even when it extracts larger rents from users. Later, in our analysis of the differences
between blockchain and centralized systems of record-keeping, we will emphasize the enhanced
portability of information allowed by blockchain. In that sense, blockchain will also alter the
equilibrium of the game played by users. However, the differences between the two systems
are not limited to the equilibrium of the game played by users: there will be differences in
the play of record-keepers and proposers as well.

18

3.2

Traditional competition between centralized ledgers

In this section, we analyze a competition between an outside ledger and a centralized
ledger maintained by an incumbent monopolist. The differences between this setting and one
with two branches of a blockchain fork will clarify exactly how fork competition differs from
standard competition, i.e., what exactly is accomplished by decentralization. We will show
that a lack of information portability will anchor users to the incumbent’s ledger and give
rise to rent extraction.
We first begin by assuming that the monopolist is the incumbent, in the sense that users
have a stake in the monopolist’s ledger but not the outside ledger. There are just two recordkeepers: the incumbent monopolist M on ledger A and an outside record-keeper (entrant) O
on ledger B. In this case, the record-keepers are also the proposers P A = M and P B = O.
Each record-keeper may write only on her own ledger. At τ = 0, the incumbent may choose
a fundamental parameter LA ≥ 0 and the entrant chooses LB ≥ 0. User i has stakes sA
i ≥0
on ledger A and sB
i = 0 on ledger B. Users have no stake in the outside record-keeper’s
ledger, and that record-keeper is unable to replicate the stakes in the monopolist’s ledger due
to information frictions. Record-keepers do not take actions at τ = 2.10
Users have preferences summarized by
ũ(s, φ, ζ, L) = sA − sB + κ(2φ − 1) + ζ − α(LA − LB ).

(1)

Users’ types si have a cross-sectional distribution Q(s) that is uniform on the interval [S −
d
2, S

+ d2 ]. Here, S is the average stake and d is the dispersion of stakes. It is important to

distinguish between situations in which network externalities are strong enough to generate
multiplicity and situations in which network externalities are weak. There is multiplicity if
and only if d > κ. We will henceforth assume in this section that the true realization of the
common value ζ is zero, but that this is unknown to users.
The monopolist receives a fee LA from each user who participates. The monopolist’s
objective function is
max φLA ,

LA ≥0

where φ denotes participation on ledger A. Similarly, the entrant’s objective function is
max (1 − φ)LB .

LB ≥0

In order to proceed, we must determine how the record-keepers’ choices of LA and LB map
10

We postpone the discussion of record-keepers’ honesty to Section 4.

19

to participation φ. Proposition 3 provides an answer.
Proposition 3. When d > κ, all users for whom


1
A
B
−1
si − α(L − L ) > Q(si )
+κ
2
choose to remain on ledger A, and all other users choose ledger B. When d < κ, all users
choose A if α(LA − LB ) < S and B if α(LA − LB ) > S.
Proposition 3 illustrates that coordination among users is inertial. Users’ initial stakes
in the incumbent’s ledger anchor them to it, and network externalities amplify the initial
anchoring effect. As a result, the entrant is at a disadvantage. Even if the entrant charges
a lower fee, it will not necessarily claim a larger market share than the incumbent. Indeed,
if network externalities are strong enough, it is possible for the entrant to charge a lower fee
than the incumbent and still completely fail to capture any users.
Now that we have determined how users coordinate given the fees proposed, we may solve
for the equilibrium of the game played by the incumbent and the entrant. In Appendix C.1,
we will show that there are two types of equilibria: when network externalities are weak,
the entrant manages to capture positive market share, whereas when network externalities
are strong, the entrant does not capture any share of the market, but the market remains
contestable in the sense that the incumbent sets its fee low enough to keep the entrant out of
the market. Proposition 4 characterizes the fee charged by the incumbent in these different
types of equilibria.
Proposition 4. The incumbent monopolist charges fees

A

L =







1
αS
1
1
α S − 2α (d − κ)
1
1
3α S + 2α (d − κ)

κ>d
d−

2
3S

≤κ<d .

κ < d − 23 S

These fees are increasing in the mean stake S.
The main insight of Proposition 4 is that the equilibrium fee charged by the incumbent
is monotonically increasing in the average stake S users have in its ledger. This relationship
is most pronounced when network externalities are strong enough that the entrant is unable
to attract any user in equilibrium.
The comparison between centralized ledger competition and fork competition highlights
one of the central tradeoffs of the blockchain trilemma: the tension between cost efficiency and
decentralization. When two forks of a blockchain compete, two forms of decentralization aid
20

coordination on an efficient outcome. Portability of information nullifies the anchoring effect
on the established ledger, so network externalities play no role in amplifying inertia. Hence,
portability of information eases coordination on the new ledger among users. Competition
among record-keepers eases coordination among record-keepers in the sense that it ensures
they will write on the ledger preferred by users. The combination of these two features
allows new, competing ledgers to emerge in equilibrium. Welfare losses in blockchain-based
record-keeping systems come mostly from the waste of computational resources.
Under traditional centralized-ledger competition, by contrast, even when there is the
possibility of entry, both the incumbent and the entrant may charge high fees. If there
is no possibility of entry, strong network externalities protect the incumbent and increase
distortionary rents. The incumbent further enjoys high rents because of its monopoly on
information, which is detrimental to users’ welfare. Taken together, these results suggest
that fork competition is particularly beneficial when coordination motives among users are
strong or when switching costs in a traditional setting are high.
Although we stress the emergence of new ledgers in our analysis of fork competition,
there is another side of fork competition that is potentially just as important: the ability
to enshrine a certain set of rules for the operation of the ledger. That is, if a new, inferior
ledger is proposed, our model suggests that users will tend to coordinate on the existing
ledger and ignore the new one, keeping the old rules intact. While our formal model of static
centralized ledger competition does not allow us to analyze the dynamics of incumbent’s fees,
intuitively it stands to reason that they may rise over time as users become more anchored
to its ledger. Thus, under centralized record-keeping it is not always possible to ensure that
existing policies will remain in place.

3.3

Fork competition

In this section, we present our baseline model of competition between blockchain ledgers
and analyze the equilibria of the stage game. In reality, this competition corresponds to
a “hard fork,” in which some of the blockchain’s record-keepers decide to build their own
blockchain with new protocols off of a previously existing (parent) blockchain. There is a
critical distinction between a hard fork in which new rules are proposed and a fork that is
created in an attack on the blockchain, such as a double-spend. The former is important
in understanding the relationship between decentralization and competition among ledgers,
which is our focus in this section. The latter relates to the security and correctness of the
ledger, which we will discuss in Section 4.
Critically, a hard fork preserves all of the data in the parent blockchain. This observation
will be crucial for our conclusions: the ability of record-keepers to change the rules of the
21

blockchain but keep users’ stakes in the network intact will allow for perfect competition
between ledgers. There will be no inertia in switching ledgers because users will not stand
to lose their stakes by doing so. We will show that in an environment with information
portability and free entry of record-keepers, competition among ledgers is essentially perfect.
Record-keepers will no longer be able to earn rents. Blockchains will enhance competition
between ledgers, but they will come at the cost of proof-of-work, i.e., the cost of decentralization. This example will thus illustrate the tradeoff between decentralization and cost
efficiency postulated in the trilemma.
The model of blockchain competition falls within the general class of models of ledger
competition described earlier. In the game, users must coordinate on a ledger (branch of a
blockchain fork), which corresponds to choosing a ledger A or B. We take A to be the branch
that keeps the rules of the existing blockchain. This branch has fees LA and users have stakes
A
A
sA
i on that branch. That is, we constrain the proposer P to choose L . This proposer can be

thought of as one of the original developers of the blockchain. The proposer on branch B may
choose a new fee LB ≥ 0 after observing ζ at τ = 0 (so proposers have perfect information
about ζ).11 Furthermore, in a hard fork, all of the information on the original blockchain
A
is carried over to the new blockchain, meaning that users’ stakes on ledger B are sB
i = si
B
for all i, so si = sA
i − si = 0. In this sense, the established ledger A has no informational

advantage over the entrant ledger B. Proposer P B can be thought of as a blockchain software
developer who wants to fork the blockchain and therefore chooses new protocols but keeps
all users’ data intact. If participation on the ledger proposed by P B is φB , P B receives a
payoff v(φ, LB ), where v is a decreasing function of LB and an increasing function of φ. The
proposer’s payoff is assumed to come from an appreciation of the developer’s stake when the
proposed ledger is adopted, so proposers’ incentives are aligned with users’.12
In this setting, the set M of record-keepers is a continuum [0, M ], where M is taken to be
large. We assume there are two branches of the fork, branch A and branch B. Record-keepers
are responsible for cryptographically securing the ledger, and they are given some surplus for
contributing computing power to the blockchain. At τ = 2, record-keeper j chooses a ledger
lj ∈ {A, B} and an amount of computational power cj ≤ 1 to contribute to that ledger. We
assume that record-keepers can observe users’ actions before making a decision because, in
practice, this is often exactly what happens. Cryptocurrency “mining pools” are set up to
12

Here we assume that P B may choose any LB ≥ 0. That is, because it is not a focus of our paper, we
assume away the issue of implementability of LB via some mechanism. For a discussion of how mechanisms
map to fees in centralized and decentralized payments systems, see Huberman, Leshno, and Moallemi (2017).
12
The assumption that the proposer’s incentives are aligned with those of users is not overly restrictive in this
context. As we will show, free entry of blockchain record-keepers implies that no matter what the fee structure,
record-keepers will not earn positive profits, so there is no way the proposer could benefit record-keepers by
choosing a higher fee.

22

automatically mine on whatever blockchain yields the highest profits at that moment. To
the extent that the token price on a blockchain proxies for participation on that blockchain,
mining pools essentially condition their decisions on users’ actions.
Record-keepers pay a linear cost f (c) = c of generating computational power. Let C l ≡
cj 0 dj 0 be the total computational power contributed to branch l of the fork, and denote

R
lj 0 =l

the participation on that fork by φl . Then a record-keeper’s net profits when contributing
computing power cj to branch l are
w(cj , C l , φl , Ll ) =

cj l l
φ L − cj
Cl

when C l > 0 and −cj otherwise. The record-keeper’s revenues are proportional to participation and the fundamental parameter Ll but are inversely proportional to the computational
power contributed by other record-keepers. This revenue function captures two features
shared by most blockchains. Namely, the total rewards given to record-keepers are fixed,
and those rewards tend to be more valuable when the blockchain has been adopted by a
larger group of users. Record-keepers’ rewards thus have a natural interpretation as a coin
associated with a particular blockchain.13
The first important feature of the equilibrium with blockchain competition is that recordkeepers’ actions are pinned down by the free-entry condition. Optimizing w with respect to
cj , we see that the optimal computing effort c∗j is given by

c∗j =







C l < φl Ll

1
∈ [0, 1]

C l = φl Ll .
C l > φl LL

0

Hence, in equilibrium it must be that record-keepers break even:
C l = φl Ll .

(2)

We later show that this result extends to all equilibria of the full dynamic game. Intuitively,
with free entry, record-keepers will compete to write on the ledgers used by users and do not
leave opportunities for profit on the table. Free entry thus distinguishes a public blockchain
from a permissioned blockchain, which, as we will show later, can feature equilibria in which
record-keepers collude in order to suppress competing ledgers.
13

Almost all blockchains reward record-keepers internally with coins that exist as data on the blockchain.
This reward scheme is common even for blockchains that are used mainly for purposes other than the exchange
of cryptocurrency. The provision of rewards within the scope of the blockchain further incentivizes recordkeepers to maintain the blockchain’s integrity.

23

Users prefer ledgers that are cryptographically secure. In order to restrict attention
to the competitive benefits of decentralization, we effectively abstract from record-keepers’
endogenous choices to attempt to distort the ledger in this section. Instead, we assume
an exogenously given relationship between the probability of attacks on the blockchain and
the proof-of-work cost. Their preferences for cryptographic security are parametrized by
a bounded utility function ũ(s, φ, ζ, L, C) (where C = (C A , C B )) that depends on recordkeepers’ actions only through the ratios
in the ratio

CB
.
φB

C l 14
,
φl

is increasing in the ratio

CA
,
φA

and is decreasing

That is, users value security in terms of the amount of computational power

committed to the blockchain per user, so they prefer ledger l when more computing power is
committed to that ledger. Hence, there is a sense in which users prefer high fees to a certain
extent: fees provide incentives for record-keepers to secure the ledger. For now, we keep
the dependence of preferences on computational effort exogenous and discuss the benefits of
fork competition. In our discussion of attacks on the blockchain we outline how it can be
endogenized and discuss in greater detail the tradeoff between free entry of record-keepers
and costly proof-of-work.
In what follows, it will be convenient to adopt a particular form for users’ utility function
ũ in order to derive analytical results. We assume
ũ(s, f, φ, ζ, L, C) = |{z}
s +
stake

κ(2φ − 1)
| {z }

network externalities

+



CA
CB
) − g(
)) .
− α(LA − LB ) − (g(
|
{z
}
φ
1−φ
|
{z
}
fundamentals
fees
ζ
|{z}

crypto security

(3)
Here, the utility function is simply represented as a linear sum of the five components of
users’ preferences. Parameter κ governs the strength of network externalities, and parameter
α determines users’ aversion to fees. Function g (which is, at this point, exogenous) relates
users’ utility to the cryptographic security of the ledger. Note that this utility function is
symmetric when ζ = 0, LA = LB , and C l = φl Ll as defined in Definition 1. Throughout, we
will continue to use a similar utility function in order to illustrate properties of equilibrium
in our applications.
Now that we have set up the blockchain game, we may prove our main result about
equilibria of the static blockchain competition game.
Proposition 5. Suppose that network externalities are strong and that there exists ζ̄ such
that ũ is symmetric, taking as given equal fees on the two ledgers, LB = LA , and optimal
equilibrium play by record-keepers, C l = φl Ll . Then if there exists LB ≥ 0 such that ũ is
14

Of course, some value must be assigned to the function at φl = 0. This value can be essentially arbitrary so
long as users’ utility when C l = 0 does not change with φl . That is, when no computing power is contributed,
users’ utility is independent of participation.

24

asymmetric toward B at ζ̄ with fees L = (LA , LB ) and optimal equilibrium play by recordkeepers, there exists a unique equilibrium of the stage game when ζ ≤ ζ̄. In this equilibrium,
proposer P B announces
L̃B = arg min ũ(s = 0, φ = 0, ζ, L, C(φ, L)),
LB

all users and record-keepers choose ledger B, and record-keepers break even.
Proposition 5 is a remarkable result. It states that in a setting in which there is an
opportunity to fork a blockchain, users will always choose the branch of the fork that has
more favorable fees, and proposers (developers) will propose rules that are beneficial to users
rather than record-keepers.15 Of course, the result that proposers suggest protocols beneficial
to users depends partly on the assumption that proposers’ incentives are aligned with those
of users. But in a setting with free entry of record-keepers, this assumption is not overly
restrictive. Record-keepers always make zero profits, so proposing a ledger that increases
record-keepers’ revenues is pointless. Furthermore, users choose to switch to ledger B only
because they do not stand to lose their stakes when doing so. The replicability of information
on ledger B completely removes an obstacle to switching ledgers. We will show that, when
information cannot be replicated on a competing ledger, users’ stakes impede switching to a
ledger where record-keepers earn lower revenue.
Proposition 5 highlights the benefits of a blockchain. When all users’ fundamental preferences for an alternative ledger are identical, the absence of switching costs induces full
coordination on the competing ledger. There is perfect competition among ledgers in that as
long as it is feasible to make ledger B even slightly more desirable than ledger A, the competing ledger will win out over the existing one. Remarkably, there is perfect competition
between ledgers. Coordination inefficiencies are precluded under these assumptions, but in
the Appendix we will discuss how coordination can break down and multiple ledgers are used
in equilibrium when users have heterogeneous fundamental preferences.16
Popular discussion has largely focused on the ways in which blockchains can decrease
essentially exogenous costs, such as by inducing faster consensus about a ledger’s contents.
This result shows there is an endogenous channel through which blockchain reduces the
15
Note that the hypothesis ζ ≤ ζ̄ is not restrictive. It just states that if agents are ex-ante neutral or prefer
ledger B, there will be a unique equilibrium in which they all switch to ledger B. A good benchmark is the
case ζ = ζ̄.
16
The results in the Appendix are reminiscent of most hard forks, in which part of the community chooses
to adopt the new fork of the blockchain and the other chooses the established blockchain. However, in many
of these cases (such as with Ethereum or any of the forks of Bitcoin) the vast majority of blockchain users
choose the same branch of the fork. We interpret our results as making predictions regarding which branch
of the fork will be adopted by the larger group.

25

cost of maintaining a ledger: the synergy between portability of information and competition among record-keepers. When information can be ported to an outside ledger, users will
want to use that ledger if record-keepers are paid lower fees (as long as the ledger is cryptographically secure). Individually, record-keepers are better off writing on a ledger with high
fees, but competitive forces drive record-keepers to undercut each other by writing on the
ledger with lower fees. Record-keepers know that all users will use the outside ledger when
there are enough record-keepers to secure it, so the end result is that all record-keepers must
switch to the outside ledger. The downside of a blockchain is that, while in a traditional
setting, record-keepers’ fees simply represent a (possibly distortionary) transfer, in the case
of blockchain record-keepers’ fees are a pure waste of resources. Later, we will examine under
what conditions a traditional ledger maintained by a monopolist induces a large extraction
of rents.

3.4

Currency competition

Although cryptocurrencies are perhaps currently the most important application of blockchain
technology, the assumptions of our benchmark model are not directly applicable to cryptocurrencies. After all, there is no need for agents to use only one currency. Furthermore, in a
model of money, agents should be able to exchange their currency holdings with one another.
In this section, we briefly describe a formal monetary model of currency competition and
show that, relaxing the restrictive assumptions made in our benchmark model, the main
intuition that information portability enhances competition between ledgers goes through.
Our model of currency competition is based on the Lagos-Wright (2005) model, which
is a workhorse in monetary economics. In the model, time is discrete and runs forever. All
goods j are produced by labor, Yj = Lj . Agents’ utility of consumption is u(c), the disutility
of labor is l, and the per-period discount factor is δ. Within each period, there are two
subperiods: day and night. During the day, specialized goods are traded in a decentralized
market. Anonymous agents meet in pairs, and a double-coincidence-of-wants problem forces
them to use currency in order to transact. Buyers make take-it-or-leave-it offers to sellers in
which they propose an exchange of a given quantity of goods for money.17 At night, agents
trade general goods in a centralized market. Agents have homogeneous preferences for general
goods.
We assume there are two currencies, A and B, and that users (agents) must pay a participation cost χl to adopt currency l. Adopting currency l enables a user to accept and use it
in decentralized market transactions, as well as to trade it in the centralized market without
17

We make this assumption in order to keep the characterization of agents’ value functions simple, since it
allows us to assume that buyers capture the entire trade surplus.

26

incurring a deadweight loss τ per unit of currency exchanged. For simplicity, we assume
τ = 1, so users who do not adopt a currency are completely unable to exchange it. Users
are permitted to adopt one currency, both, or neither. The participation cost can be thought
of as the effort expenditure required in order to recognize counterfeits, collect information
about temporary price fluctuations, or understand the monetary policy of a given currency,
for example.18 For simplicity, we will assume χA = 0. That is, users do not have to pay a
cost to adopt the established currency and hence always adopt it. The only decision they
make is whether to adopt B.
In this class of models, an agent’s utility consists of two terms: the value of the agent’s
wealth (in monetary holdings) and the continuation value obtained through future trades in
the decentralized market. First consider a user who does not choose to adopt currency B. If
this user has initial holdings mA of currencies A, the value function can be written as
W (mA |A) = ψ A mA +

δ
E[S|A],
1−δ

(4)

where ψ A denotes the price of a unit of currency A in terms of goods and E[S|A] denotes
the agent’s expected surplus in future decentralized market meetings given that only A was
adopted. For a user who adopts both currencies, the value function is
W (mA , mB |A, B) = ψ A mA + ψ B mB +

δ
E[S|A, B]
1−δ

(5)

if that user holds mA units of currency A and mB units of currency B. Here, ψ B and
E[S|A, B] are defined analogously to ψ A and E[S|A].
We examine two distinct settings. With traditional Hayekian competition, the new currency B is issued by some outside agent who sells the currency to users in exchange for some
of their holdings of A. With fork competition, on the other hand, all agents with stakes in the
original currency are initially endowed with identical stakes of the new currency B. There is
no need to purchase currency from any external issuer.
A user’s decision to adopt currency B affects her utility through two channels: it may
yield a discrete jump in the value function if she is initially endowed with some of currency B
(only with fork competition), and it increases the surplus that she can expect to earn in future
meetings if B has some transactional benefits relative to A (e.g., a lower cost of carry due
to inflation). What matters for our application is that the increase in utility from adopting
18

More realistically, users who decide not to accept or use the new currency could conceivably sell their
entire initial stake in the new currency immediately. It is not obvious that doing so would entail any sort of
substantial effort cost, but when users are unaware of the intricacies of a given currency it is possible that
they will trade that currency at a loss due to an asymmetric information problem.

27

B depends on the fraction of others who choose to adopt B. In particular, we focus on the
case where there are positive network externalities: that is, W (mA , mB |A, B) − W (mA |A) is
increasing in the adoption of B.19
There are positive network externalities for two reasons. First, when other users adopt
currency B, the probability of meeting a seller who accepts B in the decentralized market
increases. This effect reduces the inflation cost of carrying the new currency because the
inflation cost is incurred only when agents are unable to meet a seller who accepts the
currency. Therefore, the marginal surplus of holding an additional unit of B increases, making
it relatively more desirable to adopt B. Second, the increased liquidity of B induces agents to
give it a greater portfolio weight, which increases the real value of the currency. This increase
in the value of B, in turn, may increase the value of the initial stakes that users might have
in currency B and thus the desirability of adoption.
As before, we select an equilibrium by using our global games framework. When there is
incomplete information about χB , as long as network externalities are sufficiently strong this
refinement implies the existence of a cutoff χB∗ such that when χB < χB∗ , all agents will
choose to adopt B.
Proposition 6. When the utility functions in Equations 4 and 5 describe a supermodular
game with strong network externalities, there exists a cutoff χB∗ such that all users adopt B
when χB < χB∗ . This cutoff is lowest when users have no initial stake in currency B.
Proposition 6 states that the cutoff participation cost below which users adopt currency B
is higher when users have an initial stake in the ledger. That is, if users are initially endowed
with some of the new currency (as they would be after a blockchain fork, but not after an
initial coin offering) they are more likely to expend effort to understand how it is traded.
Even those who do not foresee themselves accepting the currency in future transactions
have an incentive to do so in order to avoid losses when selling their initial stake or when
purchasing goods. The knowledge that others have an incentive to pay this effort cost eases
coordination on the new currency. This endowment effect, therefore, could help a currency
that is superior to an established one along some dimension (e.g., lower inflation) to gain
widespread recognition.
19

We show in the Appendix that, under a reasonable calibration of the steady state of a Lagos-Wright-style
model, there are indeed positive network externalities in the adoption of B. These network externalities are
strong enough that the only equilibria are ones in which either all users adopt B or none do so.

28

4

Free Entry and Dynamic Ledger Choice
To fully realize the benefits of fork competition, a ledger must allow for free entry of record-

keepers as well as portability of information. All of our substantive results on the benefits
of fork competition so far, however, have relied only on the assumption that information is
portable from one branch to the other. In our static model, free entry of record-keepers serves
only to pin down the strength of the ledger’s cryptographic security. Here, we show that in
a dynamic setting, free entry is essential in fostering competition among ledgers.
We first show that in a setting with restricted entry, even when information portability is
permitted, it may be possible for an incumbent who manages a centralized ledger to prevent
an entrant from competing. The incumbent can threaten to dynamically punish the entrant
by cutting its fees and driving rents down. Thus, perfect competition between ledgers will
not obtain. We also briefly address the case of permissioned blockchain. We show that fork
competition in a permissioned setting is limited by the restrictions on entry for record-keepers.
It will be possible for collusion between permissioned record-keepers to prevent low fees from
emerging. This example will further validate our claim that free entry is an economically
relevant feature of public blockchains.
We then show that with a proof-of-work blockchain, this is not the case. We derive the
equilibrium of the repeated blockchain fork game of Section ??. We show that, remarkably,
users and record-keepers must play the static equilibrium of Proposition 5 in every period of
the blockchain ledger-choice game. In short, this is because the free-entry condition guarantees that record-keepers cannot be rewarded or punished by any dynamic scheme. Therefore,
record-keepers will not be able to collude with each other on an outcome that is beneficial
to them. The benefits of fork competition for public blockchains will thus be present in our
dynamic setting as well.

4.1

Dynamic ledger choice with restricted entry

In order to highlight the essentiality of free entry, we consider a setting in which information is portable but entry is restricted. In particular, we examine competition between an
incumbent centralized ledger writer and a single entrant who is able to replicate all of the
information in the incumbent’s ledger. The entrant’s ability to port information over to its
ledger can be thought of, perhaps, as the result of some policy that weakens the stranglehold
that monopolistic record-keepers have on their data. We do not specify the mechanism that
allows for portability of information because this example is simply an exercise to illustrate
the consequences of restricted entry.
To analyze this problem, we will lay out a simple dynamic model of ledger competition.

29

Intuitively, restricted entry will hinder competition because the entrant will need to be guaranteed rents in equilibrium in order for the decision to enter to be ex-post optimal. Hence,
the incumbent will be able to dynamically punish the entrant by threatening to act more
competitively and drive rents to zero. This threat can prevent the entrant from attempting
to compete in the first place. By contrast, in a setting with free entry, there will be no rents
in equilibrium, so such threats have no bite.
Consider the repeated version of the ledger choice model presented in Section 3. There
are two centralized entities that act as proposers and record-keepers: an incumbent P A and
an entrant P B who discount payoffs at rate δ < 1. The static ledger choice game is played
in periods t = 1, 2, . . . . There is only one difference: in subperiod τ = 0 of period t = 1,
the entrant may pay a cost c > 0 to enter. This allows the entrant to propose fees LB
t ∈ R+
in all future periods. Furthermore, P B is allowed to replicate the information in ledger A,
so if P B enters, users’ stakes are identical on the two ledgers. As argued previously, when
information is portable, users will simply choose the ledger with the lower fee.
If P B chooses not to enter, users choose between ledger A and an outside option (called
“autarky”) instead of between A and B. We assume that the optimal fee charged by A when
users face autarky as their outside option is LA∗ .20
In this model, entry is restricted in the sense that only one entity is allowed to compete
with the incumbent. In reality, it must be that the potential set of entrants is limited. It
is not possible to allow any anonymous agent to write on the ledger without some form of
identity management. Our assumption that only one entity is eligible to enter the market can
be viewed as an extreme version of this observation. This entity must have some “reputation
capital” that enables it to write the ledger, and, presumably, its reputation allows for the
possibility to extract rents. While the costs of entry can be viewed as physical resource costs
required to set up a new ledger, they can also be viewed as an opportunity cost that this
known entity incurs by using its reputation capital in this market rather than another one.
We now show that in a subgame-perfect equilibrium, it is often possible for the incumbent
to prevent the entrant from competing. The incumbent does so by threatening to drive rents
to zero conditional on entry. The equilibrium is characterized by the following strategy profile:
• At t = 1, the entrant chooses not to enter. The incumbent sets LA = LA∗ .
• For t ≥ 2, if the entrant chose to enter at t = 1, both the incumbent and entrant set
their fees to zero: LA = LB = 0.
• For all t, if the entrant chose to enter at t = 1, users choose the ledger with the lower
fee. If the fees are equal, they choose each ledger with equal probability.
20

The existence of such an optimal fee is guaranteed by the analysis in Section 3.

30

In order to verify that this is an equilibrium, we need only check that it is not strictly
optimal for the entrant to enter at t = 1. In all future periods, the incumbent and the entrant
play a static Nash equilibrium in which they charge fees equal to zero.21 When the entrant
chooses to enter, all users choose ledger B as long as LB < LA∗ , so the entrant’s profits are
at most LA∗ in the first period. Both the incumbent and the entrant earn no profits after
t = 1, so it is optimal to enter only if LA∗ ≥ c. Otherwise, the strategy profile outlined above
constitutes an equilibrium.
Note the discrepancy between the threshold cost for entry and the value of the rents
LA∗
1−δ for the right
A∗
L for the right to

earned by the incumbent. The incumbent would be willing to pay up to
to remain in operation, but the entrant is willing to pay no more than

enter. That is, for entry to occur, the costs must be only a fraction of the profits that can be
earned, meaning that efficiency is severely compromised. The model also suggests another
possibility: even if there were no fixed cost of entry, the incumbent would likely be willing
to pay off any other entity that gained the ability to enter its market. Contracting with
competitors in this way is possible only when competitors are non-anonymous. In doing so,
the incumbent would preserve its future profits.
Our results are summarized in the following proposition:
Proposition 7. In the dynamic centralized ledger-choice game, if information is portable
between ledgers, there is a threshold cost of entry c∗ above which entry can never occur:
c∗ = LA∗ .
The threshold cost is less than the present value of the incumbent’s profits in the case without
entry.
Our results on ledger competition without free entry of record-keepers can also be used
to understand the limitations of permissioned blockchains. A permissioned blockchain can
be thought of as a blockchain run by a consortium of M record-keepers. Given that there is
no need for identity management, there are no proof-of-work costs in this setting. However,
in principle, the blockchain can be forked in order to create a competing ledger.
Without free entry, the possibility of collusion via dynamic reward and punishment
schemes will again impede competition among ledgers. It will not always be optimal for
a group of permissioned record-keepers to create a competing ledger that undercuts the
fees charged by the existing blockchain, Specifically, there are equilibria in the game played
among permissioned record-keepers in which a subset N < M of record-keepers can be prevented from creating a competing blockchain. The strategy profiles are analogous to the one
21

If there were variable costs of writing the ledger in each period, they would instead set fees equal to cost.

31

described in the game between centralized record-keepers: when a group of record-keepers
defects and undercuts the blockchain’s fees, the existing blockchain will cut its fees as much
as possible, thereby lowering the rents that can be earned by the record-keepers who defected.
Formally, in the Appendix we present a model of a permissioned blockchain and show that
defection can be deterred if

1 LA∗
LA∗
>
,
1−δ M
N

where LA∗ is the fee charged by the existing blockchain. This formula is the analogue of that
in Proposition 7: here the cost of creating a new blockchain is simply the present value of
the flow of rents

LA∗
M

accruing to permissioned record-keepers. Again, the key point is that

non-competitive behavior is sustained by collusion, and the threat of future punishments
that destroy rents precludes perfect competition among ledgers. This type of collusion will
be impossible with free entry.
Our results on permissioned blockchain tie into the blockchain trilemma. To restate the
main point, there is nothing inherent in the blockchain data structure itself that impedes
rent-seeking behavior. Adding a costly identity management system to allow for free entry
of record-keepers, in fact, increases the costs of using the ledger for a given set of policies.
However, perfect competition among record-keepers, combined with the fact that blockchains
can be forked endogenously decreases the cost of using a ledger because it allows for the
selection of rules that are most beneficial to users.

4.2

Permissionless blockchain competition in a dynamic setting

We now analyze dynamic fork competition and show that free entry guarantees perfect
competition among ledgers. The repeated game with a permissionless blockchain is played
in periods t = 1, 2, . . . . In each period, proposers, users, and record-keepers play the stage
game. Users are short-lived and die after one period, but record-keepers and proposers P A ,
P B live forever and discount payoffs at rate δ.
The observable quantities are the fork LB ≥ 0 that was proposed, how many users chose
branch A, and how much computing power was committed to each branch in each period.
The ledger l chosen by the majority of users at τ = 1 becomes the reference parameter on
branch A in the next period. That is, when users choose a particular branch of the blockchain
fork, that chain is extended and becomes the default for developers to build off of if they want
to fork in the future. Users observe their own private signals, and record-keepers observe the
entire public history.
We define subgame-perfect equilibrium in the usual way. We now show that in any SPE
of the repeated game, record-keepers always make zero profits from contributing computing

32

power to the blockchain. The unique SPE of the repeated game will then be one in which
agents play the unique SPE of the static game. In that equilibrium, the outcome most
favorable to users always obtains, so competition among ledgers is indeed perfect in this
dynamic setting.
Proposition 8. In any SPE of the repeated game, record-keepers make zero profits. The
unique SPE is the equilibrium of Proposition 1 played in every period t.
Free entry of record-keepers forces their rents to zero. It is therefore not possible for
record-keepers to collude on an outcome in which they maintain only an inferior ledger that
users dislike because such a collusion scheme would require dynamic rewards or punishments,
neither of which is possible when record-keepers break even in every period.22 Therefore,
record-keepers always write on the ledger preferred by users, and users are able to coordinate
on that ledger without fearing it will lack cryptographic security. Proposers then face the
same actions by users and record-keepers as in the static game, so they play the same action
as in the static game.
Although the lack of viable dynamic punishment schemes intensifies competition among
ledgers, we will show in the next section that it poses a problem for the incentivization of
accurate record-keeping. The mechanisms used to incentivize centralized record-keepers to
report honestly typically involve dynamic punishments in which their future rents are reduced.
These mechanisms will be infeasible in a setting with free entry because record-keepers always
break even.

5

Incentivizing Honesty
Traditional ledgers have been criticized for being vulnerable to tampering by a malicious

record-keeper. One of the principal advantages of blockchain protocols is that the ledger is
resilient to fraud by a single bad actor. Record-keepers are able to discipline each other.
Additionally, the identity management mechanism (proof-of-work) makes it expensive to
attack the blockchain by rewriting history but comes at the cost of a waste of resources.
We will now analyze the security of blockchains as well as traditional ledgers maintained
by centralized entities. We outline a simple model of blockchain security and compare the
security of a blockchain to that of a ledger written by a monopolist. At one extreme, we show
that while centralized intermediaries have fully dynamic incentives not to distort their ledgers.
22
More broadly, our point extends to a situation in which record-keepers do earn some rents (e.g., because
there is a fixed cost of computing power that must be paid upfront). The key intuition is that a record-keeper’s
future rents are low relative to the static profits that could be made if the majority of record-keepers refused
to support a given branch of the fork.

33

They can always make a short-term profit by reporting dishonestly because records written
on the ledger are final, but in doing so they stake their entire future stream of profits. At the
other extreme, blockchain record-keepers’ incentives must be completely static because they
earn no rents. The reversibility of the blockchain disciplines attackers because any fraudulent
actions they take may be undone once discovered by the community.

5.1

Centralized ledger security

We first analyze the case where a monopolist is able to distort its own ledger while facing
competition from a fixed outside ledger. There is a monopolist who discounts payoffs at rate
δ, a manager of the outside ledger, and a continuum i ∈ [0, 1] of users who live for one period.
We outline the timeline of the model and then specify agents’ preferences.
Timeline: In each period t at τ = 0, the monopolist proposes a fixed fee LA and the
outside proposer announces a fixed LB .23 Ledger B can be thought of as an exogenously
given outside option. Users choose a ledger at τ = 1. At τ = 2, each record-keeper chooses
its own ledger.
The monopolist is able to take an action to distort the ledger at τ = 2 of each period.
The monopolist chooses an action ht ∈ [0, h] at τ = 2. The action ht represents the recordkeeper’s honesty: a smaller ht represents a larger distortion of the ledger attempted by the
monopolist.
There are public signals that permit users to detect distortions of the ledger. These
signals could correspond to news media revealing that fraudulent activity has occurred, or
large numbers of people realizing that their accounts on the ledger have been compromised
and spreading word of the attack. In each period t, a public signal yt ∈ {0, 1} is observed
at τ = 2 with probability Pr(yt = 1|ht−1 ) = p(ht−1 ).24 We assume p(h) = 0, so that no
deviation is detected when the monopolist is completely honest, and that p0 (h) < 0, so that
when the monopolist’s distortion is severe, it is more likely to be revealed to the public.
Preferences: Users’ fundamental preferences for ledger A are given by ũi,t = si + ζ −
γE[(h−ht )|{ys }ts=1 ], where si is user i’s stake on ledger A and users receive signals xi = ζ +σηi
as usual. A user’s utility is decreased when the monopolist distorts the ledger and plays
h < h. Given that the monopolist’s actions to distort the ledger are final, users’ decisions
are forward-looking: their decision to continue to use ledger A depends on their beliefs about
the monopolist’s future behavior.
23

We abstract from proposers’ choices of LA and LB in order to focus on the problem of incentivizing
honesty rather than the problem of competition among ledgers.
24
Here the assumption that yt takes only the values 0 or 1 restricts the set of possible equilibria. We impose
this assumption so that we may analyze an equilibrium in which users inflict the harshest possible punishment
on the monopolist upon detecting dishonesty.

34

All records written on the monopolist’s ledger are final, so the profits earned through
a distortion of the ledger cannot be nullified. When the monopolist distorts the ledger at
time t, he immediately receives (LA + h − ht )φt , where φt is users’ participation on ledger A.
That is, profits from dishonesty are realized immediately, so a dynamic punishment scheme
is needed to incentivize honesty.
Equilibrium: There will be multiple equilibria because there is no mechanism to pin
down users’ expectations of future play. However, we can establish a lower bound on the fee
required by the monopolist to ensure that h = h is played in all periods, which is a proxy for
the cost of maintaining a ledger under a centralized intermediary above and beyond the rents
extracted due to its competitive advantage. We will assume that users punish the monopolist
in the harshest way possible: they play on ledger B in all future periods after the public
signal yt = 1 is realized.
In order to ensure this is an equilibrium for users, it suffices to assume that there is an
action ĥ the monopolist can take so that max si − γ(h − ĥ) − α(LA − LB ) < 0, meaning even
i

the type who is most anchored to ledger A by a personal stake in the system prefers to leave
the ledger when users expect ĥ to be played going forward. The expectations that justify
this equilibrium, then, are
(
E[h −

ht |{ys }ts=1 ]

=

0

ys = 0 ∀ s ≤ t

h − ĥ ∃ s ≤ t, ys = 1

.

If we wish to derive a lower bound on LA , we may also assume that participation on the
monopolist’s ledger is φ = 1 whenever ys = 0 for all s ≤ t. The monopolist’s problem is
stationary: as long as yt = 1 has not been realized, the monopolist can achieve some value V
in expectation, and after yt = 1 is realized the monopolist gets zero. Hence the monopolist
solves
max h − h + δ(1 − p(h))V.
h

The first-order condition is
1 = −p0 (h∗ )δV.
When the monopolist plays h∗ , we have V =
optimum h∗ ∈ [0, h̄] to exist is then just

d2
dh2

LA +h−h∗
1−δ(1−p(h∗ )) . A sufficient
(LA +h−h)
− 1−δ(1−p(h))
< 0. This

condition for a unique
condition is similar to

the increasing hazard rate assumption that will be made in the next section. To ensure the
monopolist plays h∗ = h, we need
1<−

δ
p0 (h)LA .
1−δ

35

(6)

The monopolist trades off the marginal gain of dishonesty, which is a unit payoff in the
current period, against the marginal cost. The marginal cost is the increase in the probability
of detection, −p0 (h), times the discounted value of all future profits,

δ
A
1−δ L .

This condition

is usually somewhat weak: in order for the monopolist to be dishonest, the marginal benefit
of stealing must be on the order of his franchise value as long as the marginal increase in
the probability of detection is not too low. Therefore, it tends to be cheap to provide a
monopolist with incentives for honesty as long as the harshest punishment scheme can be
implemented. This result is restated in Proposition 9.
Proposition 9. Assume that the monopolist’s objective function (under the harshest punishment scheme) is concave, i.e.

d2
dh2

−

(LA +h−h)
1−δ(1−p(h))

< 0. As long as

1
1
LA > −( − 1) 0
δ
p (h)
the monopolist never finds it optimal to distort the ledger.
Proposition 9 says that the monopolist’s ability to distort the ledger imposes an endogenous lower bound on its fees above and beyond the bound due to the barriers to entry that
result from users’ stakes on the ledger. The less likely the monopolist is to be detected in
its deviations, the higher this bound must be. It is worth noting that the fee charged by
a monopolist may be far from this bound. If the rents earned by a monopolist through his
normal activities are large, there is no competitive force to push the fee it charges down to
the level derived in Proposition 9.
Although the fees required to incentivize the monopolist to report truthfully are not
necessarily large, we highlight that the harshest punishment scheme is only one of many
possibilities in equilibrium. In general, it will be more difficult to incentivize the monopolist.
First, in a setting with a traditional ledger, equilibrium is not unique, so while it may be
the case that under the harshest possible punishment scheme it is not necessary to pay an
intermediary large fees to obtain ledger security, the equilibrium fee required to ensure good
behavior may be much higher. Second, in this case the assumption that signals yt are either
zero or one is not without loss of generality. A richer signal structure would lead to even
greater multiplicity that would allow the monopolist to “nickel and dime” users by proving
to them that, although he is distorting the ledger, he is not doing so to the extent that users
would prefer to switch to a competitor and lose their stakes in the established ledger.

36

5.2

Blockchain security and rollback

In this section, we present a model of blockchain security. There will be occasional
opportunities for record-keepers with large computing capacities to attack the blockchain.
The dynamic mechanism used by centralized record-keeping systems, in which a recordkeeper’s future rents are reduced when a distortion of the ledger is detected, is not feasible
with free entry because rents are driven to zero. The incentives for these attackers to refrain
will be static: they will trade off the benefits of distorting the ledger against the one-time
cost of conducting an attack. The key technological feature of blockchains that will allow
for a static incentive mechanism is rollback. Attacks that are detected can be immediately
reversed by the community. In this sense, blockchain’s lack of finality is a feature rather than
a bug. Rollback provides an additional defense against attacks that goes above and beyond
the onerous cost to acquire the computational power necessary to overwhelm the rest of the
network.
Whereas we focused on hard forks that changed the blockchain’s policies in Section 3,
here we consider forks that roll the blockchain back to a previous state in the wake of an
attack but keep policies intact. When a malicious record-keeper attacks the blockchain, such
as by attempting a double-spend, the blockchain typically forks. The attacker creates one
branch of the blockchain in secret while other record-keepers, being initially unaware of the
attack, extend another branch. When the attacker manages to create a longer chain and
reveals his branch, most users mechanically go along with it because their software looks for
the longest chain. It may become clear only after some time that a malicious attack has
occurred, at which point part of the community may propose a rollback of the blockchain to
a state preceding the attack.25 In our model, we will interpret this type of attack as lowering
users’ stakes on the attacker’s chain. A rollback will permit users to recover the stakes that
they lost at the cost of undoing some transactions. Figure 2 illustrates this process.
We will analyze several features of blockchain security. We differ from previous literature
on the subject (e.g., Biais et al. (2017)) by focusing on how coordination among users of the
system and the possibility of rollback influence the success of an attack. We show that, as
argued by Budish (2018), proof-of-work may be expensive because the incentives of recordkeepers are static, so the cost of providing incentives is a flow cost. Our novel result is that
the possibility of rollback facilitates coordination among users to discipline bad actors. In
25

While the attack on the Ethereum blockchain in 2016 was not a double-spend, it remains by far the largest
attack on a cryptocurrency blockchain. It indeed resulted in a hard fork that rolled back the blockchain and
undid certain transactions, although a minority of the community continued to use the blockchain containing
the entire history of transactions after the attack. Other, smaller, double-spend attacks have occurred on
cryptocurrency blockchains that typically elicit some sort of response to improve security, but often these
attacks are not severe enough to merit a rollback.

37

Figure 2: An illustration of a rollback response to a double-spend attack. The blocks mined
by the attacker on the longer chain are marked in red, and, as described in the model, users’
stakes on this chain are reduced. The community may roll back to the chain mined by honest
record-keepers (in green) to recover users’ lost stakes.
that sense, blockchain security is more robust than centralized ledger security. Our analysis
thus highlights a tradeoff suggested by the Blockchain trilemma: cost inefficiency gives rise
to a stronger form of ledger correctness.
The model of blockchain security is based on the repeated ledger-choice game. We first
describe the timeline and then agents’ preferences.
Timeline: As before, there are two proposers, P A and P B . In subperiod τ = 0 of period
t, Proposer P A suggests extending the current longest chain, and proposer P B suggests rolling
back to the state at time t − 1. Neither suggests a change of rules, so fees on both ledgers
are equal to some fixed L.
There is a continuum of users i ∈ [0, 1] who live for one period. At τ = 1 of period
t, users choose between ledger A, the longest chain, and ledger B, the rolled back chain.
Record-keepers who recorded information at time t − 1 receive payoffs once users make their
decisions.
The main difference between this model and our benchmark dynamic model of permissionless blockchain is in the modeling of record-keepers. In each period, there is a continuum of
infinitesimally small record-keepers j ∈ [0, M ] with computing capacity dj. With probability
µ > 0, a single large record-keeper J is permitted to attempt an attack on the blockchain. For
simplicity, we will assume µ ≈ 0, although all of our results will extend to the general case.
This record-keeper has computing capacity M , so his computing power is enough to match
the rest of the network’s capacity. This assumption is meant to capture “51% attacks” in
which an entity or mining pool able to control a majority of a blockchain’s computing power
mounts a malicious attack on the network in order to reap financial gains.26 Record-keepers

38

who write on the ledger in period t receive payoffs at t + 1 and then shut down operations.27
In subperiod τ = 2 of period t, the large record-keeper may race the small record-keepers
to create the longest chain. All record-keepers choose to write on the ledger chosen by
users at τ = 1, and then the large record-keeper J can attempt to distort the ledger by
contributing at least as much computing power as the small record-keepers. Formally, if the
computation power contributed by the large record-keeper is cJ and small record-keepers
exert computational effort cj dj, record-keeper J succeeds in creating the longest chain if
R
cJ ≥ cj dj. The attacker may also attempt to distort the ledger by taking an action h ∈ [0, h],
j

as in the model of centralized ledger security. Again, action h − hJ represents the recordkeeper’s dishonesty, which here can be thought of as the severity of a 51% attack. The type
of attack modeled here is one in which the large record-keeper maliciously creates a fork of
the blockchain on which he reverses previously accepted reports while small record-keepers
write on the other branch. Users are initially fooled by large record-keepers’ reports28 and
transact according to the his chain because it has greater proof-of-work.29
The structure of public signals is similar to that in the case with a centralized ledger.
In each period t > 0, a public signal yt ∈ {0, 1} is revealed. The signal takes value 1 with
probability p(ht−1 ), where ht−1 is the action h played by the large record-keeper at t − 1 (if
an attack occurred and the attacker created the longest chain). We assume that
p(h)
d
−
< 0,
dh 1 − p(h)
i.e., the hazard rate is decreasing, and again that p(h) = 0, so no deviation is detected if the
record-keeper is completely honest. In this setting, the assumption y ∈ {0, 1} will be without
loss of generality. The equilibrium will be the same regardless of whether users can perfectly
observe hJ,t−1 with some probability.
Preferences: Users’ preferences are as before. Their fundamental preferences for each
27
Even in a setting where the primary purpose of the blockchain is not to facilitate the exchange of cryptoassets, 51% attacks would likely be financially profitable because almost all blockchains compensate recordkeepers internally with coins. Thus, blockchains will typically contain some sort of financial asset that can, in
principle, be double-spent.
27
We make this assumption in order to abstract away from dynamic punishments for large record-keepers
who can attack the network. This assumption is reasonable because large record-keepers would not be able
to profitably attack the blockchain on a regular basis given that others would join the attacks and drive their
profits to zero, and even if the blockchain completely shut down, these record-keepers could simply choose to
attack another blockchain.
29
If users were perfectly able to observe misconduct on the blockchain (as is the case for some blockchains
that are not storage-intensive), there would be no possibility of an attack in the first place. The success of
any attack relies on users being fooled to a certain extent.
29
A 51% attack works because users’ software looks for the longest chain of blocks. Even though small
record-keepers are sending reports as well, these reports are initially ignored by users.

39

branch of the fork are given by ui,t = ζ − γE[h − ht−1 |yt ]. The term ζ is a (vanishingly small)
preference for the longer chain, reflecting the fact that users prefer a ledger that does not
omit the most recent information. The term −γE[h − ht−1 |yt ] corresponds to the fact that
users’ stakes are impacted by the attack and they can essentially reverse their losses from
the previous distortion of the ledger by forking and rolling back to a point in the blockchain
before the distortion occurred.
These preferences differ from those in the example with a traditional ledger in an important way. Users’ stakes in the ledger at t − 1 (which are related to distortions in previous
periods) are now relevant. This is because users have the option to fork off to a ledger on
which the distortion that occurred at t − 1 never happened. Whereas in the model with a monopolist users’ play was affected by public signals only because it was informative about the
monopolist’s continuation play, in this model public signals matter because they materially
affect users’ payoffs when they choose to roll back. In this sense, whereas users’ actions in the
example with a monopolist were forward-looking, in this example their actions are backwardlooking. Users receive a noisy signal xi = ζ + σηi of the common value as before, and their
only signals of ht−1 are the public signals yt . Users’ types are hence given by θi,t = (xi , yt ).
Given that all users have identical fundamental preferences for rolling back the blockchain,
they will all coordinate on the same ledger (as in Proposition 5). There are two cases. If no
attack is detected in period t (yt = 0), users will prefer the longer chain because ζ > 0 and
the possibility that an attack occurred at t − 1 is unlikely. If an attack is detected (yt = 1),
users will prefer to roll back the blockchain because their preference for the longer chain is
small and their expectations of the severity of the attack, h − ht−1 , are strictly positive.
Record-keepers are compensated for their computational effort at time t only if they
contributed to the longest chain and users select the longest chain (ledger A) at t + 1. If an
attacker does not manage to overwhelm the rest of the network at time t, small record-keepers
receive

R cj
φ L
cj 0 dj 0 t+1

≡

cj
C φt+1 L

at t + 1, where φt+1 is the fraction of users who choose A at

j0

t + 1. On the other hand, if an attacker does manage to overwhelm the network at t, the
attacker receives (L + h − h)φt+1 in period t + 1. Small record-keepers get nothing because
they did not contribute to the longest chain.
Under the assumption that an attack is unlikely (µ ≈ 0), the aggregate computational
effort of small record-keepers will always be equal to L, the fees that can be earned through
honest record-keeping. Hence, in order to conduct a successful 51% attack, the large recordkeeper will need to pay at least L.
Equilibrium: Having pinned down the behavior of users and small record-keepers, we
may now analyze the large record-keeper’s choices at τ = 2 when an attack is possible. Of
course, the only interesting case is the one in which the large record-keeper chooses cJ = L
40

and h < h. We look for conditions under which he never does so in equilibrium. We have
argued that whenever yt = 1, the attack is not successful. When the attack is successful, the
large record-keeper gets fees L plus the revenue h − h from the distortion. Therefore, the
large record-keeper must solve
max(1 − p(h))(L + h − h).
h

The first-order condition implies
1=−

p0 (h∗ )
(L + h − h∗ ).
1 − p(h∗ )

(7)

This equation illustrates the static nature of the attacker’s incentives. The attacker cheats
just enough so that the marginal gain from an increase in dishonesty, 1 − p(h∗ ), is equal to
the marginal cost, which is just the profits L + h − h∗ times the change in the probability of
failure, −p0 (h∗ ).
Equation 7 implies that an equilibrium in which the attacker attempts to steal may exist
0

p (h)
only when the hazard rate − 1−p(h)
is large enough. By our earlier assumption that the hazard

rate is decreasing, a sufficient condition to ensure h∗ = h is
1 < −p0 (h)L.

(8)

When the hazard rate is large, the probability of detection is high enough to completely
dissuade the large record-keeper from even attempting an attack. Note that this condition
is satisfied for sufficiently large L, meaning that when the fee earned by blockchain recordkeepers is high, even agents with the ability to subvert the network prefer not to attack it
because they stand to lose the fee they would earn through honest record-keeping. Proposition
10 summarizes these findings:
Proposition 10. The large record-keeper chooses not to attack the blockchain if and only if
max(1 − p(h))(h − h) − p(h)L ≤ 0.
h

A sufficient condition that guarantees this inequality will hold is
L>−

1
p0 (h)

.

This bound on L characterizes the tradeoff between decentralization and cost efficiency
41

required to maintain correctness. It furthermore clarifies the nature of static incentives: the
one-time cost of an attack L must be sufficiently high to deter malicious record-keepers.
Relative to the case of a centralized ledger, security is expensive because it is based on a
flow cost rather than a stock. The intuition for this result is simple and similar to that in
Budish (2018): while a blockchain record-keeper is punished for misbehavior only through
nullification of the profits obtained by attacking the blockchain, a monopolist is punished via
the destruction of its franchise value, which consists of all future fees earned through honest
play.
Proposition 10 has a striking implication. When the probability of detection is sufficiently
large, it is unnecessary to set up an expensive fee structure for record-keepers that leads to
a large waste of computational resources. Record-keepers will abstain from distorting the
ledger regardless because each marginal unit of computational power spent on an attack
earns less on average than one spent on keeping records honestly. The cost of conducting
an attack, which is exactly equal to the fee earned in equilibrium, acts as further protection
against attacks. The fact that incentives must be static coupled with the need for a pure
waste of resources makes incentivizing honesty expensive for a blockchain.
There are several advantages that make the security of a blockchain more robust than
that of a centralized ledger, however. Crucially, in this framework the equilibrium is unique:
users always abandon the ledger after detecting an attack. The uniqueness of equilibrium
is a direct consequence of fork competition. If an attack makes all users worse off they will
coordinate on an alternative ledger on which the attack never happened, but the rest of the
information on the ledger remains intact. Competition among record-keepers will cause them
to coordinate on that ledger as well, and the attacker will get nothing. Hence, rollback is
an effective security feature because it reduces the cost of negating an attack. As we will
show, this static mechanism is quite different from that securing a centralized ledger. Also,
the signal structure p(h) may well be more revealing for a blockchain than for a traditional
ledger, since blockchains are designed specifically to provide transparency about attacks on
the ledger. Fork competition is thus important in securing a ledger as well as in forcing
competition among record-keeper compensation schemes. Hence there is a sense in which,
relative to blockchains, centralized ledgers trade away correctness in order to achieve greater
cost efficiency (due to the fact that franchise values can be used to incentivize honesty).

5.3

Why proof-of-work?

One may wonder why we focus on PoW given that it is only one of many possible consensus algorithms. Popular alternatives that bear mentioning are proof-of-stake (PoS). These
algorithms provide a way to achieve consensus without forcing record-keepers to solve difficult
42

computational problems and hence avoid the waste of resources that proof-of-work entails.
However, the physical resource expenditures involved in PoW actually provide a distinct advantage in achieving consensus among a decentralized group of record-keepers: PoW makes it
costly to extend invalid chains of blocks. With PoS, for example, a record-keeper may record
information whenever a coin that she owns is randomly selected. That is, a record-keeper’s
voting power is proportional to the number of coins she owns rather than the computational
effort she expends. If a record-keeper is randomly selected to record information on an invalid
chain, however, there is very little to stop her from doing so since it costs her nothing. This
impediment to consensus is known as the nothing-at-stake problem and is an active area of
research in computer science.30
The PBFT algorithm essentially achieves consensus by selecting a “validating committee”
and relaying transaction information among validators until a supermajority agree on the
set of transactions to include in the next block. PBFT-style algorithms are often used by
permissioned blockchains such as Ripple. It avoids the problem of forking by forcing validators
to update the current state rather than allowing them to choose to roll back to a previous
state. The lack of forking is detrimental in the sense that PBFT makes it more difficult
to create a competing ledger that contains the information in the existing one. The main
difficulty with PBFT, however, lies in how to select the validating committee without a
system of identity management. There is currently a lack of consensus in the computer
science community regarding how this might be done in a permissionless setting.

6

Enforcement
In this section, we discuss some practical matters and present results related to the ap-

plication of blockchain when enforcement is necessary. The issue with blockchains is that,
though useful for transferring ownership of assets, they do not necessarily guarantee transfers
of possession. Consider a simple example in which a buyer wishes to purchase a car from a
seller on a blockchain. In this case, ownership of the car would be represented by a token
in the seller’s account on the blockchain. The blockchain’s record-keepers would be able
to transfer ownership of the token to the buyer, but they would not be able to verify that
the buyer was physically in possession of the car after the transaction. To ensure transfers
of possession, it is necessary to have some entity that enforces contracts on the blockchain
30

While there are proposals that aim to curb the severity of the nothing-at-stake problem (such as Ethereum’s
Casper), to our knowledge most of these algorithms are based on the idea of punishing record-keepers who use
the same address to validate transactions on two different chains. One can circumvent this security measure
by splitting coins up over multiple addresses, thus minimizing the possibility that any one address is selected
to record information on both chains.

43

when those contracts involve the transaction of physical assets. This type of enforcement
would likely be the role of some centralized entity, which would then have to explicitly make
reference to the cases in which it would enforce blockchain contracts.
The need for an enforcer alongside a blockchain raises two issues. First, while several
commentators claim that blockchain will benefit those in developing countries without strong
property rights, one needs to identify why property rights are weak in the first place before
concluding that a blockchain is the solution. If the government is overly bureaucratic and
incapable of setting up good institutions to track property rights, then a blockchain is an
effective alternative. However, if the government is corrupt to the point that it would outright
refuse to enforce some contracts in a publicly available database, a blockchain will be useless.
Again, the users of the ledger are the ultimate source of discipline, so a blockchain is useful
only insofar as it helps them to discipline a corrupt government (through greater disclosure
of information, most likely). If the enforcer is itself a private firm, such as a bank that
enforces debt obligations, it may be optimal for the enforcer to maintain the ledger as well.
The enforcer will have an incentive to fulfill its obligation for fear of losing the privilege of
maintaining the ledger.
The second issue is that the enforcer must choose which forks of a blockchain to support.
An enforcing entity cannot simply commit to enforce contracts on all forks because the same
physical asset may be promised to two different individuals on different forks of the blockchain.
The enforcer could say it will enforce all contracts so long as certain policies are followed,
which prevents hard forks that change the blockchain’s rules. Of course, this enforcement
policy would be detrimental because it would essentially destroy the potential for competition
between ledgers. Furthermore, if an attack were to occur, such as the one on the Ethereum
blockchain in 2016, the enforcer would have enormous power to resolve the issue in its own
favor.
We have two formal results corresponding to these two issues. We fully lay out the model
with enforcement in the Appendix, but present the main elements here. The only change
to the benchmark dynamic model is that a fourth subperiod τ = 3 is added to each day on
which an agent known as the “enforcer” takes an action e ∈ [0, 1]. In each period, the enforcer
earns a fee proportional to the participation in its ledger that does not depend on the action
e. Users prefer the enforcer to play larger values of e, but by playing e the enforcer incurs a
utility cost of e. Deviations from e = 1 are detected on the next day with probability q(e).
Users have the option to abandon the ledger and get zero utility at any time.
First, we show that there is a synergy between writing the ledger and enforcing its contents. An agent who both writes and enforces the ledger may distort the ledger by choosing an
action h as in Section 4.4 and choosing an enforcement level e. The probabilities of detection

44

of these two actions are independent. We can then compare this situation to one in which
there is a continuum of blockchain record-keepers in charge of reporting the ledger’s contents
and a separate enforcer. Proposition 11 summarizes the incentive compatibility constraints
in the two situations.
Proposition 11. When the enforcer also writes the ledger, the fee L earned by this entity
must satisfy




1
1
1
L≥−
− 1 min
,
,
δ
p0 (0) q 0 (1)

(9)

where p is the detection function for distortion of a centralized ledger. On the other hand,
when the ledger is written by a blockchain and enforced by a centralized entity, the fees LW
and LE earned by blockchain record-keepers and the enforcer, respectively, must satisfy
LW



1
1
1
≥− 0
, LE ≥ −
−1 0 ,
pB (0)
δ
q (1)

(10)

where pB is the detection function for distortions of the blockchain.
Clearly, the bound on the fee L derived in (9) is less than LE + LW in (10) when δ is reasonably large and pb ≈ p. When distortion of the ledger and lack of enforcement are strategic
substitutes, bundling record-keeping and enforcement together reduces the fee required to
incentivize honest behavior. The fee only needs to be large enough that the intermediary will
not choose the more attractive of the two deviations, after which the incentive compatibility
condition for the other type of deviation is automatically satisfied. Furthermore, bundling
is beneficial because it eliminates the waste of resources required by a blockchain. The only
case in which it may be beneficial to keep record-keeping and enforcement unbundled is if
the p function is much more sensitive for blockchains than standard ledgers, and the cost of
enforcement

1
q 0 (1)

is small relative to the cost of honest reporting.

Our second result is that when there is a centralized enforcer, there is no longer a unique
equilibrium with a blockchain in which the ledger that is best for users is always selected.
There are “dictatorial” equilibria in which the enforcer effectively decides which branch of a
fork is chosen.
Proposition 12. With a centralized enforcer, there is always an equilibrium in which the
ledger preferred by the enforcer is chosen by all users.
We defer the proof of this proposition to the Appendix, but the intuition is simple. The
enforcer just threatens not to enforce contracts on any branch of a fork that uses policies of
which it does not approve. Users will not want to coordinate on any ledger that the enforcer
will ignore, so they use the one selected by the enforcer. The existence of a centralized entity
45

that is indispensable for the proper functioning of the ledger destroys the benefits that come
with decentralizing the record-keeping function.

7

Conclusion
We present a general model of ledger competition and apply it to understand when a

blockchain is more economically beneficial than a centralized ledger managed by a centralized
intermediary. Our analysis of the tradeoffs between centralized and decentralized recordkeeping is guided by the blockchain trilemma. First, we examine the competitive benefits of
decentralization. We show that two key technological features of blockchains that promote
competition between ledgers are information portability and free entry of record-keepers.
The portability of information allowed by fork competition reduces switching costs for users
when a new ledger emerges to compete with an established one. Thus, fork competition
eases coordination among users on an entrant ledger with better protocols and policies. Free
entry is critical for fork competition as well because it forces record-keepers’ rents to zero.
In particular, the absence of rents prohibits record-keepers from coordinating on an outcome
detrimental to users. Such coordination requires dynamic punishment schemes, but in an
environment without rents, such punishments are infeasible. Record-keepers simply compete
to write on the ledger preferred by users. By contrast, in an environment with portability of
information but no free entry of record-keepers (e.g., a permissioned blockchain), it need not
be the case that the policies most beneficial to users emerge in equilibrium.
We then explicitly examine the costs of incentivizing record-keepers to report honestly
(correctness). We show that on the one hand, centralized intermediaries are incentivized
dynamically. Any distortion of a centralized ledger is final, so when fraud is discovered,
the record-keeper must be punished by a reduction in future profits. Centralized recordkeepers are incentivized by ensuring that the future profits they will earn are large enough to
guarantee they do not want to risk losing them. On the other hand, blockchain record-keepers
do not earn rents, so they must be incentivized statically. Rollback, the third important
technological feature of blockchain, enables static incentivization by making attacks on the
blockchain reversible. Attackers hence weigh the probability that a 51% attack will succeed
against the one-off cost of conducting such an attack. Correctness is incentivized by raising
the flow cost of proof-of-work to the point that attacks become unprofitable. It is expensive
to incentivize blockchain record-keepers with flow rewards, but the security provided by
blockchains is more resilient to misbehavior because of the rollback feature. Blockchains
hence sacrifice cost efficiency for decentralization and more robust correctness.
We highlight the important distinction between ownership and possession. Blockchains

46

can effect transfers of ownership, but when enforcement of possession rights is required it is
often more efficient to bundle record-keeping and enforcement duties in a single centralized
intermediation structure.
In this paper, we have outlined the incentive mechanisms of two particularly important
types of ledgers. What we have not developed so far is a general theory of the interactions
between record-keepers and users on an arbitrary ledger. An investigation of the optimal
technological restrictions on communication between record-keepers and users is a fruitful
avenue for future research.

References
[1] Bruno Biais, Christophe Bivière, Matthieu Bouvard, and Catherine Casamatta. The
blockchain folk theorem. 2017.
[2] Eric Budish. The economic limits of bitcoin and the blockchain. Working paper, 2018.
[3] Hans Carlsson and Eric van Damme. Global games and equilibrium selection. Econometrica, 61(5):989–1018, 1993.
[4] Jonathan Chiu and Thorsten Koeppl. The economics of cryptocurrencies– bitcoin and
beyond. 2017.
[5] William Lin Cong and Zhiguo He. Blockchain disruption and smart contracts. 2017.
[6] William Lin Cong, Ye Li, and Neng Wang. Tokenomics: Dynamic adoption and valuation. Working Paper, 2018.
[7] Douglas Diamond. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. The Review of
Economic Studies, 51(3):393–414, 1984.
[8] Lukasz Drozd and Ricardo Serrano-Padial. Financial contracting with enforcement externalities. Journal of Economic Theory, 178:153–189, 2018.
[9] David Easley, Maurenn O’Hara, and Soumya Basu. From mining to markets: The
evolution of bitcoin transaction fees. 2017.
[10] David Frankel, Stephen Morris, and Ady Pauzner. Equilibrium selection in global games
with strategic complementarities. Journal of Economic Theory, 108(1):1–44, 2003.
[11] Drew Fudenberg and Jean Tirole. Perfect bayesian equilibrium. Journal of Economic
Theory, 53(2):236–260, 1991.
47

[12] Joshua Gans, June Ma, and Rabee Tourky. Market structure in bitcoin mining. NBER
Working Paper, 2018.
[13] Arthur Gervais, Ghassan Kharame, Karl Wüst, Vasileios Glykantzis, Hubert Ritzdorf,
and Srdjan Capkun. On the security and performance of proof of work blockchains. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, 2016.
[14] Gur Huberman, Jacob Leshno, and Ciamac Moallemi. Monopoly without a monopolist:
An economic analysis of the bitcoin payment system. Working Paper, 2017.
[15] Ricardo Lagos and Randall Wright. A unified framework for monetary theory and policy
analysis. Journal of Political Economy, 113(3):463–484, 2005.
[16] Paul Milgrom and John Roberts. Rationalizability, learning, and equilibrium in games
with strategic complementarities. Econometrica, 58(6):1255–1277, 1990.
[17] Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin. Unique equilibrium in a model of speculative
currency attacks. American Economic Review, 88(3):587–597, 1998.
[18] Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin. Global games: Theory and applications. In
Mathias Dewatripont, Lars P. Hansen, and Stephen J. Turnovsky, editors, Advances
in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World Conference,
Cambridge, 2003. Cambridge University Press.
[19] Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Whitepaper, 2008.
[20] Emiliano Pagnotta and Andrea Buraschi. An equilibrium valuation of bitcoin and decentralized network assets. 2018.
[21] Jean-Charles Rochet and Jean Tirole. Platform competition in two-sided markets. Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(4):990–1029, 2003.
[22] Joszef Sakovics and Jakub Steiner. Who matters in coordination problems. American
Economic Review, 102(7):3439–3461, 2012.
[23] Linda Schilling and Harald Uhlig. Some simple bitcoin economics. 2018.
[24] Ricardo Serrano-Padial. Coordination in global games with heterogeneous agents. Working paper, 2018.
[25] Michael Sockin and Wei Xiong. A model of cryptocurrencies. 2018.

48

[26] Karl Wüst and Arthur Gervais. Do you need a blockchain? IACR Cryptology ePrint
Archive, 2017.

49

A

Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1:
Proof. This proposition is an immediate consequence of Lemma B.1 in Appendix B.
Proof of Proposition 2:
Proof. This proposition follows from Theorem B.1 in Appendix B.
Proof of Proposition 3:
Proof. The equilibrium follows from Propositions B.2 and B.3.
Proof of Proposition 4
Proof. This proposition follows from equations 17, 23, and 21.
Proof of Proposition 5:
Proof. We prove the proposition by backwards induction.
τ =2: At t = 2, record-keepers know the value of φl , l ∈ {A, B}. We show that C l = φl Ll in
equilibrium. Suppose first that C l < φl Ll . Then since M is large, there exists a record-keeper
j such that cj < 1, but record-keeper j could make profits by setting cj = 1 because
1 l l
φL −1>0
Cl
Now suppose C l > φl Ll . This means that any record-keeper j for whom cj > 0 would benefit
by setting cj = 0, since
cj l l
1
φ L − cj = ( l φl Ll − 1)cj < 0
l
C
C
Hence C l = φl Ll .
τ =1: We will guess and verify that in any equilibrium, ũ(s = 0, φ, ζ, L, C) is asymmetric
towards B. Record-keepers’ optimal play at τ = 2 implies that

Cl
φl

= C for each branch of

the fork. Then it must be that P B selects LB such that
1
ũ(s = 0, φ = , ζ, L, C = (φLA , (1 − φ)LB )) ≤ 0
2

50

This utility function is isomorphic to a symmetric utility function with positive stakes on B
by setting
s̃i = g(LB ) − g(LA ) − α(LB − LA ) ≡ g̃(LB ) − g̃(LA )
We may now apply Theorem B.1 given that we have a symmetric utility function with positive
stakes on one of the two ledgers. According to Theorem B.1, then, type s̃i ’s cutoff signal
k(si ) is nonnegative, so as long as ζ ≤ 0, all users will have such signals when σ is sufficiently
close to zero. Therefore all users play B.
τ =0: Now we confirm our guess that the proposer selects such a value LB if possible. The
equilibrium derived above shows that whenever g̃LB < g̃(LA ), the proposer obtains a payoff
of ũ(s = 0, φ = 0, ζ, L, C(φ = 0, L)). It is never possible for the proposer to obtain a higher
payoff by choosing LB such that g̃(LB ) < g̃(LA ). Then it must be that the proposer chooses
the lowest possible LB in order to maximize payoffs, so
LB = arg min ũ(s = 0, φ = 0, ζ, L, C(φ, L))
LB

Proof of Proposition 6
Proof. When χA = 0, it is always a dominant strategy to adopt currency A given that there
is uncertainty about the adoption of B. Then this game reduces to one with two possible
choices: to adopt B or not to adopt B. When χB is negative, it is dominant to adopt B.
When χB is large and positive, it is dominant to not adopt B, so we have shown the existence
of dominance regions. Then by Lemma B.1, there is a unique cutoff equilibrium. The proof
of Theorem B.1 shows that the cutoff χ∗ is smallest when all users’ initial stakes are equal to
zero.
Proof of Proposition 7
Proof. The proof is outlined in Section 4.1.
Proof of Proposition 8
Proof. First we show that in subperiod τ = 2 after any history, on either branch l of the
fork, the total computing power contributed by record-keepers must be φl Ll . Suppose that
C l < φl Ll . Then there must be some record-keeper j who contributes cj < 1. By deviating
to cj = 1 on branch l, this record-keeper can achieve positive profits in the current period.
Furthermore, this record-keeper’s deviation does not affect any publicly observable signal in
51

the future history, since the record-keeper is of measure zero. An analogous argument shows
that C l cannot be greater than φl Ll , so C l = φl Ll at any history.
Second, we must check that proposers play static best responses. Given that both users
and record-keepers play the same strategies that they do in the stage game, a proposer can
maximize her flow of payoffs by playing the same LB as in the stage game.
Proofs of Proposition 9 and Proposition 10:
Proof. Proposition 9 follows from the analysis in Section 5.1. Proposition 10 follows directly
from optimality condition 7.
Proof of Propositions 11 and 12:
Proof. See Appendix C.4.

B

Global Games with Heterogeneous Preferences
The majority of the proofs in this section are adapted from Drozd and Serrano-Padial

(2017) and Serrano-Padial (2018). There is a continuum of players i ∈ [0, 1] who play a
one-shot coordination game in which they choose between two options, A and B. Players’
fundamental preferences consist of heterogeneous private values θi ∈ R for choice A. There is
also a common value τ ∈ [τl , τu ] that affects players’ preferences for A. We assume that θ is
iid across players with distribution F (θ). For now, we assume F is a discrete distribution with
finite support but later take the limit of a continuous distribution F . Players’ preferences
can be described by the function
v(θ, τ, φ)
where φ is the proportion of players who choose A. That is, there is a coordination motive.
When v(θ, τ, φ) > 0, it is a best response for a player of type θ to choose A. Conversely,
a player of type θ should choose B if v(θ, τ, φ) < 0. We additionally impose a symmetry
assumption. Assumption B.1 summarizes the restrictions on v:
Assumption B.1. We make the following assumptions about v:
1. Function v(θ, τ, φ) is increasing in θ;
2. Function v(θ, τ, φ) is increasing in τ ;
3. Function v is symmetric in the sense that v(0, 0, φ) = −v(0, 0, 1 − φ).

52

4. There exist dominance regions for both actions: ∃ τ < τu , τ > τl such that A is dominant
for all θ whenever τ > τ and B is dominant for all θ whenever τ < τ .
Henceforth we will assume that players have incomplete information about the common
value τ . We assume players have a uniform prior over τ 31 and receive signals si = τ + σηi
(σ > 0), where ηi is iid across players and independent of τ . The noise term ηi is distributed
with CDF H(η) with support on the interval [− 12 , 12 ]. In what follows, we will frequently
consider the limit σ → 0.
By Theorem 5 in Milgrom and Roberts (1990), this is a supermodular game. Therefore, if
the signal profile is s, there are largest and smallest rationalizable strategy profiles k(s) and
k(s). Furthermore, every equilibrium strategy profile k(s) satisfies k(s) ≤ k(s) ≤ k(s). Given
that agents observe only their own signals, it must be that all agents play cutoff strategies:
for each type θ, there is a signal k(θ) such that θ plays A if si > k(θ) and plays B if si < k(θ).
When agents play a cutoff equilibrium k, we will denote the expected utility derived from
playing A for type (θ, s) by E[v(θ, τ, φ)|k, s]. The equilibrium condition is just
E[v|k, k(θ)] = 0

(11)

for all θ. The following lemma establishes that there is a unique equilibrium in cutoff strategies. The proof is essentially the same as that in Drozd and Serrano-Padial (2017).
Lemma B.1. For sufficiently small σ, if k is a cutoff strategy equilibrium and ∆ > 0, then
E[v|k, k(θ)] < E[v|k + ∆, k(θ) + ∆].
Proof. The assumption that there exist dominance regions for actions A and B mean we may
focus on signals s ∈ [τ − σ2 , τ + σ2 ] (since agents with signals outside that interval know τ lies
31

In the limit σ → 0, the results would be unchanged if we were to assume an arbitrary prior on τ with full
support. See Frankel, Morris, and Pauzner (2003).

53

in a dominance region). For small σ, the density of τ conditional on s is h( s−τ
σ ). We have
k(θ)+ σ2

Z

E[v|k, k(θ)] =



 

Z 
k(θ0 ) − τ 
k(θ) − τ
0
1−H
v θ, τ,
dF (θ ) h
dτ
σ
σ

k(θ)− σ2
k(θ)+ σ2

Z

<

θ0



 

Z 
k(θ0 ) − τ 
k(θ) − τ
0
1−H
v θ, τ + ∆,
dF (θ ) h
dτ
σ
σ

k(θ)− σ2

θ0

k(θ)+∆+ σ2

Z

=


 


Z 
k(θ0 ) + ∆ − τ 
k(θ) + ∆ − τ
0
1−H
dF (θ ) h
dτ
v θ, τ,
σ
σ

k(θ)+∆− σ2

θ0

= E[v|k + ∆, k(θ) + ∆]

From Lemma B.1 it is immediate to see that there is a unique equilibrium. Suppose that
ˆ = max k(θ) − k(θ), and let θ̂ be the value of
k ≤ k with strict inequality for some θ. Let ∆
θ

θ that achieves this maximum. Then

ˆ k(θ̂) + ∆]
ˆ ≤ E[v|k, k(θ̂)]
E[v|k, k(θ̂)] < E[v|k + ∆,
ˆ
where the last inequality comes from the fact that k ≤ k + ∆.
In what follows, it will be useful to define the following object: for all θ ∈ Θ, where Θ is
some set contained in the support of F , set
X  k(θ) − τ 
1
H
ψ(τ, Θ) = P
f (θ)
f (θ)
σ
Θ

Θ

This expression is the expectation of the number of agents in Θ who play B given the
common value τ . We now prove an important lemma (called the “Belief Constraint”) about
the function ψ due to Sakovics and Steiner (2012) and Drozd and Serrano-Padial (2017):
Lemma B.2. For any subset Θ ⊂ supp(F ) and any z ∈ [0, 1],

P
Θ

X
1
Pr(ψ(τ, Θ) < z|s = k(θ))f (θ) = z
f (θ)
Θ

Proof. Begin by defining “virtual types” δ(s, θ) = s − k(θ). This reduces the two-dimensional
54

type space to a one-dimensional one. Agents play A whenever δ(s, θ) > 0 and B when
δ(s, θ) < 0. With this definition,
ψ(τ, Θ) = Pr(δ(s, θ) < 0|τ, Θ)
For brevity, we will denote δ(si , θi ) by δi . First we find the marginal density of (s, θ) conditional on θ ∈ Θ after integrating out τ . Then we show that Pr(ψ(τ, Θ) ≤ z|δ(si , θi ) = 0) = z.
This property is due to Morris and Shin (2003).
We have
Pr(s, θ, τ |Θ) = Pr(s|θ, τ, Θ) Pr(θ|τ, Θ) Pr(τ |Θ)
Recalling that the prior on τ is uniform, this yields
Pr(s, θ, τ |Θ) =

1
h
σ



s−τ
σ



f (θ)
P
f (θ0 )
θ0 ∈Θ

whenever s ∈ [τ + σ2 , τ − σ2 ]. Cutoffs k(θ) must always lie in this range as argued earlier.
When s ∈ [τ − σ2 , τ + σ2 ], the marginal density is then
s+ σ2

Z

Pr(s, θ|Θ) =
s− σ2

Define η̃i =

δi −τ
σ ,

1
h
σ



s−τ
σ



f (θ)
f (θ)
P
dF (τ ) = P
0
f (θ )
f (θ0 )
θ0 ∈Θ

θ0 ∈Θ

and denote the distribution of η̃ conditional on θ ∈ Θ by H̃Θ . Observe

that
H̃Θ (η̃) =

X
θ∈Θ


Pr

s − k(θ) − τ
< η̃
σ


=

X
θ∈Θ



k(θ)
Pr  < η̃ +
σ

Hence η̃j is iid across players and independent of τ .We have
Pr(ψ(τ, Θ) < z|δi = 0) = Pr(Pr(δj > 0|τ ) < z|δi = 0)
 


τ
= Pr Pr η˜j < −
< z|δi = 0
σ




τ
= Pr 1 − H̃Θ −
< z|δi = 0
σ
= Pr(1 − H̃Θ (η̃i ) < z)
−1
= Pr(η̃i > H̃Θ
(1 − z))
−1
= 1 − H̃Θ (H̃Θ
(1 − z)) = z

55

Now to complete the proof, observe that
Pr(ψ(τ, Θ) < z|δ = 0) =

X

Pr(ψ(τ, Θ) < z|s = k(θ)) Pr(θ|δ = 0, Θ)

Θ

Given the uniform prior over τ , the information environment is translation-invariant, so
f (θ)
Pr(θ|δ = 0, Θ) = P
f (θ0 )
Θ

That is, knowing δ = 0 yields no additional information about θ, since each type is equally
likely to observe δ = 0. Hence

P

X
1
Pr(ψ(τ, Θ) < z|s = k(θ))f (θ) = z
f (θ)

Θ

Θ

as desired.
Up until this point, none of the results have depended on taking the limit σ → 0; we just
needed σ to be small enough that τ −

σ
2

> τl and τ +

σ
2

< τh . Now we specialize to the case

considered in the text where σ becomes arbitrarily small and define kσ to be the threshold
equilibrium played for variance parameter σ. Correspondingly, we denote a specific type θ’s
cutoff by k σ (θ). We then define
Aθ (z|kσ , Θ) = Pr(ψ(τ, Θ) < z|s = k σ (θ))
to be the strategic belief of type θ– that is, it is the probability that type θ assigns to the
event that a proportion less than z of agents in Θ play action B. Now we prove the final
lemma we will need before proving the main result (due to Drozd and Serrano-Padial (2017)).
Lemma B.3. There exist a unique partition Θ1 , . . . , ΘS and thresholds k1 > · · · > kS such
that, as σ → 0, k σ (θ) → ki uniformly for all θ ∈ Θi and all i ∈ {1, . . . , S}. Furthermore, the
cutoffs ki satisfy the limit conditions

Z1 
X
X
0
0
v θ, ki , 1 − 2
f (θ ) − 2z
f (θ ) dAθ (z|k, Θi ) = 0
0

Θj ,j<i

Θi

where k denotes the set of limit cutoffs.
Proof. Fix σ̃ > 0 and define a partition of types Θ1 , . . . , ΘS by placing two types θ, θ0 in the
same equivalence class whenever |k σ̃ (θ) − k σ̃ (θ0 )| < σ̃. Define Qσ̃θ (χ|kσ̃ , z) = Pr(τ ≤ χ|s =
56

k σ̃ (θ), ψ(τ, Θi ) = z) (for θ ∈ Θi ) to be type k σ̃ (θ)’s belief about τ conditional on the event
that a proportion z of players in the same equivalence class of the partition play B. We have
σ̃

σ̃


Z1 kZ+ 2 
X
X
σ̃ σ̃
E[v|k , k (θ)] =
v θ, χ, 1 − 2
f (θ) − 2z
f (θ) dQσ̃θ (χ|kσ̃ , z)dAθ (z|kσ̃ , Θi )
Θj ,j<i

0 kσ̃ − σ̃
2

Θi



P
P
σ̃
σ̃
The term in the integrand is bounded by v θ, k ± 2 , 1 − 2
f (θ) − 2z f (θ) , so
Θj ,j<i

Θi


Z1 
X
X
σ̃
σ̃
f (θ) dAθ (z|kσ̃ , Θi )
f (θ) − 2z
E[v|k , k (θ)] ≤ v θ, k + , 1 − 2
2
σ̃

σ̃

Θj ,j<i

0

(12)

Θi

and

Z1 
X
X
σ̃
σ̃
E[v|k , k (θ)] ≥ v θ, k − , 1 − 2
f (θ) dAθ (z|kσ̃ , Θi )
f (θ) − 2z
2
σ̃

σ̃

Θj ,j<i

0

(13)

Θi

Note that as σ̃ → 0, the right-hand side of B converges to the right-hand side of B as long
as dAθ is bounded, which is shown in Lemma 10 of Drozd and Serrano-Padial (2017).
Now, for each i, take some arbitrary θi ∈ Θi and set ki = k σ̃ (θi ). As σ is taken to
σ̃

zero from σ̃, set cutoffs k̂σ so that ∆θi ,θi0 =

σ̃ (θ 0 )
ki −k̂σ
i
σ

=

ki −kσ̃ (θi0 )
σ̃

for all θi0 ∈ Θi . Note that

σ̃

Aθ (z|k̂σ , Θi ) is constant as σ → 0 under these transformed cutoffs. Then as σ → 0,
σ̃
E[v|k̂σ , k σ̃ (θ)]


Z1 
X
X
→ v θ, ki , 1 − 2
f (θ) − 2z
f (θ) dAθ (z|kσ̃σ , Θi )
Θj ,j<i

0

Θi

Fix  > 0. If we pick σ̃ close to zero, we can ensure that
σ̃

E[v|k̂σ , k σ̃ (θ)] − E[v|kσ̃ , k σ̃ (θ)] < 
for all σ < σ̃. This is because the solution of the system of equations E[v|kσ̃ , k σ̃ (θ)] = 0
can be seen as the correct choice of k σ̃ (θi ) and ∆θi ,θi0 for each i holding Θi fixed (which is
possible as long as σ̃ is sufficiently small). The solution to this system of equations lies in a
compact set, so for small σ̃ the limit condition will not differ from the equilibrium condition
E[v|kσ̃ , k σ̃ (θ)] = 0 by more than . Therefore the limit condition holds as σ̃ → 0. Since

57

ki was arbitrary, this proof has the additional implication that k σ (θ) → ki uniformly for all
θ ∈ Θi . The uniqueness of the partition is immediate from the uniqueness of equilibrium in
this setting.
In order to proceed, we will need to define stable and unstable equilibria of the complete
information game.
Definition B.1. An equilibrium strategy profile a(θ) constitutes an unstable equilibrium of
the complete information game if for all µ > 0, if a fraction µ of players’ choices are changed
from the prescription of a(θ) (from A to B), all players wish to play B, and if a fraction µ
of actions are changed from B to A, all players wish to play A. An equilibrium profile a(θ)
constitutes a stable equilibrium if it is not an unstable equilibrium.
We now prove the main theorem.
Theorem B.1. Suppose that in the complete information game, for any value of τ there are
at most two pure strategy (stable) equilibria: one in which all players choose A and one in
which all players choose B. In the limit σ → 0, the equilibrium strategies are given by a
cutoff k common to all players such that
1. When θi = 0 for all i with certainty, k = 0;
2. When F (0) = 0 and F (θ) < 1 for some θ > 0, k < 0.
Proof. First note that as σ → 0, the cutoff used by all agents must be the same. Suppose
that there are two groups of types Θ1 and Θ2 such that types in Θ1 use k1 and types in Θ2
use k2 > k1 as σ → 0. Then there would be an equilibrium of the complete information game
in which types in Θ1 choose A and types in Θ2 choose B when τ ∈ [k1 , k2 ]. By assumption,
this equilibrium must be unstable. That is, for all τ ∈ [k1 , k2 ] and any µ > 0, all agents
would prefer to play A if the fraction of agents playing A were Q(Θ1 ) + µ, and all agents
would prefer to play B if the fraction of agents playing A were Q(Θ1 ) − µ.
For s ∈ [k1 − σ2 , k1 + σ2 ], there is uncertainty about whether other types in Θ1 will play
A. In fact, the belief constraint implies that some cutoff type must believe at least half of all
others in Θ1 will play B (or at least half of all others in Θ2 will play A). By the definition of
an unstable equilibrium, there must then always be some cutoff type who wants to deviate
from the equilibrium cutoff strategy (since this type believes that the fraction of agents who
play A is strictly less than Q(Θ1 )). Hence an unstable equilibrium cannot be the equilibrium
selected in the limit, meaning there must be a cutoff common to all agents.

58

The rest of the proof follows from Lemma B.3. The cutoff k must satisfy the limit
condition


Z1 
X
0
v θ, k, 1 − 2z
f (θ ) dAθ (z|k) = 0
Θ

0

for all θ ∈ Θ. When Θ = {0} the belief constraint (Lemma B.2) implies that dAθ (z|k) =
dA(z|k) = zdz. Then we have
Z1
v(0, k, 1 − 2z)zdz = 0
0

From the symmetry assumption in Assumption B.1 it is immediate that this condition is
satisfied when k = 0.
On the other hand, when there is a positive mass of agents with θ > 0, we have
X

Z
f (θ)


v θ, k, 1 − 2z

X

Θ


f (θ ) dAθ (z|k) = 0
0

Θ

by summing over θ. Then by the assumption that v is increasing in θ,
X
Θ

Z
f (θ)




Z 
X
X
X
0
0
v θ, k, 1 − 2z
f (θ ) dAθ (z|k) >
f (θ) v 0, k, 1 − 2z
f (θ ) dAθ (z|k)
Θ

Θ

θ

Z


v 0, k, 1 − 2z

=

X

0

f (θ )

Θ

Z



 X


f (θ)dAθ (z|k)

θ



v 0, k, 1 − 2z zdz

=

where the first equality is obtained by noting that the integrand is independent of θ and
the second follows from the beliefconstraint. Note that
 if k ≥ 0, then the right-hand side
R
P
is nonnegative, meaning that v θ, k, 1 − 2z f (θ0 ) dAθ (z|k) must certainly be positive.
Θ

Thus the limit condition can only be satisfied by some k < 0.
We may specialize the results to a case in which the function v is linear in order to derive
further analytical expressions characterizing the equilibrium. From now on, we assume that
v(θ, τ, φ) = θ + τ + κφ
The following proposition describes the main results in this linear case.
Proposition B.1. In the limit σ → 0, the equilibrium strategies are given by a monotone
59

partition Θ1 , . . . , ΘS of Θ and cutoffs k1 > · · · > kS such that
(i) For all θ ∈ Θi , k(θ) = ki ;
(ii) −θi − κ(1 − 2F (θi )− ) ≤ ki ≤ −θi − κ(1 − 2F (θi ))


P
P
(iii) ki + κ 1 − 2
f (θ) − f (θ) = −E[θ|θ ∈ Θi ] for all i.
Θj ,j<i

Θi

where θi = min Θi , θi = max Θi .
Proof. Point (i) is a consequence of Lemma B.3. We now show the partition is monotone.
Suppose that θ1 > θ2 but θ2 ∈ Θj , θ1 ∈ Θm with j > m. Then
−θ1 ≥ km + κ(1 − 2

X

X

f (θ)) ≥ kj + κ(1 − 2

Θn ,n≤m

f (θ)) ≥ −θ2

Θi ,i<j

a contradiction. From this it immediately follows that
−θi − κ(1 − 2F (θi )− ) ≤ ki ≤ −θi − κ(1 − 2F (θi ))
which is point (ii).
To see (iii), note that Lemma B.3 implies that for all θ ∈ Θi ,


Z1
X
X
0 = ki + θ + κ 1 − 2
f (θ) − 2
f (θ) zdAθ (z|k, Θi )
Θj ,j<i

Multiplying by

Pf (θ) 0
f (θ )

Θi

0

on both sides, moving the θ term to the left-hand side, and summing

Θi

over θ ∈ Θi ,


Z1 
X
X
X
1
−E[θ|θ ∈ Θi ] = ki + κ 1 − 2
f (θ) − 2
f (θ) zd P
f (θ)dAθ (z|k, Θi )
f (θ)
Θj ,j<i

Θi

0

Θi

Θi



X
X
= ki + κ 1 − 2
f (θ) −
f (θ)
Θj ,j<i

Θi

where the second line follows from Lemma B.2, the belief constraint. This is precisely the
desired result.
Equipped with Proposition B.1, we may now prove some properties of equilibria when
the distribution F satisfies certain conditions. We consider three scenarios:
60

1. F is continuous and θ + κ(1 − 2F (θ)) is monotonically increasing;
2. F has a symmetric, single-peaked density f and θ + κ(1 − 2F (θ)) is non-monotonic;
3. F is a two-point discrete distribution.
The next three propositions characterize the equilibrium in these three cases. Henceforth we
assume H is the uniform distribution on [− 12 , 12 ].
Proposition B.2. When F is continuous and θ + κ(1 − 2F (θ)) is a monotonically increasing
function, the cutoffs k(θ) satisfy k(θ) = −θ − κ(1 − 2F (θ)).
Proof. We show that the partition described in Proposition B.1 must consist of singletons in
this case. Suppose that θ1 < θ2 are the boundaries of equivalence class i of the partition. By
property (ii) of Theorem 4, we have
−θ1 − κ(1 − 2F (θ1 )) ≤ ki ≤ −θ2 − κ(1 − 2F (θ2 ))
By assumption, −θ1 − κ(1 − 2F (θ1 )) > −θ2 − κ(1 − 2F (θ2 )), so this is impossible. Hence
the partition is indeed a collection of singletons, and k(θ) = −θ − κ(1 − 2F (θ)) (again by
property (ii)).
Proposition B.3. Suppose F has a symmetric, single-peaked density f and θ + κ(1 − 2F (θ))
is non-monotonic. Let θ̂ = arg max f (θ). The equilibrium is characterized by a parameter ∆
θ

such that
• k(θ) = −θ − κ(1 − 2F (θ)) for θ 6∈ [θ̂ − ∆, θ̂ + ∆],
• k(θ) = −θ̂ − κ(1 − F (θ̂ − ∆) − F (θ̂ + ∆)) for θ ∈ [θ̂ − ∆, θ̂ + ∆],
• The parameter ∆ is the unique nonzero solution to
∆ = κ(F (θ̂ + ∆) − F (θ̂ − ∆))

Proof. Observe that under the assumptions on F , there must be only one interval [θ, θ] where
θ + κ(1 − 2F (θ)) is decreasing. All θ in this interval must belong to the same equivalence
class of the partition described in Proposition B.1. We show this by contradiction. Suppose
θ ∈ [θ, θ) is at the upper boundary of an equivalence class Θi and θ0 ∈ (θ, θ] is the lower
bound of Θi+1 . Then by point (ii) of Proposition B.1 we have
ki ≤ −θ − κ(1 − 2F (θ)) < −θ0 − κ(1 − 2F (θ0 )) ≤ ki+1
61

which is impossible because the cutoffs are monotonically decreasing in i.
Hence the entire increasing region [θ, θ] belongs to a single equivalence class of the partition. At the boundaries of the equivalence class containing that interval, k(θ) must be
continuous (which follows by again applying the argument showing that there cannot be two
equivalence classes containing points in the increasing region). By the argument in Proposition B.2, there cannot be an equivalence class of the partition containing only points in the
decreasing region, so it must be that the partition consists of a single equivalence class [θ, θ]
containing all values of θ in the increasing region and singletons for all θ outside that interval.
Let k(θ) = k for θ ∈ [θ, θ]. Point (iii) of Theorem 4 implies that


k = − E[θ|θ ≤ θ ≤ θ] + κ(1 − F (θ) − F (θ))

(14)

Continuity of the cutoff at the boundaries of the interval implies


− θ + κ(1 − 2F (θ)) = k = − θ + κ(1 − 2F (θ))
Rearranging these expressions, we find
θ+θ
= E[θ|θ ≤ θ ≤ θ]
2

(15)

θ−θ
= κ(F (θ) − F (θ))
2

(16)

The symmetry of the density f and (5) imply that E[θ|θ ≤ θ ≤ θ] = θ̂ and there exists ∆
such that θ = θ̂ − ∆, θ = θ̂ + ∆. Then (4) reduces to
k(θ) = −θ̂ − κ(1 − F (θ̂ − ∆) − F (θ̂ + ∆))
for θ ∈ [θ̂ − ∆, θ̂ + ∆] and (5) reduces to
∆ = κ(F (θ̂ + ∆) − F (θ̂ − ∆))
as desired. Finally, we must show that there is a unique nonzero solution ∆ 6= 0 to the above
equation. The derivative of the left-hand side with respect to ∆ is 1, and the derivative of
the right-hand side is 2κf (θ̂ + ∆) by the symmetry of f . The derivative of the right-hand
side is greater than 1 for ∆ = 0 (since θ + κ(1 − 2F (θ)) is increasing at θ̂) and monotonically
decreasing towards zero, so there is a unique crossing point ∆ 6= 0.
Proposition B.4. When F is a two-point distribution with support {θL , θH } (and θL < θH )
62

such that Pr(θ = θL ) = µ, Pr(θ = θH ) = 1 − µ, the equilibrium cutoffs are
• k(θ) = −(µθL + (1 − µ)θH ) for all θ if θH − θL ≤ κ,
• k(θL ) = −(θL + (1 − µ)κ) and k(θH ) = −(θH − µκ) if θH − θL > κ.
Proof. There are two possible cases when the support of F consists of two points: either
k(θL ) = k(θH ) or k(θL ) > k(θH ). We first suppose that the cutoffs are equal and derive the
restriction θH − θL = κ in that case. Recall from Lemma B.3 that when k(θH ) = k(θL ) = k,




Z1
Z1
0 = k + θH + κ 1 − 2 zdAθH (z|k) = k + θL + κ 1 − 2 zdAθL (z|k)
0

0

We will derive an expression that allows us to evaluate the integrals on the right-hand side
in terms of the cutoffs for small σ.
Consider the equilibrium with finite, nonzero σ. We have

σ

kσ (θH )+ σ2 


 
k(θH ) − τ
dτ
τ + θH + κ h
σ

Z

σ

E[v|k , k (θH )] =
kσ (θH )− σ2

kσ (θH )+ σ2 

  σ

k(θL ) − τ
k(θH ) − τ
k (θH ) − τ
µ(1 − H(
)) + (1 − µ)(1 − H(
)) h
dτ
σ
σ
σ

Z

− 2κ
kσ (θH )− σ2

= k σ (θH ) + θH + κ(1 − µ(1 + ∆2H,L ) − (1 − µ))
= k σ (θH ) + θH − κµ∆2H,L
where ∆H,L ≡
on

[− 21 , 12 ].

k(θL )−k(θH )
σ

and the third line uses the fact that H is the uniform distribution

Similarly, we find
E[v|kσ , k σ (θL )] = k σ (θL ) + θL + κ(1 − µ)∆2H,L

Suppose that as σ → 0, ∆H,L → ξ. Then these equations imply
k + θH − κµξ 2 = k + θL + κ(1 − µ)ξ 2
so
θH − θL = κξ 2

63

Clearly, ξ 2 ∈ [0, 1], so we obtain
θH − θL ≤ κ
when the cutoffs are equal.
Now consider the case in which the cutoffs are not equal. Then when σ → 0, the cutoff
type k(θH ) is certain that all type θL players received signals below k(θL ), and type k(θL ) is
certain that all type θH players received signals above k(θH ). The equilibrium conditions are
then
0 = k(θH ) + θH + κ(1 − 2µ − (1 − µ)) = k(θL ) + θL + κ(1 − µ)
by part (iii) of Proposition B.1. Rearranging, we get
k(θL ) − k(θH ) = (θH − κµ) − (θL + κ(1 − µ))
Given that k(θL ) > k(θH ), we must have
θH − θL > κ
which completes the proof.

C

Applications

C.1

Competition between centralized ledgers

Here we analyze the optimal fees charged by the two centralized record-keepers in Section
3.2. First, we consider the simpler case in which d < κ. In this case, network externalities
are so strong that all users will end up choosing the same ledger regardless of how invested
they are in ledger A. Proposition 3 shows that when network externalities are strong, the
incumbent and entrant effectively compete à la Bertrand. Each will try to undercut the
other as long as it is possible to do so. However, the incumbent has a competitive advantage
corresponding to the average stake S users have in its ledger. Therefore, in equilibrium the
entrant must choose LB = 0, and the incumbent monopolist chooses LA just small enough
so that users do not switch to B. By Proposition 3, this yields
LA =

S
α

(17)

In this case, the profits earned by the monopolist depend only on the average stake and α,
which parametrizes users’ aversion to fees. When the average stake is higher, the monopolist
has a larger competitive advantage because there is greater inertia in switching ledgers.
64

Now we consider the case inwhich d > κ. By Proposition
3, when the monopolist selects

1
LA , all users for whom 21 + κ−1 si − α(LA − LB ) > Q(si ) = s−S
d + 2 choose to remain on
ledger A. To find the cutoff type s∗ who is indifferent between remaining on the monopolist’s
ledger and leaving, we solve
s−S 1
1
+ κ−1 (s − α(LA − LB )) =
+
2
d
2
which implies
s∗ =



d
S
α(LA − LB ) − κ( − 1)
d−κ
d

(18)

so long as the expression on the right-hand side is in the range [0, S]. This yields Q(s∗ ) =
1
s∗ −S
d + 2,
of LA :

so we obtain an expression for participation in the monopolist’s ledger as a function
φ(LA , LB ) = 1 − Q(s∗ (LA , LB )) =

S+

d
2

−

κ
2

− α(LA − LB )
d−κ

Then the monopolist’s problem reduces to
max
LA



d κ
S + − − α(LA − LB ) LA
2 2

which yields
LA =

S+

d
2

− κ2 + αLB
2α

(19)

The rents extracted by the monopolist are increasing in the average stake on its ledger because
when the average stake is higher, users must be charged a higher fee before they become
indifferent between leaving the ledger and losing their stakes. A high dispersion of stakes also
allows the monopolist to extract high fees because when there is a wide distribution of stakes,
the sensitivity of the monopolist’s revenues to LA is low. There are fewer marginal users,
so an upwards adjustment of LA does not result in a large exodus of users from ledger A.
Finally, when the parameter LB is large, users are reluctant to leave ledger A because they
know that they will be charged high fees on the outside ledger regardless, so the monopolist
enjoys higher profits.
On the other hand, a strong coordination motive can be detrimental to the monopolist’s
business. If the coordination motive is strong, when a single marginal user leaves the ledger
it induces many other users to leave as well. In this case, the sensitivity of participation to
LA is high. Clearly, it will also be the case that when users’ preferences are sensitive to LA ,
the monopolist must set a lower LA .
Recall that with a blockchain, the fundamental parameter that is chosen in equilibrium
65

depends only on users’ fundamental preferences– the ledger that is best for users is chosen
automatically. In the traditional environment, when even partial competition is possible,
network externalities work as a disciplining device against the incumbent monopolist. That
is, network externalities enhance the importance of ledgers’ fundamental parameters when
replication of information and perfect, blockchain-style competition between record-keepers
is impossible.
Now we analyze the entrant’s problem. Participation on the entrant’s ledger is
d
2

−

κ
2

− S + α(LA − LB )
d−κ

The entrant’s problem is then

max

LB ≥0


d κ
A
B
− − S + α(L − L ) LB
2 2

The first-order condition of this problem is
LB =

d
2

−

κ
2

− S + αLA
2α

(20)

The monopolist will choose this value of LB as long as S − αLA ≤ 12 (d − κ). Otherwise, the
first-order condition is satisfied only for negative LB , which is impossible, so the entrant sets
LB = 0.
Equation 20 shows that the entrant will extract high rents if the dispersion in users’ stakes
is large or if the incumbent also extracts large rents. When the dispersion in users’ stakes is
large, the sensitivity of the entrant’s revenues to LB is low, as in the case where the monopolist
is the incumbent. That is, dispersion in stakes is harmful to users no matter which ledger
they ultimately choose. When the fundamental parameter LA on the incumbent’s ledger is
large, users are more willing to stomach high fees charged by the entrant, so LB is higher.
The entrant’s rents are decreasing in the strength of the coordination motive κ, the
mean stake on the incumbent’s ledger S, and users’ sensitivity to fundamentals α. Network
externalities discipline both the incumbent and the entrant– when these externalities are
strong, an increase in LB tends to cause a domino effect that results in a large mass of users
leaving ledger B. The fee charged by the entrant is also decreasing in the mean stake S on
the incumbent’s ledger because that stake gives the incumbent a competitive advantage, so
the entrant must charge a lower fee in order to capture a significant segment of the market.
In order to find the equilibrium of the game between the incumbent monopolist and
the entrant, we simply combine their first-order conditions. Hence we simultaneously solve

66

equations 19 and 20. This yields
LA =

1
1
1
1
(d − κ) +
S, LB =
(d − κ) −
S
2α
3α
2α
3α

(21)

Then participation on each ledger is
φA = φ =

1 1 S
1 1 S
+
, φB = 1 − φ = −
2 3d−κ
2 3d−κ

We need 0 ≤ φA , φB ≤ 1 and Ll ≥ 0 for l ∈ {A, B}. A necessary and sufficient condition is
3
S ≤ (d − κ)
2

(22)

This inequality is a no-entry bound. If this inequality does not hold, the incumbent A
is in fact able to retain all users even when LB = 0. That is, the stakes users have in
ledger A endogenously prevent entry by even the most competitive entrant. While network
externalities discipline the fees charged by the incumbent, inequality 22 shows that they
actually impede entry by competitors as well. When the participation of others is important
to users, it is difficult for a competitor to enter because it cannot attract enough users to get
itself off the ground. On the other hand, when users’ stakes on ledger A are dispersed, it is
easier for the entrant to attract the users with the least to lose by switching, which in turn
induces switching by other users. When the no-entry bound holds,
A

L =L

NE



1
1
=
S − (d − κ)
α
2

(23)

The incumbent sets LA to be the highest value such that all users participate in the ledger.
We have the following results regarding the case with no entry.
Proposition C.1. The no-entry bound on the average stake S is decreasing in the strength of
the coordination motive κ and increasing in the dispersion of stakes d. Users’ welfare under
the no-entry bound is decreasing in S, increasing in d, and decreasing in κ.
Proof. These properties are a result of Equations 22 and 23.
Now we turn to the case in which there is entry. Equation 21 clarifies that dispersion in
stakes and the strength of the coordination motive κ affect the fees charged on both ledgers
symmetrically. When the coordination motive is powerful, both monopolists are disciplined
by the fact that a higher fee will cause a large loss of clientele through spillover effects. When
one user leaves a ledger, other nearly marginal users follow suit because of the importance of
coordination. On the other hand, dispersion in stakes has the opposite effect. When users’
67

stakes are heterogeneous, only a small mass of users will be marginal for any given fee, so an
increase in the fee does not cause a large loss in a monopolist’s client base.
The mean stake S has an asymmetric effect on monopolist’s fees. An increase in S
increases LA while decreasing LB . When the mean of users’ stakes on ledger A is high, there
is a competitive wedge between ledgers A and B. Monopolist M can extract higher rents
than the entrant O because users’ stake in ledger A acts as an inertial force preventing them
from leaving.

C.2

Currency competition: Calibration

Here we briefly describe the parameters we use in our currency competition model and
the system of equations we solve. We also show that under our calibration, the currency
adoption decision exhibits positive network externalities.
First, when buyers make take-it-or-leave-it offers in the decentralized market, they are
always able to purchase c units of goods when they hold real balances that would be worth
c in the centralized market of that period. This is because buyers are always able to extract
full surplus from sellers. Second, there are only two types of meetings: meetings in which the
buyer encounters a seller who accepts only A (fraction φA of meetings) and meetings in which
the buyer encounters a seller who accepts both A and B (fraction φ∪ = 1 − φA of meetings).
As is well known, all agents who make the same adoption decision will carry the same real
B
balances into the decentralized market in this type of model. Let cA
∪ , c∪ be the real balances

of currencies A and B, respectively, held by agents who adopt B. Let cA
A be the real balances
of A held by agents who do not adopt B. In the centralized market, quasilinear preferences
imply that agents always consume c∗ such that u0 (c∗ ) = 1. Hence we only need to pin down
consumption in the decentralized market in order to solve the model. We focus on the region
of the parameter space where agents’ liquidity constraints bind in all meetings. For an agent
who adopts B, the Euler equations for holdings of A and B are
u0 (c∗ ) =


δ
∪ 0 A
B
0 ∗
σ(φA u0 (cA
∪ ) + φ u (c∪ + c∪ )) + (1 − σ)u (c )
A
π

u0 (c∗ ) =


δ
B
∪ 0 ∗
σφ∪ u0 (cA
∪ + c∪ ) + (1 − σφ )u (c )
B
π

On the other hand, for an agent who adopts only A, the Euler equation is
u0 (c∗ ) =
We assume u(c) =

c1−γ
1−γ


δ
0 ∗
σu0 (cA
A ) + (1 − σ)u (c )
A
π

with γ = 5 and set δ = 0.96, σ = 0.05.32 We assume that

68

Figure 3: Coordination externalities in the model of currency competition. Parameters are
given in Appendix C.2.
the established currency A is a high-inflation currency with π A = 25% (e.g., the Argentine
peso) and that currency B has no inflation, π B = 0.33 Using these parameters, the system
of equations above can be solved for any values of (φA , φ∪ ). We then show that there are
strategic complementarities in the adoption of currency B by showing that the difference
W (M A , M B |A, B) − W (M A |A) (defined in Equations 4 and 5) is increasing in the fraction
φ∪ of users who adopt B. Figure 3 illustrates this result.

C.3

Permissioned blockchain

We present a formal model of permissioned blockchain in order to study fork competition
in this environment and prove the claims in Section 4.1. The model is similar to the baseline
model with the exception that there is a finite number of record-keepers who do not incur
computational costs. Play occurs in periods t = 1, 2, . . . , and each day consists of subperiods
τ = 0, 1, 2, just as in the benchmark ledger-choice model. There are M ∈ N record-keepers
33

As in Lagos and Wright (2005), the calibration of σ is somewhat arbitrary.
In this class of models we may specify inflation directly by choosing the long-run rate of growth of the
money supply.
33

69

who discount payoffs at rate δ. These record-keepers are split into two groups: group A (with
N A members) and group B (with N B members). Each group l assigns a dedicated member
P l as a proposer. Proposer P l may choose to announce a fee Ll ∈ R+ in subperiod τ = 0
or to announce nothing. There is also a continuum of short-lived users i ∈ [0, 1] who choose
a ledger at τ = 1 if a fork has been proposed. As permissioned blockchain does not require
identity management, there are no computational problems to be solved. Record-keepers in
group A do not take an action at τ = 2. The only action record-keepers in group B take is
to choose whether to continue to write on the established ledger A or the competing ledger
B (if it has been proposed) at τ = 2.34
Here branch A of the fork can be seen as the reference ledger, and branch B can be seen
as a competing ledger that may emerge. Our main result will be that with a permissioned
blockchain, it will be possible for record-keepers to prevent forking to branch B and thus
perpetuate high user fees.
Given that information is portable from one branch of the fork to the other, users will
simply coordinate on the ledger with the lower fees, as demonstrated in our analysis of the
static ledger choice model. Our analysis hence focuses on record-keepers’ actions.
The incidence of a fork in this setting should be thought of as a proposal to create a
competing system (potentially made by one of the original record-keepers). A subset of the
record-keepers may break off and begin writing on the new ledger, but the group of recordkeepers who continue to write on the original ledger will be able to punish defectors by
threatening to act more competitively and reduce the appeal of the new ledger relative to
the old one.35
Now we show that when δ is sufficiently large or M is sufficiently small, there is an SPE
of this game in which all record-keepers choose ledger A, and a new ledger with lower fees is
never proposed. This is in contrast to the permissionless blockchain case, in which users and
record-keepers would always coordinate on ledger B if the proposed fee LB were lower than
LA . Consider the following equilibrium conjecture:
1. After any history in which all record-keepers chose A in all previous periods,
• At τ = 0, proposer P A announces LA = L and proposer P B announces nothing.
All record-keepers and users choose A.
34
We assume that if P B chooses to announce a fork, he must write on ledger B at τ = 2. This assumption is
made to avoid a situation in which a fork has been announced, users choose that ledger, and no record-keeper
writes on that branch of the fork.
35
Another possible punishment is for record-keepers who break off to be sanctioned and forbidden from
writing on the established ledger ever again. We do not consider this type of punishment, but the equilibria
that could be sustained with this punishment are similar to those that can be sustained in our environment
because both punishments essentially reduce to a threat to lower defectors’ franchise values.

70

• At τ = 1, and P B announced a fork at τ = 0 of the current period, all users choose
A if LA ≤ LB and B otherwise.
• At τ = 2, if a fork was announced at τ = 0 and φ users chose A at τ = 1,
record-keepers in group B choose A if

φLA
N A +1

>

(1−φ)LB
NB

and B otherwise.

2. After any history in which P B announced a fork in some previous period, proposer P A
sets fees equal to zero and P B announces nothing. All record-keepers and users choose
A.
This equilibrium conjecture is based on a grim trigger punishment scheme. Within a given
period, if a fork has been proposed with LB < L, record-keepers in group B have an incentive
to choose ledger B because then all users switch to B and they obtain all the revenues
on branch B. However, afterwards they receive payoffs equal to zero, and they cannot
individually deviate to obtain higher payoffs because users will choose A (with LA = 0) in
every period.
The continuation play in the conjectured equilibrium depends only on the action taken
by proposer P B at τ = 0. Otherwise, all agents play static best responses. Furthermore, the
play after a deviation is a static Nash equilibrium. Hence we need only check the incentive
compatibility condition at τ = 0. If P B deviates at τ = 0, he (and the rest of group B) can
obtain

LB
NB

in the current period, but future payoffs are equal to zero. Formally, the incentive

constraint that must be satisfied in order for proposer P B not to deviate is
LB
1
≤
LA
B
N
M (1 − δ)
for all LB < LA . This inequality holds if and only if
M
1
≤
.
B
N
1−δ
This inequality holds when δ is large or

M
NB

(24)

is small. When record-keepers are patient, they

have an incentive to conform to equilibrium play because the threat of losing future payoffs
is perceived to be harsh. When the total size of the record-keeping consortium M is small
relative to the size of the deviating coalition N B , there is also an incentive not to deviate
because the static payoffs earned by continuing to write on the original ledger are large relative
to those that can be earned by deviating to a competing ledger with fewer record-keepers.

71

C.4

Enforcement

Dictatorial equilibrium with an enforcer: In this section, we describe a model of ledger
choice with enforcement issues. In addition to proposers, users, and record-keepers, there
is a fourth type of agent known as an enforcer. This agent must take a costly action in a
new subperiod τ = 3 in order to enforce obligations written down in the ledger. Formally,
the enforcer exerts effort e to enforce obligations and receives fees φLE if φ users choose its
ledger. For simplicity, in this section we assume that users choose between using a given
ledger A and not using a ledger at all. Users get payoff si + κφ − α(LW + LE ) when they use
the ledger and the enforcer chooses to enforce at t = 3 and payoff −α(LW + LE ) otherwise
(where LW is the fee earned by record-keepers). They may also choose not to use the ledger
at all, in which case they get zero.
Of course, the enforcer has no incentive to take the costly action in the stage game, since
the payment to the enforcer is not contingent on whether he takes the costly action. We
assume, as in our dynamic setting, that the game is played on days t = 0, 1, . . . . We now
illustrate the presence of an enforcer can undermine the decentralization that is central to
blockchain’s benefits.
Intuitively, the need for enforcement (whether by a government or some other agency) is
detrimental to decentralization because this entity can threaten to stop enforcing agreements
unless the blockchain adopts certain protocols, thereby destroying the mechanism by which
blockchain selects the outcome most beneficial to users. Blockchains that operate under
conditions favorable to users will be dysfunctional because the enforcer will refuse to recognize
them. In our model, this type of equilibrium can be captured in a simple way: suppose that
there is a policy L∗W preferred by the enforcer. The enforcer receives an additional benefit
V (L∗W ) whenever policy L∗W is proposed. If the proposer in period t announces L∗W , the
enforcer takes the costly action to enforce at τ = 3 of period t. Otherwise, the enforcer
refuses to take the costly action in all subsequent periods, and users stop using the ledger.
Checking incentive compatibility of this strategy profile is simple. The enforcer may
deviate either by choosing not to enforce in periods where he is supposed to or by enforcing
when he is not supposed to. Clearly, the latter deviation is always suboptimal, since users
do not use the ledger in any future period regardless of what the enforcer does. For it to be
optimal to enforce along the equilibrium path, we must have
e≤

δ
(LE − e + V (L∗W ))
1−δ

That is, the one-shot benefit of shirking enforcement duties must exceed the enforcer’s stream
of future profits plus the benefits it receives when L∗W is played on future days.
72

There is no incentive for any other agent to deviate from the prescribed strategy profile.
Users play myopically, so they choose A whenever the enforcer is expected to take the costly
action and exit otherwise. Record-keepers always make zero profits, so they have no incentive
to deviate. Proposers get nothing if they propose anything other than L∗W , so they also play
according to the equilibrium prescription.
Of course, this equilibrium is not unique, but it illustrates that, unlike in the case without
enforcement, there is not a unique equilibrium in which the best outcome for users is always
realized. The equilibrium becomes dynamic rather than static because despite the fact that
record-keeping is decentralized, enforcement is not decentralized. A single centralized enforcer
that is crucial to the functioning of the blockchain may be able to subject the blockchain’s
policies to its will because, unlike other agents, it can threaten to prevent the blockchain
from functioning properly.
Synergy between record-keeping and enforcement: We can also consider a situation
in which the enforcer, record-keeper, and proposer are the same entity (analogously to the
case without enforcement where monopolistic intermediaries were both record-keepers and
proposers). The goal is to determine whether there is a synergy between record-keeping
and enforcement in the sense that the rents required by an intermediary who performs both
functions are less than those needed to compensate two separate entities who write on the
ledger and enforce its contents.
The intermediary takes an action h ∈ [0, h] to distort the ledger and an action e ∈ [0, 1] to
enforce obligations. Deviations from the “honest” strategy (h, e) = (0, 1) go undetected with
probability p̃(h, e) = (1 − p(h))(1 − q(e)), where p(h) is increasing in h and q(e) is increasing
in e. We further assume p(h) = 1 and q(1) = 1, so p̃(x, e) = 0 when the intermediary
plays honestly. The analysis in the previous section was equivalent to the assumption that
1 − q(e) = 1{e < 1}, so the enforcer always chose e ∈ {0, 1}.
The intermediary obtains benefit v(h, e) from taking action (h, e) in addition to a fee L
that it receives every period (independent of its actions). We assume strategic substitutability
between distortion of the ledger and lack of enforcement:
v(h, e) = h − h − e
Under the harshest punishment, then, the intermediary solves
V = max Ṽ (h, e) = max
h,e

h,e

L+h−h−e
1 − δ(1 − p(h)))(1 − q(e))

We may now derive bounds on the fee L such that the record-keeper-enforcer plays honestly.

73

The derivatives of the intermediary’s objective function satisfy
∂
Ṽ (h, e) = −(1 − δ(1 − p(x))(1 − q(e))) − δp0 (x)(L + h − h − e)
∂h
∂
Ṽ (h, e) = −(1 − δ(1 − p(x))(1 − q(e))) − δq 0 (e)(L + h − h − e)
∂e
If the intermediary plays honestly, it must be that Ṽ is nondecreasing in e and nondecreasing
in h at (h, e) = (h, 1). Hence we must have

L≥




1
1
1
− 1 max − 0 , − 0
δ
p (0)
q (1)

(25)

We can now compare this situation to one in which the ledger is written by a decentralized
group of blockchain record-keepers and enforced by an outside entity. We assume that users
abandon the ledger whenever any type of deviation is detected, whether it is by the recordkeepers or the enforcer. The enforcer earns a fee LE per period and solves
max
e

LE − e
1 − δq(e)

As in the benchmark model of blockchain security, large blockchain record-keepers solve
max(1 − pB (h))(LW + h − h)
x

where LW is the aggregate fee earned by blockchain record-keepers. The (necessary) incentive
compatibility conditions that come out of the enforcer’s and record-keepers’ optimization
problems are


1
1
1
LE ≥ −
− 1 0 , LW ≥ − 0
δ
q (1)
pB (0)
respectively.

D

Extensions and Additional Results

D.1

A realistic “hard fork”

In this section, we analyze a hard fork that is more realistic than the type highlighted
in the preceding analysis where all users of the blockchain switch to one branch of the fork
and the other is completely abandoned. In reality, hard forks usually lead to a split of the
community. For example, the Ethereum community split after hackers stole cryptocurrency
from a smart contract. Although the majority of the blockchain’s users joined the segment
74

of the community that decided to fork, a significant percentage of users continued to use the
original blockchain. The Bitcoin blockchain has also been forked by the (significantly less
popular) cryptocurrencies Bitcoin Cash and Bitcoin Gold, both of which changed the rules
of Bitcoin in order to benefit users. In these cases, many users of Bitcoin refused to actively
use the new cryptocurrencies because they felt that the changes to the rules were actually
detrimental or compromised the security of the blockchain. This section will focus on the
tradeoff between fork competition and network externality inefficiencies, the second cost of
decentralization. Although fork competition can benefit users, we will show that it can also
lead to inefficient miscoordination, or “too many ledgers” in equilibrium.
The key mechanism that will underlie realistic hard forks in our model is preference
heterogeneity. Although in the benchmark model agents have heterogeneous stakes, we have
shown that when considering a blockchain fork, stake heterogeneity is irrelevant. We now
consider a model identical to the benchmark with the exception of the specification of types.
Users’ types are given by
θi = (xi , fi )
where fi ∈ {0, f }. The type fi reflects a preference for forking: users with fi = f dislike all
forks equally, and users with fi = 0 are not averse to forking the existing blockchain.36 Types
fi are independently and identically distributed across users with Pr(fi = η) = µ. Types xi
are distributed uniformly in the interval [ζ − σ2 , ζ + σ2 ] as before. Users observe both xi and
fi .
We will use essentially the same utility function ũ as in the previous section. We assume


CB
CA
) − g(
))
ũ(s, f, φ, ζ, L, C) = f + κ(2φ − 1) + ζ − α(LA − LB ) − (g(
φ
1−φ

(26)

Here the only difference from the previous section is that users’ fundamental preferences
depend on fi rather than on a stake si .
Let g̃(L) = g(L) − αL. Note that if there exists LB ≥ 0 such that g̃(LB ) > g̃(LA ) + f ,
we obtain the same result as in Section 3.2. Proposer P B will propose such an LB and all
users will switch to branch B. In this case, there exists a feasible fee LB that is better than
LA by such a wide margin that all users, including those who dislike forks, prefer ledger B
with parameter LB .
We therefore consider only the case in which all LB ≥ 0 satisfy g̃(LB ) < g̃(LA ) + f . In
fact, the only situation in which multiple equilibria would arise under complete information
36

We adopt this specification for simplicity. Allowing for ηi to depend on the announced fundamental
parameters LA and LB would not change the main results. Anecdotal evidence suggests that there are indeed
blockchain users who are fundamentally averse to forking.

75

is if
f + g̃(LA ) − g̃(LB ) ≥ κ(1 − 2µ) ≥ g̃(LA ) − g̃(LB )
We derive the unique equilibrium under these conditions. The results are summarized in
Proposition D.1.
Proposition D.1. Suppose users face ledgers with fees LA , LB , W l ≥ Ll record-keepers
commit to branch l at τ = 2, and a fraction µ of users are of type fi = f . Then if
f + g̃(LA ) − g̃(LB ) ≥ κ(1 − 2µ) ≥ g̃(LA ) − g̃(LB )
the essentially unique equilibrium at τ = 1 is of one of two types.
1. If f ≤ κ, then all users choose branch A if g̃(LA ) − g̃(LB ) > µf and branch B if
g̃(LA ) − g̃(LB ) < µf .
2. If f > κ, users of type fi = f choose branch A iff f − (g̃(LA ) − g̃(LB )) > (1 − µ)κ
and users of type fi = 0 choose branch B iff g̃(LA ) − g̃(LB ) > µκ. That is, the
miscoordination equilibrium of the complete information game is selected when f > κ
if such an equilibrium exists.
Proof of Proposition D.1:
Proof. These statements follow from Proposition B.4.
This proposition essentially shows that when users’ fundamental aversion to forking is
strong relative to the coordination motive, the blockchain is vulnerable to a hard fork that
splits the community. Intuitively, when network externalities are weak relative to some users’
dislike of forks, users who are averse to forks will still prefer not to leave the existing ledger
even if all other users join the new fork. Put another way, coordination motives are a source
of strength for a blockchain: when network externalities are weak, coordination among the
blockchain community becomes fragile and the community is susceptible to a split.
The possibility of a hard fork that splits the community has important implications for
welfare. When no fork is proposed, all users obtain utility µf − g̃(LA ) + κ. When a fork is
proposed and a community split occurs, on the other hand, users obtain average utility
µ(f − g̃(LA ) + κµ) + (1 − µ)(−g̃(LB ) + κ(1 − µ))
Relative to the case with no forking, the welfare gains or losses are
(1 − µ)(g̃(LA ) − g̃(LB )) − 2κµ(1 − µ)
76

The first term is the fundamental benefit users of type fi = 0 obtain by switching to B,
and the second term is the coordination loss associated with the split. Hence the fork is
detrimental to welfare if
2κµ > g̃(LA ) − g̃(LB )
The results of the previous section and this one highlight the main tradeoff relevant for
determining whether a blockchain is worthwhile. Although a blockchain greatly enhances
competition between ledgers and lowers fees, it may also induce an undesirable breakdown
of coordination. The possibility of miscoordination is especially strong when network externalities are weak but the welfare losses are large only when coordination matters, so
miscoordination should be a concern when network externalities lie in an intermediate range.

D.2

Multi-Homing

Up until this point, for analytical tractability we have made the extreme assumption that
users use only one of the two ledgers. We now extend the analysis to allow users to use
both ledgers simultaneously. The main results of our analysis go through: users’ stakes in a
traditional centralized ledger anchor them to it and hinder competition, but the portability
of information permitted by a blockchain removes this barrier to entry.
As in the benchmark model, there are two ledgers A and B and three time periods,
τ = 0, 1, 2. However, users are allowed to “multi-home” and choose to use both ledgers at
τ = 1. In particular, users now have four possible choices {∅, A, B, A ∪ B} instead of just two.
Here ∅ and A ∪ B represent the choice not to use either ledger and the choice to use both
ledgers, respectively. A user who uses ledger l pays a cost αLl . By choosing just one ledger
(say A), a user obtains utility from interacting with all other users who chose A or A ∪ B. If
that user then chooses to participate in ledger B as well, the marginal gain in utility is just
the utility obtained from interacting with users who chose B. That is, a user who chooses
A ∪ B does not get utility from coordinating twice with other users who chose A ∪ B; utility
is gained only by interacting with a new set of users.
Formally, suppose that φ∅ , φA , φB , φA∪B are the proportions of users who choose the
strategies ∅, A, B, A ∪ B, respectively. Then (neglecting cryptographic security) the utilities
obtained by choosing ∅, A, B, and A ∪ B are given by
u∅ = 0,

A
A∪B
uA = sA
) − αLA
i + κ(φ + φ

B
A∪B
uB = sB
) − αLB ,
i + κ(φ + φ

B
A
B
A∪B
) − α(LA + LB )
uA∪B = sA
i + si + κ(φ + φ + φ

If there is complete information about payoff parameters, there will be multiple equilibria

77

in this game. As such, we must introduce an arbitrarily small amount of noise in users’
information structure in order to obtain unique predictions. We suppose users observe a
signal ζ of the “fundamentals” of ledger B such that the expected cost of using B is αLB + ζ.
Again, users observe ζ with an arbitrarily small amount of noise. This information structure
leads to the equilibrium described in Proposition D.2.
B

Proposition D.2. For a given LA , there is a cutoff value L (LA ) such that users all choose
B

B whenever LB < L (LA ), and no user chooses B otherwise. The cutoff value is
B

A

A

L (L ) = Q(αL )




1
A
A
A
A
(1 − Q(αL ))κ + Q(αL )(αL − E[s|s < αL ])
2

This proposition outlines two features of the equilibrium. First, in any equilibrium where
some user uses B, all users use B. This is because users have no initial stakes in B, so their
preferences for B are homogeneous. If one user finds that using B is worth the cost, then the
same is true for all users. On the other hand, some users with large stakes in A will choose
to continue to use A even after a large portion of the population has abandoned the ledger.
Second, users’ stakes still anchor them to ledger A as in our previous results. As expected,
the anchor on A is stronger when users’ stakes in A are higher. The formula for the cutoff is
also useful in a situation where users’ stakes on both ledgers are the same (as in a blockchain).
For example, if we simply take si = 0 for all i, in which case the formula simplifies to
B

L (LA ) = LA , meaning that as in our benchmark model, the ledger more favorable to users
is always selected. In order to obtain the result that competition among ledgers is restricted,
however, we now must also assume that the proposer of ledger B cannot feasibly run a ledger
with LB = 0. That is, there must be some lower bound LB on the fee charged by proposer B.
B

As long as L (LA ) < LB , ledger B will not emerge. There are several reasons why there may
be a lower bound on LB – there could be some economic cost to producing a viable ledger, or,
as we discuss in the next section, incentive issues may require record-keepers to earn rents.
Here we prove the results. First we describe the equilibria of the complete information
game.
Proposition D.3. Suppose B is the entrant ledger in the sense that sB
i = 0 for all i.
There are two equilibria in the complete information game as long as min{αLA , αLB } <
A
A
min{κ, max sA
i } and κ(1 − Q(αL )) > αL : there is one in which all users choose only A,
i

and there is one in which all users choose B and some users multi-home.
Proof. First note that a strategy profile in which all users choose A is indeed an equilibrium:

78

we have
A
∅ B
A∪B
uA = sA
}
i + κ − αL > max{u , u , u

for all i since uB = −αLB and uA∪B = uA − αLB .
Now suppose that there is some equilibrium with φB > 0. Then
uB = κ(φA∪B + φB ) − αLB > 0
If some agents multi-home (i.e. φA∪B > 0), then it must be that
A
A∪B
A
A∪B
uA∪B = sA
+ φB ) − α(LA + LB ) > sA
) − αLA = uA
i + κ(φ + φ
i + κ(φ + φ

which implies
κφB − αLB > 0 ⇒ κ(φA∪B + φB ) − αLB > 0
Therefore, if some agents multi-home, then all agents must choose B. However, if no agents
multi-home, then φA∪B = 0, so we still have that if some agents choose only B, then all
agents must choose B.
Now we show that some agents must multi-home. Even if φA + φA∪B = 0, we have
A
uA∪B − uB = sA
i − αL > 0

for some i by assumption. Hence in any equilibrium where some agents choose only B, all
agents must choose B or multi-home.
Another possibility is that some agents choose not to use a ledger. All agents with
s > αLA clearly must at least choose to use A. If it is the case that κ(1 − Q(αLA )) > αLA ,
then, no agent will choose not to use a ledger at all, since any agent with s < αLA will still
find it preferable to choose ledger A over choosing neither.
Finally, by the argument above it is evident that there can be no equilibrium in which all
agents either choose A or multi-home. In this case, all agents would find it optimal to choose
B, so all agents would multi-home, which cannot be an equilibrium.
Proposition 1 shows that when ledger B is used by some, all users must use it. This may
seem like a somewhat extreme result, but it can be modified by assuming that users have
heterogeneous preferences for the properties of ledgers A and B. In such a case, there would
be equilibria in which some users choose A, some users choose B, and some users multi-home,
which is arguably closer to the empirically relevant case.
Note that there is a discontinuity at LA = LB = 0. In that case, the only trembling-hand
perfect equilibrium is one in which all users multi-home. When the cost of using a ledger is
79

even  > 0, though, this ceases to be an equilibrium at all.
Since we want to obtain unique predictions about equilibrium play, we now turn to a
setting with incomplete information. Suppose that users derive fundamental utility −(αLB +
ζ) from using ledger B, where ζ is unknown. As in the benchmark model, users receive signals
xi = ζ + σi , where the distribution of i has support on [− 12 , 12 ]. We now consider the global
games refinement.
Global games refinement: We consider a game in which users choose among their four
possible strategies simultaneously. This game is more complicated because (1) we need to
show it can be cast as a supermodular game, and (2) we need to determine what the cutoff
strategies look like (since they are no longer a choice between just two options). We state
without proof that the game is supermodular under the following parametrization: identify
the set {0, 1}2 with users’ choices by taking any element with first coordinate 1 to as a
strategy where the user chooses A and any element with second coordinate 0 as a strategy
where the user chooses B.
As the noise in the signals of ζ approaches zero, the equilibrium play of the complete
information game is recovered. Therefore, there must be a cutoff k such that all users with
si > αLA choose only A when xi > k and multi-home when xi < k, and users with si < αLA
choose only A when xi > k and choose only B when xi < k.
We characterize the cutoff equilibrium and derive the fee LB required for some users to
choose ledger B.
Proof of Proposition D.2. At the cutoff, users with si > αLA are indifferent between choosing
only A and multi-homing. Hence
Z1 
0=


(s + κ(1 − Q(αLA ) + Q(αLA )(1 − z)) − αLA ) − (s + κ − α(LA + LB ) − k) dAs (z|k)

0

This yields
B

A

Z1
zdAs (z|k)

αL + k = κQ(αL )
0

for s > αLA . This condition immediately yields LB ≤ ακ Q(αLA ). It also implies
A

B

A

Z

Z1

(1 − Q(αL ))(αL + k) = κQ(αL )

zdAs (z|k)dQ(s)

(27)

s>αLA 0

By contrast, users with s < αLA choose between using only A or only B at the cutoff.
80

Their indifference condition is
Z1 
0=


(s + κ(1 − Q(αL ) + Q(αL )(1 − z)) − αL ) − (κz − αL − k) dAs (z|k)
A

A

A

B

0

This condition implies


Z1
A
αL + k = αL − s − κ 1 − (1 + Q(αL )) zdAs (z|k)
B

A

0

for s < αLA . Integrating over s < αLA ,

A

B

A

A

A

Z

A

Z1

Q(αL )(αL +k) = Q(αL )(αL −E[s|s < αL ]−κ)+κ(1+Q(αL ))

zdAs (z|k)dQ(s)

s<αLA 0

(28)
Combining Equations 27 and 28 and using the belief constraint

R R1
s 0

B

A

αL + k = Q(αL )



zdAs (z|kdQ(s) = 12 ,


1
A
A
A
A
(1 − Q(αL ))κ + Q(αL )(αL − E[s|s < αL ])
2

so it any user uses B in equilibrium, LB must be less than or equal to the right-hand side
(assuming ζ = 0).
As expected, the anchor on A is usually stronger when users’ stakes in A are higher (i.e.,
under a first-order shift upwards of Q(s)). The formula for the cutoff is also useful in a
situation where users’ stakes on both ledgers are the same (as in a blockchain). For example,
if we simply take si = 0 for all i, the formula simplifies to
k = α(LA − LB )

(29)

Then when ζ ≈ 0 (as we assume throughout) we find that even in the presence of multihoming, the ledger with the lower fee wins out.

D.3

Competition between a monopolist and a blockchain

Now we turn to competition between a monopolist and a blockchain. The primary difference from the previous example of competition between two centralized entities is that the
agent who proposes the fee structure for a blockchain does not care about the fees earned by
81

record-keepers because record-keepers always break even. Rather, the proposer’s incentives
are aligned with those of users. As before, the proposer can be thought of as a developer of
blockchain software who has a large stake in the network that appreciates when others use the
blockchain platform. Formally, there are two ledgers A (monopolist) and B (blockchain) with
proposers P A = M, who is also the record-keeper on ledger A, and P B = D (for “developer”)
who is not a blockchain record-keeper. Proposers P A and P B choose parameters LA , LB ≥ 0
at τ = 0. The stakes on proposer P A ’s ledger are uniformly distributed on [S − d2 , S + d2 ],
and the stakes on P B ’s ledger are all equal to zero. When a blockchain competes against
a monopolist, there is still perfect competition between blockchain record-keepers, but the
blockchain cannot replicate the information contained on the monopolist’s ledger.
As in the baseline blockchain model, there is a continuum of record-keepers j ∈ [0, M ].
However, there is no longer incomplete information. When users’ stakes on ledger A are
distributed in an interval of finite length, an arbitrarily small amount of noise in agent’s
beliefs will have no effect on the equilibrium. Nevertheless, despite this change to the model,
the equilibrium played by record-keepers will be the same as in the baseline model of a
blockchain fork.37 Furthermore, blockchain record-keepers cannot write on the monopolist’s
ledger, so they all must commit to ledger B at τ = 1. The equilibrium at τ = 2 is just like the
equilibrium in the case of monopolistic competition so long as Condition SC is satisfied, which
again reduces to the inequality d ≥ κ. To see this, note that in this setting the distribution
of types is simply the distribution of stakes on ledger A and apply Proposition 1.
We then have equilibrium play along any path for τ ≥ 1, so solving the model reduces to
solving the proposers’ optimization problems at τ = 0. The monopolist behaves as if facing a
fixed outside ledger with parameter LB , so the optimal LA is again given by 19. However, P B
has different preferences than an entrant monopolist. As in the baseline blockchain model,
P B ’s preferences are given by users’ utility function ũ. If there is a value LB∗ that is uniformly
best for users (with utility function ũ) given optimal play by record-keepers, proposer P B
will choose it. The monopolist then chooses
LA =

d
2

−

κ
2

+ S + αLB∗
2α

as long as
3
S + αLB∗ ≤ (d − κ)
2
This inequality is the no-entry bound in the presence of a blockchain. Note that the noentry bound is tighter when LB∗ is larger. This is because when the minimum feasible
37

Indeed, the τ = 2 part of the proof of Proposition 5 is independent of the information structure so long
as all record-keepers observe participation on the ledger.

82

computational power required to support a blockchain is large, the compensation necessary
to attract record-keepers (and thus the minimum blockchain fee) will be higher, thereby
dissuading users from using the blockchain.
The fee charged on the blockchain will be lower than that charged by an entrant monopolist precisely when LB∗ is less than the expression given in 21 for the entrant’s fee.
Furthermore, in this case the lower fee charged on the blockchain will induce the incumbent
monopolist to drop its fee below what it would charge when facing an entrant monopolist.
The condition for a blockchain to lower fees on both ledgers is
LB∗ <

1
1
(d − κ) −
S
2α
3α

A blockchain lowers costs for users when the computational expenditure required to placate
users’ need for cryptographic security is small, when the dispersion of users’ stakes on the monopolist’s ledger is high, or when the coordination motive is weak. Surprisingly, a blockchain
tends to lower costs when the average stake on a monopolist’s ledger is small. This is because
when stakes on a monopolist’s ledger are large, an entrant monopolist would optimally charge
a low fee in order to induce switching by users. Hence when the incumbent already charges
high fees, competition by a traditional intermediary should be enough to lower costs to users.
Blockchain is useful primarily when entrants into the market have incentives to charge high
fees. Free entry of blockchain record-keepers implies that there is no incentive for a proposer
to choose a policy that gives record-keepers large fees because all record-keepers break even
regardless. The feature of the blockchain that allows it to more effectively compete with
traditional intermediaries is that it strips record-keepers of their market power.

83

