                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SOCIAL SECURITY AND RETIREMENT TIMING:
                 EVIDENCE FROM A NATIONAL SAMPLE OF TEACHERS

                                       Melinda S. Morrill
                                         John Westall

                                      Working Paper 25411
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25411


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2018




This paper was originally prepared for the NBER Conference, Incentives and Limitations of
Employment Policies on Retirement Transitions, funded by the Sloan Foundation. The authors
would like to thank the Sloan Foundation for their support of this work. The paper will be
included in a special issue of the Journal of Pension Economics and Finance. We thank our
discussant, Cory Koedel, and conference participants for useful comments and suggestions. All
remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Melinda S. Morrill and John Westall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Security and Retirement Timing: Evidence from a National Sample of Teachers
Melinda S. Morrill and John Westall
NBER Working Paper No. 25411
December 2018
JEL No. H55,H75,I28,J26

                                         ABSTRACT

This study documents an important role for Social Security income in workers' retirement timing.
About 40 percent of public school teachers are not covered by Social Security. This provides an
opportunity to analyze the causal impact of Social Security on retirement timing by comparing
covered and non-covered teachers. Using individual-level data from the American Community
Survey, we find robust evidence of higher rates of retirement among covered teachers at Social
Security eligibility ages. This pattern is confirmed using an alternative regression model of
participation in the teacher labor force. These estimates suggest that, should the federal
government mandate full inclusion in Social Security for all public sector workers, the retirement
timing patterns of newly covered teachers and other public sector workers would likely change.


Melinda S. Morrill
Department of Economics
North Carolina State University
Campus Box 8110
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
and NBER
melinda_morrill@ncsu.edu

John Westall
Department of Economics
Campus Box 8110
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
jwwestal@ncsu.edu
1    Introduction

Roughly 40 percent of teachers are not currently covered by Social Security (Kan and
Aldeman, 2014). Originally, the Social Security Act of 1935 only covered private sector
workers. Concerns about the constitutionality of the federal government collecting taxes
from state and local governments prevented their inclusion. Section 218 of the Social
Security Act, passed in 1950, allowed states to decide whether to bring their employees
into Social Security. Subsequent changes to the Act mandated Social Security coverage
for any state or local government employees not included in another pension system (Gale
et al., 2015). State or local governments can alter their Section 218 agreements and join
Social Security, but are no longer allowed to withdraw if currently covered. In total,
approximately 25% of public employees are not covered by Social Security of which most
are public safety officers and teachers (GAO-05-786T, 2005).
    Prior work on the role of Social Security in retirement has estimated elasticities with
respect to benefit levels (e.g., Coile and Gruber, 2007; Coile, 2015; Liebman et al., 2009).
This study instead measures whether the age pattern of retirement is affected by Social
Security coverage on the extensive margin. We estimate the individual-level probability
of retiring within the past year leveraging pension plan level variation in Social Security
inclusion. There is no statistically significant difference in retirement probabilities for
individuals in their 50’s by Social Security coverage, although the confidence intervals
contain economically meaningful values. We find evidence that teachers respond to Social
Security incentives through statistically signifcantly higher retirement rates between ages 62
and 70. Social Security eligibility is associated with about a 12 percent higher probability of
retiring among 62-70 year olds. We confirm these findings by illustrating that the teacher
labor force participation rate, which is defined as the age × state × year × gender cell
probability that an individual with at least a bachelor’s degree is currently working as a
teacher, follows a similar pattern.
    Our approach is similar to Asch et al. (2005), who estimate logit models of retirement


                                              1
regressed on peak and option value of retirement benefits along with a set of age-specific
dummies. While the results do suggest “excess” retirements at key Social Security eligibility
ages, they do not provide evidence of whether retirements occur earlier or later under Social
Security. Using age-specific survival probabilities in a cohort-level analysis, we provide
suggestive evidence that Social Security inclusion is associated with earlier retirements.


2        Background and Literature

Teachers were among the first public sector workers to be covered under employer-provided
pensions.1 Almost all teacher pension plans are some form of a defined benefit (DB) plan.2
DB plans have their own unique rules regarding such parameters as pension benefit formu-
las, ages at which benefits can be received, years of service required to claim benefits, years
of service until employees are vested, levels of inflation adjustment, and eligibility for Social
Security benefits, among others. Koedel and Podgursky (2016) provide a comprehensive
overview of teacher pensions and their role in the teacher labor market.
        The incentives generated by pension parameters are generally grouped into two cate-
gories: “pull” incentives that attract and retain new employees and “push” incentives that
promote retirement of employees when they reach a certain age (Lazear, 1986). These
incentives are often modeled as an “option-value” of work where, for an additional year of
work, pensions levels increase but at a cost of foregone pension receipt within that year
(Stock and Wise, 1990). Individuals retire when the utility from an additional year of
income and retirement wealth accruals is exceeded by the disutility of work and the oppor-
tunity cost of an additional year of foregone retirement benefits. Costrell and Podgursky
(2009) illustrate the sharp patterns of pension wealth accruals for six teacher pension plans.
On the other hand, Clark and McDermed (1986) show that earnings rise after pension el-
    1
     For an in-depth discussion of the history and structure of teacher pensions across states see Clark and
Craig (2011).
   2
     Alaska is the only state to provide a pure defined-contribution (DC) plan to teachers, but that plan
only applies to those hired after 2006.



                                                     2
igibility ages, supporting the notion that compensation is more of a spot market than a
Lazear-type lifetime contract.
   Coile and Gruber (2007) adapted the forward looking, option-value framework to the
modeling of Social Security wealth accrual patterns. Similar to the models of employer-
provided pension wealth, one must forgo Social Security income to qualify for a higher
benefit the following year. Coile and Gruber (2007) compute the option value of work using
employment history and pension parameter data from the Health and Retirement Survey
(HRS). Using a similar framework to ours, with a retirement probability as the dependent
variable, they find that Social Security incentives are a significant determinant of retirement
decisions and have an impact similar to private pension incentives. Liebman et al. (2009)
uses the HRS in conjunction with discontinuities in Social Security rules and conclude that
individuals are responsive to marginal changes in Social Security benefits. Mastrobuoni
(2011) also use the HRS and finds that retirement timing responds to both perceived
and actual changes in Social Security incentives. Fetter and Lockwood (2016) show that
an additional program, the Old Age Assistance Program (OAA), which is means tested,
reduced the labor force participation rate among men in their late 60’s and early 70’s. No
paper to our knowledge specifically examines the impact of Social Security inclusion on
teachers’ retirement decisions. Rather than relying on structural estimates of variation in
the intensity of Social Security wealth changes, this study instead utilizes variation on the
extensive margin: having any Social Security wealth or not.
   Prior work has found strong evidence that teachers’ retirement decisions are influenced
by pension wealth. Asch et al. (2005) explore retirement timing among federal workers
in the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS), who are not covered by Social Security.
Using administrative records, Asch et al. (2005) estimate retirement hazards over 7 years as
a function of forward-looking measures of pension wealth incentives. They find workers are
responsive to financial incentives for retirement with no evidence of “excess” retirements
at key Social Security eligibility ages 62 and 65. Ni and Podgursky (2016) estimate a



                                              3
structural model of teacher retirement and illustrate an important role for pension wealth
in retirement timing.
       Recent work on retirement timing has investigated the role of pension modifications and
enhancements on encouraging delayed retirement. Teachers’ responsiveness to changes in
financial incentives is typically small. Koedel and Xiang (2017) leverage variation in how
a pension enhancement in St. Louis affected pension wealth for teachers differentially by
years until retirement eligibility. Similarly, Brown (2013) exploits a change for California
teachers and finds a significant but small elasticity of lifetime labor supply with respect to
the return to work. Fitzpatrick (2015) finds that teachers’ willingness-to-pay for retirement
benefits is small relative to the cost of providing them. Furgeson et al. (2006) estimate that
Pennsylvania public school teachers responded to early retirement incentives with women
having a higher elasticity than men.
       With the Social Security system facing potential future solvency issues, policymakers
have considered mandating the coverage of all public sector workers to increase the Social
Security tax base (GAO-HEHS-98-196, 1998; GAO-03-710T, 2003; GAO-05-786T, 2005;
Munnell, 2000, 2005; Nuschler et al., 2011) and changing rules that determine the level
of spousal and survivor benefits for those not covered by Social Security (Diamond and
Orszag, 2003; Haltzel, 2004; Kilgour, 2009; Gustman et al., 2013). Because public sector
pensions generally have full retirement ages that are much younger than those of Social
Security and private sector pension plans, past research into the impact of Social Security
on retirement timing may not be extendable to teachers. Gale et al. (2015) provide a
comprehensive analysis of the issues associated with a potential federal mandate to include
all state and local government employers in Social Security. Teachers with short tenures
are likely better off when covered by Social Security, but it is less clear whether long tenure
teachers would benefit.3
       Public sector workers who are not included in Social Security may still be eligible for
   3
    This argument is in contrast with enhancements to public sector pensions, which typically will benefit
long tenure teachers at the cost of short tenure teachers (e.g. Koedel et al., 2014).


                                                    4
benefits either through a spouse’s earnings or through other covered employment. For these
individuals, two programs are used to adjust benefits to account for the non-covered ser-
vice. The Windfall Elimination Program (WEP) reduces one’s own Social Security benefits
earned under covered employment to account for the period of non-covered employment.
The Government Pension Offset (GPO) program reduces the spousal benefit that indi-
viduals with non-covered employment history can receive. Both programs are designed
to ensure individuals who do not contribute to the Social Security system via Federal In-
surance Contributions Act (FICA) taxes do not receive unfair compensation from Social
Security benefits. These programs have somewhat complicated rules, and often individuals
are not aware that their benefits will be reduced until the point of claiming. Congress has
debated repealing these unpopular programs. For example, the H.R.1205 - Social Secu-
rity Fairness Act of 2017 proposed repeal.4 Gustman et al. (2014) estimate that about
3.5 percent of households in the HRS are affected by either the WEP or the GPO. These
programs impact the joint retirement decisions of households and apply to a substantial
proportion of teachers (Diamond and Orszag, 2003; Haltzel, 2004; Kilgour, 2009; Gustman
et al., 2013). When considering the implications of extending Social Security coverage to
public sector workers, it is important to not only consider the impacts on Social Security
solvency, but also how structural changes in public sector workers’ retirement incentives
will change their own and their spouses’ labor supply decisions.


3       Data

3.1     Pension Plan Data

All state and local government employers, including the District of Columbia (DC), have
Section 218 agreements with the Social Security Administration (SSA) that stipulate Social
Security coverage. There can be significant confusion about which state and local govern-
    4
    More information can be found at: https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/1205, [ac-
cessed July 2018]


                                                   5
ment employees are covered by Social Security, even within SSA (GAO-10-938, 2010). Our
teacher pension plan data come from the Center for Retirement Research, Public Pensions
Database (PPD).5
      Table 1 lists the Social Security coverage status of teachers in each state and DC. There
are 12 states plus DC where teachers are not covered by Social Security and 35 states where
teachers are covered. The remaining 3 states, Georgia, Missouri, and Rhode Island, allow
local school districts to enter into Section 218 agreements with SSA. Because teachers in
those states cannot reliably be classified as covered or not, they are excluded from our
sample.


3.2     Teacher Employment Data

Data on the retirements are from the American Community Survey (ACS) from 2010 to
2016.6 The ACS allows for the estimation of a large sample of teachers representative at
the state level. Unlike administrative datasets, the ACS includes detailed demographics,
marital status and household structure, and socioeconomic characteristics. Furthermore,
the ACS allows for cross-state comparisons not possible with data from individual states.
Because employer can be imputed by state of residence, we can merge on detailed infor-
mation about pension coverage with reasonable accuracy. Longitudinal data, such as the
HRS, provides a better indication of teaching history and teacher retirement. However,
the ACS has a substantially larger sample size and allows for a more precise estimation of
differences by public employer.
      Following Harris and Adams (2007), teachers are defined as any individual who reported
their most recent occupation as one of the the following and who was also working in the
last year: kindergarten teachers, primary and secondary school teachers, special education
teachers, and other teachers not otherwise classified. This excludes all post-secondary
  5
    Data are available at: http://publicplansdata.org/public-plans-database/, [accessed July 2018].
  6
    Steven Ruggles, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek. Integrated Public
Use Microdata Series: Version 7.0 American Community Survey. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota,
2017


                                                 6
teachers. We further restrict to those who report working for a state or local government
employer.7
       The ACS contains limited information on work history necessitating an approximation
of retirement. Failure to observe retirements will bias our estimates of the impact of Social
Security inclusion if there is any correlation between the coverage of teachers by Social
Security and moving into other work directly after leaving teaching. For example, the
number of “unobserved” retirements would be lower in non-covered states if individuals
must work after retirement to supplement income. Similarly, Haider and Loughran (2008)
find that the Social Security Earnings Test reduces labor supply in retirement, although
they do not consider specifically the timing of the return to paid employment. When a
retirement is “missed” by our measure, the denominator (i.e., the population of teachers)
will also be lowered as that person is not identified as a teacher by our definition. As a
robustness check, we confirm our main findings using a parallel analysis of teacher labor
force participation rates. Labor force participation rates will not be biased by individuals
transitioning directly from teaching to another position.


3.3      Means and Descriptive Statistics

Table 2 contains descriptive statistics for our sample of teachers by Social Security inclusion.
Our sample is 88,788 teachers ages 50-70. Column (1) is the full sample. Column (2)
includes teachers who are not covered by Social Security, as listed in Table 1. About 40
percent of teachers in our sample are not covered by Social Security. Column (3) includes
   7
     Results are similar without making this restriction, although because private school teachers are also
included the magnitudes are diminished. We include individuals regardless of self-reported hours of work
so as to better capture retirement transitions. We benchmark the implied population from ACS weights
against data from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES, Data available at: https://nces.ed.
gov/programs/digest/d16/tables/dt16 105.40.asp?current=yes, [accessed August 2018]). To better match
with the NCES data, for this exercise we do not make an age restriction in the ACS and further restrict the
ACS population to only include public primary and secondary school teachers. In the NCES, the population
of teachers ranges from 3.1 million in 2010 to 3.2 million 2016 (projected). The implied one year population
in the ACS is 3.2 million. Restricting to those working 30 or more hours per week, the implied population
size is 2.8 million. In results not shown, when making this more stringent restriction on hours of work, the
age pattern is similar but with implied magnitudes that are substantially larger.


                                                     7
teachers who are covered by Social Security. Column (4) provides the difference between
Columns (3) and (2). To calculate the difference in means we conduct two-sided t-tests with
the null hypothesis that Column (3) − Column (2) = 0. Standard errors are in brackets.
        The first row of Table 2 provides the average probability of retiring, i.e., teaching at
some point in the prior year but no longer teaching at the time of the survey. On average,
teachers ages 50-70 who are covered by Social Security are 0.65 percentage points (about 5
percent of the mean of the not-covered sample) more likely to retire than their peers who are
not covered by Social Security. Given this, it is not surprising to see that, among 50-70 year
olds who were working within the past year, the population of teachers covered by Social
Security is slightly younger. Importantly, teachers in states covered by Social Security are
4.5 percentage points more likely to have an advanced degree. If Social Security inclusion
is viewed as an amenity or state pensions are in better financial health in those states,
teachers covered by Social Security may be positively selected. States where teachers are
included in Social Security have more non-Hispanic African American teachers, while there
are fewer Hispanic teachers. This is primarily driven by the fact that California and Texas
are two large states not included in Social Security. The probability of being married is
very slightly higher in states covered by Social Security, while the probability of being
never married or divorced is lower. The regression estimates are insensitive to controlling
for these demographic characteristics.


4        Methods and Results

4.1        Age-Specific Retirement Rates and Survival Probabilities

Figure 1 shows the retirement patterns of teachers separately by Social Security inclusion.
This is contrasted with workers in “other occupations,” most of whom will be covered
by Social Security.8 Note that some workers in this latter group will have had prior
    8
        See the data appendix for details on which occupations are included here.



                                                       8
experience as a teacher, so we anticipate that the difference in retirement patterns in this
other category of workers will be smaller but not necessarily zero.
       Figure 1 illustrates that teachers are more likely than their private sector counterparts
to retire between age 50 and 70 with the gap growing at about age 57 and increasing
through the 60’s. Second, there is a slightly higher rate of retirement after age 66 for other
workers in states with Social Security coverage for teachers. This difference is much smaller
than for those actively working as teachers and is likely due to prior public sector work
among these “other” workers. Most importantly, there is a striking difference in retirement
rates between teachers covered by Social Security and those not covered. There is a jump
at age 62, which coincides with the earliest age of eligibility to claim Social Security. The
differences continue throughout the 60’s with those covered by Social Security having a
higher probability of retirement at each age except age 63.
       To capture a clearer picture of the cumulative probability of retirement, Table 3 presents
age-specific probabilities alongside a cumulative retirement rate.9 Using a life table ap-
proach, we model the cumulative failure probability of a cohort of 1,000 workers actively
employed at age 50. This approach is similar to Dudel and Myrskyl (2017) except it does
not include adjustments for mortality. In Table 3, Column (1), we present age-specific
retirement rates for teachers not included in Social Security, while retirement rates for
those included in Social Security are in Column (4). To aid in interpreting these numbers,
Columns (2) and (5) apply the age-specific probability of retirement to get a “failure” rate
that is the cumulative probability of retiring by the age in each row. We observe that
the surviving number of teachers is always higher in states where they are excluded from
Social Security. Furthermore, the cumulative retirement rate is always higher for teachers
covered by Social Security. Importantly, the most dramatic differences occur at ages 62
and 66. We explore this further in a multivariate regression analysis below. Overall, this
exercise provides suggestive evidence that Social Security coverage is associated with earlier
   9
   Populating this table with regression-estimated coefficients yields similar patterns. Results are available
upon request.


                                                      9
retirements.


4.2      Multivariate Regression Analysis

In the raw means presented in Table 3, we observe that retirement rates are generally
higher for teachers who are covered by Social Security after age 62. We model this more
formally by estimating versions of the following regression equation.


P r(Retiredist = 1) = F (βss SSIncs + γa 1(Age62 − 70)ist + βa 1(Age62 − 70)ist × SSIncls

                       + Xist δ + Pist ψ + Mst θ + τt )
                                                                                                        (1)

where i, s, and t index individuals, states, and years respectively. SSIncls equals 1 if
an individual is in a state where teachers are covered by Social Security. 1(Age62 − 70)
is an indicator for whether the individual is between ages 62 and 70. Xist is a vector of
individual characteristics. Pist is a vector of state pension plan parameters that vary either
across individuals or over time. Mst is a vector of state-level measures of macroeconomic
conditions. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. The βa ’s are the parameters
of interest.10
       We then present a more disaggregated model by age categories.

                                              69
                                              X                          69
                                                                         X
P r(Retiredist = 1) = F (βss SSIncs +               γa 1(Ageist = a) +          βa 1(Ageist = a) × SSIncls
                                             a=60                        a=60

                       + Xist δ + Pist ψ + Mst θ + τt )
                                                                                                        (2)

Ageist is the age of individual i in state s in year t. This approach is similar to Asch et al.
(2005), where the authors estimate logit models of retirement regressed on peak and option
  10
     Estimates are coefficients from a logistic model. In results not shown, estimates from a complementary-
log-log (cloglog) specification are nearly identical.



                                                     10
value of retirement benefits along with a set of age-specific dummies.
       We first estimate a baseline model with individual controls for sex, marital status, and
education level. Social Security coverage is not the only aspect of retirement income that
differs by state. To test the sensitivity of our findings, we add three pension characteristics
and three proxies for state-level economic conditions to the baseline model. Means of these
variables are provided in Appendix Table A1. We expect that states where teachers are not
included in Social Security have different pension benefits. To capture some of the variation
in plan characteristics, we define an indicator variable for theoretically being eligible for
full retirement at the individual’s age. For each pension plan in the data, we calculate the
age at which a teacher who began working in the pension system at age 24 and had no
breaks in service would be eligible for a full and unreduced pension. For this exercise, we
utilize plan-specific retirement eligibility rules from the Urban Institute’s State and Local
Employee Pension Plan Database (SLEPP).11 We define the theoretical eligibility indicator
as whether the individual is younger or older than that earliest full retirement eligibility
age within their pension plan. Note that measure is just a theoretical construct as each
individual’s eligibility will be a function of age at hire and any prior service that might be
used to purchase service. As shown in Appendix Table A1, among teachers who worked
within the past year those covered by Social Security are more likely to be “eligible” for a
full retirement benefit, by this definition. This is consistent with teachers who are covered
by Social Security being more influenced by Social Security eligibility than by pension plan
parameters.
       Additionally, we include two measures of pension plan health from the PPD: the funding
ratio and the percent of employer’s required contributions that was paid. The funding ratio
measures the ratio of a pension plan’s assets to its liabilities, so a higher funding ratio
indicates a healthier pension. The percent of employer’s required contributions that was
  11
    For more information on the Urban Institute’s Public Pension Project, see: https://www.urban.
org/policy-centers/cross-center-initiatives/program-retirement-policy/projects/public-pension-project [ac-
cessed May 2018].



                                                   11
paid measures the extent to which the pension plan sponsor pays its required contributions.
A low value for this measure indicates that the cost of funding the pension plan may be
causing fiscal stress for the sponsor. Along these two dimensions, plans included in Social
Security are in better financial health.12
    To account for variation in macroeconomic conditions across states and over time we
include controls for annual state unemployment rates, real GDP per capita, and per capita
personal income. Again, means of these variables are provided in Appendix Table A1.13
Note that while the unemployment rate is lower among states included in Social Security,
real income per capita and real GDP per capita are both lower as well.
    Table 4 presents estimated coefficients from a logit model estimating equation (1), with
robust standard errors clustered by state of residence. The main estimated coefficients of
interest are the age group indicator, the Social Security inclusion dummy variable, and
the interaction between age and Social Security inclusion. All models also include year
fixed effects, educational attainment (graduate degree), race/ethnicity, gender, and marital
status. Marginal effects are reported in brackets at the bottom of the table. The marginal
effects are calculated as the average change in probability from being included in Social
Security for individuals ages 50-61 and for individuals ages 62-70. Column (1) includes
only the baseline characteristics. Column (2) adds the three pension plan characteristics
  12
     A potential mechanism through which Social Security inclusion could affect retirement timing is its
impact on the generosity of pension benefits. In particular, we would expect teachers not included in Social
Security to receive some form of compensating wage differential, perhaps through a higher replacement
rate from their employer-provided pensions. To estimate the full policy effect of Social Security inclusion,
we do not include controls for pension generosity such as average benefit, replacement rate, or normal
cost. To account for other pension plan characteristics that may be related to Social Security inclusion
and retirement timing, but which we do not believe are mediating factors, we include a proxy for full
benefit eligibility and two measures of pension plan health. In results not shown, the results are similar
when including normal cost as a covariate for the subset of state by year combinations that this variable is
available in the PPD data.
  13
     Data on annual state level unemployment rates are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Local Area
Unemployment Statistics, https://www.bls.gov/lau/rdscnp16.htm [accessed August 2018]. Annual state
level real GDP per capita and personal income per capita are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis’
Regional Economic Accounts, “Per capita real GDP by state (chained 2009 dollars),” [accessed August
2018] and “SA1 Personal Income Summary: Personal Income, Population, Per Capita Personal Income,”
[accessed August 2018].



                                                    12
described above. The final column adds the three macroeconomic variables.
   First, the estimated coefficients on Social Security inclusion for the reference group
(ages 50-61) are not statistically significantly different from zero. However, the confidence
intervals on these estimates are large and include economically meaningful positive or neg-
ative differences. The bottom of the table presents the estimated marginal effects for ages
50-61 year olds. Again, these are economically small and not statistically significant. As
expected, the estimated coefficient on the age group indicator suggests a large and statisti-
cally significant difference in retirement rates between the younger (ages 50-61) and older
(ages 62-70) age groups. Importantly, the interaction term between the older age group
and Social Security inclusion is positive and statistically significant. The marginal effects,
reported at the bottom of Table 4, are calculated as the average change in probability of
retirement from being included in Social Security for those ages 62-70. In the baseline
Column (1), Social Security inclusion is associated with a 3 percentage point higher prob-
ability of retirement. The average probability of retiring among 62-70 year olds who are
not covered by Social Security is 25 percent. Thus, the marginal effect suggests that, for
teachers, Social Security eligibility is associated with a 12 percent higher probability of
retirement, all else equal.
   Because some teachers will be eligible for Social Security benefits through other jobs
or through their spouse, this estimates represents a lower bound of the effect of Social
Security eligibility on retirement. However, these estimates rely on cross-sectional varia-
tion across states. To determine the extent to which other omitted characteristics could
explain these findings, we include three measures of pension characteristics in Column (2).
As discussed in detail above, differences in employer-provided pension plan characteristics
may be due to Social Security inclusion. Still, when controlling for these characteristics
we observe a slightly larger effect of Social Security eligibility on retirement. Column (3)
further includes macroeconomic conditions that vary by state and year. Again, including
these controls suggests an even larger marginal effect. Note also that including the macroe-



                                             13
conomic condition control variables changes the estimated time pattern of retirements. The
constructed measure of “theoretical eligibility” for full retirement benefits strongly predicts
retirement, while the other two pension health measures do not. A higher unemployment
rate is associated with an increased probability of retirement, but the other two proxies for
macroeconomic conditions do not predict retirement, all else equal.
   The results in Table 4 illustrate a statistically significant difference in retirement rates
for individuals 62-70 by Social Security inclusion status. To further explore whether the
age pattern of retirement rates differs by Social Security inclusion, we next disaggregate
the age categories further as in Equation (2). This more closely mirrors Figure 1. For this
exercise, we construct the omitted age group as ages 50-59 and include age-specific dummy
variables for ages 60-70. Column (1) of Table 5 presents these results. The specification
here includes all covariates from Table 4, Column (3).
   For the group of teachers not covered by Social Security, we observe that retirement
rates increase monotonically in age except at age 69. Note that although most teachers
with sufficient tenure will be covered by some form of retiree health insurance, Medicare
is likely still an important component of health insurance support (see, e.g., Clark and
Morrill, 2010).
   The estimated coefficient on Social Security inclusion is again not statistically signif-
icant for the excluded age group (here ages 50-59), although the confidence intervals are
large. The interaction terms between Social Security inclusion and age reveal a statistically
significant difference in the retirement patterns of teachers. The estimated coefficients for
the age-specific retirement rates are statistically significantly higher under Social Security
eligibility at ages 62, 64, and 66. In Column (1), a Wald-test of the null hypothesis that the
age 62 to 70 interaction coefficients are jointly equal to zero is rejected with p < 0.001. To
give a sense of magnitude, in results not reported in the table, the average marginal effect
of Social Security inclusion for a 62 year old (the sum of the baseline estimate plus the
interacted term) is 4.8 percentage points. Table 3 showed the age-specific retirement rate



                                              14
for individuals age 62 who are not covered by Social Security is 19.14 percent. Thus, Social
Security coverage is associated with about a 25 percent higher risk of retirement at age
62. To bolster our confidence in this conclusion, we perform a Wald-test of the joint null
hypothesis that each of the age 63-70 interaction coefficients is equal to the age 62 interac-
tion coefficient. We reject this null hypothesis at the < 10% level with a p = 0.0693. These
results indicate a clear impact of Social Security inclusion on the timing of retirement.14


4.3      Labor Force Participation Rates

So far, we have considered individual’s transitions from working to not working. This
“flow” measure will capture all workers who retire from teaching and do not immediately
begin a new job. The measure will not detect individuals who move directly from teaching
to a new job without a period time spent not working. An alternative measure is a “stock”
of who is actively working as a teacher. For this exercise, we collapse the data into age ×
state × year × gender cells. We define the teacher labor force participation rate as the
fraction of individuals in each cell who are actively working as a teacher.15 We include
in the numerator individuals who are currently employed or unemployed and report their
current or most recent occupation to be teacher. Individuals who report being out of the
labor force are excluded from the numerator. The denominator is all individuals in that
age × state × year × gender cell who have at least a bachelor’s degree. All estimates are
weighted by the population size of each cell. For age groups where the flow to stock ratio
is small, it will be more difficult to detect a statistically significant change in the outflow
from teaching. Still, we anticipate that the sign and approximate magnitude of the change
will be similar to that from the preferred age-specific retirement rates analysis above.
       To begin, we illustrate the teacher labor force participation rate for ages 25 through
  14
     In results not shown, we confirm that these estimates are robust to dropping Texas or California, both
large states where teachers are not covered.
  15
     Over the summer months a teacher may not be actively working but may still have a job as a teacher.
The ACS is collected year-round, but the public use version does not indicate the survey month. It is
possible that this type of measurement error varies by state, but we have no way to test this directly.



                                                    15
70. Means are presented for each age individually with population weights used in the
calculation of the mean.16 Figure 2 illustrates that the teacher labor force is actually
higher in states covered by Social Security for ages 25 through about age 55. For that
age range, about 10 percent of individuals in states where teachers are covered by Social
Security are working as teachers, compared to closer to 9 percent in non-covered states.
This could be due to a labor supply effect indicating that Social Security is a benefit
valued by potential teachers, or it could indicate something about the financial wellness of
the state. This pattern switches starting at about age 55. Interestingly, from about age 55
through age 63, the teacher labor force participation rates are much more similar between
the two groups of states. Starting at age 63, states where teachers are covered by Social
Security have lower teacher labor force participation rates.
      Table 5, Column (2) presents estimates from an OLS regression with the same age-
specific rate specification as in Column (1). Estimates weight each age×state×year×gender
cell by the population size. The first row indicates that the teacher labor force participation
rate does not significantly differ by Social Security inclusion for the omitted age group, ages
50-59. This is consistent with the labor force participation rate figure above. Similar to
the retirement rate regressions presented above, the teacher labor force participation rates
drop as individuals age. The estimated coefficients on age suggest a smooth decline in the
probability of being a teacher by age with only a slightly larger decline at age 65.
      To see the difference in participation in the teacher labor force by Social Security
coverage, Table 5, Column (2) includes interaction terms with age and Social Security
inclusion. Confirming the results above, Social Security is associated with lower teacher
labor force participation rates starting at age 64. The estimate at age 62 is similar in
magnitude but not statistically significant. Considering the most saturated model, shown
in Table 5, Column (2), for individuals age 67, Social Security inclusion is associated with
a 0.46 percentage point lower teacher labor force participation rate. The average labor
 16
      Appendix Table A3 presents the statistics on teacher labor force participation.




                                                     16
force participation rate for non-covered teachers age 67 is 2.0 percent, shown in Appendix
Table A3. This implies an approximately 23 percent lower teacher labor force participation
rate among 67 year olds associated with Social Security coverage. Although not always
statistically significant, the magnitudes are quite similar to that found analyzing retirement
rates above. To put this number into perspective, Fetter and Lockwood (2016) find that
the Old Age Assistance Program (OAA) reduced the labor force participation rate of men
in their late 60’s by 8.5 percentage points.
   The second half of Table 5 presents the estimated coefficients for the other covariates in
the regression model. The time pattern for participation in the teacher labor force suggests
a decline in teaching over time. Parallel to the results above, the unemployment rate is
associated with a lower teacher labor force participation, potentially due to lower demand.
Real GDP per capita (measured in thousands of dollars) is associated with a significantly
lower teacher labor force participation rate.


4.4   Marital Status

There are several reasons to expect retirement patterns for married individuals to be less
sensitive to Social Security inclusion. First, own Social Security income may be a smaller
portion of total household income and, thus, may be less important in timing retirement.
Second, couples may consider other non-financial factors in timing their retirement, such as
joint leisure. If so, we expect to see a smaller impact of financial incentives on retirement.
Retirement coordination is well established in the data: married couples tend to retire
at the same time (Blau, 1998; Gustman and Steinmeier, 2000; Coile, 2004). This result
is often explained by the joint budget set faced by couples and leisure complementarities
between spouses. This intuition runs counter to recent empirical evidence which suggests
that the returns to additional years of work later in life are greater for married women than
for married men (Maestas, 2017). Henriques (2018) uses Social Security records to estimate
whether men and women claim Social Security benefits in a way that maximizes benefit


                                                17
levels. Her analysis shows that, despite the increase in women’s labor force participation
and wages, wives are still dependent on their husbands’ Social Security benefits. Further,
she finds that husbands respond to their own incentives but do not claim in a way that
maximizes dependent benefits.
   One benefit of the ACS is that we can observe marital status and, if married, character-
istics of the spouse. In Appendix Table A4, we present estimates for the samples of married
women and married men, with controls for spouse’s age and labor supply, parallel to our
preferred model from Table 4, Column (3). Our empirical results lack sufficient power
to estimate meaningful differences by gender and marital status. However, the estimates
are suggestive that the impact of Social Security eligibility is larger for single women at
younger ages and larger for married women and men later in their 60’s.
   In Appendix Table A4, Column (1), the marginal effect of Social Security coverage at
age 67 indicates an 11.17 percentage point higher probability of retirement. Not shown in
the table, the average retirement rate for married female teachers not covered by Social
Security who are age 67 is 31.7 percent. Thus, Social Security coverage is associated with
about a 35 percent higher probability of retirement among 67 year old married female
teachers, but not at other ages. Married male teachers age 66 also have a statistically
significantly higher probability of retiring if covered by Social Security. Here, the marginal
effect of 10.50 percent represents about 47 percent of the non-covered mean of 22.3 per-
cent. For married male teachers there are also statistically significant differences by Social
Security coverage at ages 69 and 70. The fact that we do not see similar jumps at the early
Social Security claiming ages for married men or women suggests that factors impacting
the joint retirement decisions of couples might outweigh the effects of Social Security in-
centives. There is also evidence of a desire for joint leisure as having a spouse who is not in
the labor force is associated with a large and statistically significantly higher probability
of retirement for both men and women. Still, the standard errors on these estimates are
large, so we do not explore this further in this context.



                                              18
5    Discussion and Conclusion

The evidence presented here supports the hypothesis that Social Security inclusion influ-
ences age-specific probabilities of retirement for individuals ages 62-70. These results are
confirmed in a supplemental analysis of the participation in the teacher labor force. On
average, teachers eligible for Social Security (ages 62-70) have about a 12 percent higher
probability of retiring than teachers ages 62-70 who are not covered by Social Security.
In the American Community Survey (ACS) data, we can only observe a retirement if an
individual moves from working as a teacher to not working. If the teacher terminates
employment and begins a new career without a break, our method will not capture that
retirement. Our estimates will be inaccurate if this type of measurement error is correlated
with Social Security coverage. We therefore confirm our main estimates by instead ana-
lyzing participation in the teacher labor force. This measure is not sensitive to retirement
transition type. Using this measure, we find that Social Security coverage is associated
with lower participation in the teacher labor force starting at age 64.
    Many public employees are not currently covered by Social Security. Many public
pension plans are in crisis due to lower investment returns, historic underfunding, and
rising life expectancies. One option a plan sponsor might consider is transitioning to a DC
plan plus Social Security. This leads to several key questions. Which public employees
would benefit and which may not? What are the labor supply impacts of pension reforms?
What are the implications on costs for Social Security?
    The results in this paper indicate that Social Security coverage is associated with in-
creased retirement rates between ages 62 and 70. However, we can only provide suggestive
evidence that this is consistent with earlier not later retirements. Further, we cannot pro-
vide evidence on whether teachers are better or worse off when covered by Social Security.
It may be that the income support that Social Security provides allows individuals to re-
tire at younger ages. Engelhardt et al. (2018) show that the introduction of early Social
Security claiming led to a decline in retirement income and a subsequent rise in old age


                                            19
poverty for male-headed households. Snyder and Evans (2006) leverage variation in re-
tirement income induced by the notch and find that the larger benefit group experienced
higher mortality rates. One potential mechanism for this is that the lower benefit group
engaged in post-retirement work, which may have yielded a health benefit to those workers.
In addition, we cannot provide evidence on whether these earlier departures are helpful or
harmful to the education system as a whole. Fitzpatrick and Lovenheim (2014) estimate
that when a teacher early retirement incentive is introduced, student test scores do not
drop as a result of the induced retirements.
   In this study, we cannot distinguish between whether Social Security allows individuals
to retire when desired or whether workers are being pulled out of the labor force. Coile and
Levine (2007) show that Social Security can help alleviate the income loss associated with
a weak labor market. They find that when a labor market downturn occurs, individuals
eligible for Social Security are more likely to retire. The evidence presented here strongly
suggests that Social Security influences retirement timing. Should a teacher pension plan
opt to join Social Security in the future, these newly covered teachers may increase their
retirement rates in their 60’s. We find no evidence that retirement rates of teachers in their
50’s differ by Social Security coverage, with the exception of single men. If Social Security
does hasten retirements, these earlier retirements would, in turn, put further strain on the
public sector pensions.




                                               20
References
Asch, B., Haider, S. J., and Zissimopoulos, J. (2005). Financial incentives and retirement:
  Evidence from federal civil service workers. Journal of Public Economics, 89(2):427–440.

Blau, D. M. (1998). Labor Force Dynamics of Older Married Couples. Journal of Labor
  Economics, 16(3):595–629.

Brown, K. M. (2013). The link between pensions and retirement timing: Lessons from
  California teachers. Journal of Public Economics, 98:1–14.

Clark, R. L. and Craig, L. A. (2011). Determinants of the generosity of pension plans for
  public school teachers, 1982-2006. Journal of Pension Economics & Finance; Cambridge,
  10(1):99–118.

Clark, R. L. and McDermed, A. A. (1986). Earnings and Pension Compensation: The
  Effect of Eligibility. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2):341–361.

Clark, R. L. and Morrill, M. S. (2010). Retiree Health Plans in the Public Sector: Is There
  a Funding Crisis? Edward Elgar Publishing.

Coile, C. (2004). Retirement Incentives and Couples’ Retirement Decisions. Topics in
  Economic Analysis & Policy, 4(1).

Coile, C. and Gruber, J. (2007). Future Social Security Entitlements and the Retirement
  Decision. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2):234–246.

Coile, C. C. (2015). Economic Determinants of Workers Retirement Decisions. Journal of
  Economic Surveys, 29(4):830–853.

Coile, C. C. and Levine, P. B. (2007). Labor market shocks and retirement: Do government
  programs matter? Journal of Public Economics, 91(10):1902–1919.

Costrell, R. M. and Podgursky, M. (2009). Peaks, Cliffs, and Valleys: The Peculiar In-
  centives in Teacher Retirement Systems and Their Consequences for School Staffing.
  Education Finance and Policy, 4(2):175–211.

Diamond, P. A. and Orszag, P. R. (2003). Reforming the GPO and WEP In Social Security.
  page 3.

Dudel, C. and Myrskyl, M. (2017). Working Life Expectancy at Age 50 in the United
 States and the Impact of the Great Recession. Demography, 54(6):2101–2123.

Engelhardt, G. V., Gruber, J., and Kumar, A. (2018). Early Social Security Claiming and
  Old-Age Poverty: Evidence from the Introduction of the Social Security Early Eligibility
  Age. Working Paper 24609, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                            21
Fetter, D. K. and Lockwood, L. M. (2016). Government Old-Age Support and Labor
  Supply: Evidence from the Old Age Assistance Program. Working Paper 22132, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Fitzpatrick, M. D. (2015). How Much Are Public School Teachers Willing to Pay for Their
  Retirement Benefits? American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(4):165–188.

Fitzpatrick, M. D. and Lovenheim, M. F. (2014). Early Retirement Incentives and Student
  Achievement. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(3):120–154.

Furgeson, J., Strauss, R. P., and Vogt, W. B. (2006). The Effects of Defined Benefit Pension
  Incentives and Working Conditions on Teacher Retirement Decisions. Education Finance
  and Policy, 1(3):316–348.

Gale, W. G., Holmes, S. E., and John, D. (2015). Social Security coverage for state and
 local government workers: A reconsideration. Brookings Institution. June.

GAO-03-710T (2003). Social Security: Issues Relating to Noncoverage of Public Employees.

GAO-05-786T (2005). Social Security: Coverage of Public Employees and Implications
 for Reform, Statement of Barbara D. Bovbjerg, Director, Education, Workforce, and
 Income Security. Testimony. Technical report.

GAO-10-938 (2010). Management Oversight Needed to Ensure Accurate Treatment of
 State and Local Government Employees. Technical report.

GAO-HEHS-98-196 (1998). Social Security: Implications of Extending Mandatory Cover-
 age to State and Local Employees. Technical report.

Gustman, A. L. and Steinmeier, T. L. (2000). Retirement in DualCareer Families: A
 Structural Model. Journal of Labor Economics, 18(3):503–545.

Gustman, A. L., Steinmeier, T. L., and Tabatabai, N. (2013). The Social Security Windfall
 Elimination and Government Pension Offset Provisions for Public Employees in the
 Health and Retirement Study. Working Paper 19724, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Gustman, A. L., Steinmeier, T. L., and Tabatabai, N. (2014). The Social Security Windfall
 Elimination and Government Pension Offset Provisions for Public Employees in the
 Health and Retirement Study. Social Security Bulletin, 74:55.

Haider, S. J. and Loughran, D. S. (2008). The Effect of the Social Security Earnings Test
  on Male Labor Supply New Evidence from Survey and Administrative Data. Journal of
  Human Resources, 43(1):57–87.

Haltzel, L. (2004). Social Security: The Government Pension Offset (GPO). page 18.

                                            22
Harris, D. N. and Adams, S. J. (2007). Understanding the level and causes of teacher
  turnover: A comparison with other professions. Economics of Education Review,
 26(3):325–337.

Henriques, A. M. (2018). How Does Social Security Claiming Respond to Incentives?
  Considering Husbands’ and Wives’ Benefits Separately. Journal of Human Resources,
  53(2):382–413.

Kan, L. and Aldeman, C. (2014). Uncovered: Social Security, Retirement Uncertainty, and
 1 Million Teachers. Bellwether Education Partners.

Kilgour, J. G. (2009). Social Security and the Public Sector: The Windfall Elimina-
  tion Provision and the Government Pension Offset. Compensation & Benefits Review,
  41(5):34–42.

Koedel, C., Ni, S., and Podgursky, M. (2014). Who Benefits from Pension Enhancements?
 Education Finance and Policy, 9(2):165–192.

Koedel, C. and Podgursky, M. (2016). Chapter 6 - Teacher Pensions. In Hanushek, E. A.,
 Machin, S., and Woessmann, L., editors, Handbook of the Economics of Education, vol-
 ume 5, pages 281–303. Elsevier.

Koedel, C. and Xiang, P. B. (2017). Pension Enhancements and the Retention of Public
 Employees. ILR Review, 70(2):519–551.

Lazear, E. P. (1986). Chapter 5 Retirement from the labor force. In Handbook of Labor
  Economics, volume 1, pages 305–355. Elsevier.

Liebman, J. B., Luttmer, E. F. P., and Seif, D. G. (2009). Labor supply responses to
  marginal Social Security benefits: Evidence from discontinuities. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics, 93(11):1208–1223.

Maestas, N. (2017). The Return to Work and Women’s Employment Decisions. NBER
 Working Paper. http://www.nber.org/papers/w24429.

Mastrobuoni, G. (2011). The role of information for retirement behavior: Evidence based on
 the stepwise introduction of the Social Security Statement. Journal of Public Economics,
 95(7):913–925.

Munnell, A. H. (2000). The Impact of Mandatory Social Security Coverage of State and
 Local Workers: A Multi-State Review. page 92.

Munnell, A. H. (2005). Mandatory Social Security Cover- Age of State and Local Workers:
 A Perennial Hot Button. page 9.



                                           23
Ni, S. and Podgursky, M. (2016). How Teachers Respond to Pension System Incentives:
  New Estimates and Policy Applications. Journal of Labor Economics, 34(4):1075–1104.

Nuschler, D., Shelton, A. M., and Topoleski, J. J. (2011). Social Security: Mandatory
 Coverage of New State and Local Government Employees. Social Security, page 22.

Snyder, S. E. and Evans, W. N. (2006). The Effect of Income on Mortality: Evidence from
  the Social Security Notch. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3):482–495.

Stock, J. H. and Wise, D. A. (1990). Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and Retirement.
  Econometrica, 58(5):1151–1180.




                                          24
Figure 1: Age-Specific Retirement Rates for Teachers and Other Workers




          Figure 2: Teacher Labor Force Participation Rates




                                 25
                     Table 1: Teachers’ Social Security Coverage by State

                  State                      Are Teachers Included in Social Security?
                  Alabama                    Yes
                  Alaska                     No
                  Arizona                    Yes
                  Arkansas                   Yes
                  California                 No
                  Colorado                   No
                  Connecticut                No
                  Delaware                   Yes
                  District of Columbia       No
                  Florida                    Yes
                  Georgia†                   Partial Inclusion
                  Hawaii                     Yes
                  Idaho                      Yes
                  Illinois                   No
                  Indiana                    Yes
                  Iowa                       Yes
                  Kansas                     Yes
                  Kentucky                   No
                  Louisiana                  No
                  Maine                      No
                  Maryland                   Yes
                  Massachusetts              No
                  Michigan                   Yes
                  Minnesota                  Yes
                  Mississippi                Yes
                  Missouri†                  Partial Inclusion
                  Montana                    Yes
                  Nebraska                   Yes
                  Nevada                     No
                  New Hampshire              Yes
                  New Jersey                 Yes
                  New Mexico                 Yes
                  New York                   Yes
                  North Carolina             Yes
                  North Dakota               Yes
                  Ohio                       No
                  Oklahoma                   Yes
                  Oregon                     Yes
                  Pennsylvania               Yes
                  Rhode Island†              Partial Inclusion
                  South Carolina             Yes
                  South Dakota               Yes
                  Tennessee                  Yes
                  Texas                      No
                  Utah                       Yes
                  Vermont                    Yes
                  Virginia                   Yes
                  Washington                 Yes
                  West Virginia              Yes
                  Wisconsin                  Yes
                  Wyoming                    Yes
                  † States where only some teachers are covered are excluded.

Notes: Pension plan data is derived from the the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College’s Public
Plan Database. See Section 3.1 for details.         26
                                   Table 2: Summary Statistics


                                (1)               (2)                    (3)                 (4)
                                All       Not included in SS       Included in SS     Difference:(3)-(2)
 Retired                      0.1221             0.1182                0.1247               0.0065∗∗
                             (0.3275)           (0.3228)              (0.3304)              [0.0026]
 Age                         57.5320            57.5852               57.4978              -0.0875∗∗
                             (5.0464)           (5.0923)              (5.0165)              [0.0417]
 Advanced Degree              0.6017             0.5743                0.6192              0.0449∗∗∗
                             (0.4896)           (0.4944)              (0.4856)              [0.0041]
 White                        0.8710             0.8711                0.8709               -0.0002
                             (0.3352)           (0.3351)              (0.3353)              [0.0030]
 African American             0.0846             0.0757                0.0903              0.0146∗∗∗
                             (0.2783)           (0.2646)              (0.2866)              [0.0025]
 Other Race                   0.0444             0.0531                0.0388              -0.0143∗∗∗
                             (0.2060)           (0.2243)              (0.1931)              [0.0018]
 Hispanic Origin              0.0599             0.0891                0.0412              -0.0479∗∗∗
                             (0.2374)           (0.2849)              (0.1988)              [0.0023]
 Female                       0.7667             0.7597                0.7712              0.0115∗∗∗
                             (0.4230)           (0.4273)              (0.4201)              [0.0036]
 Married                      0.7129             0.6994                0.7216              0.0223∗∗∗
                             (0.4524)           (0.4585)              (0.4482)              [0.0039]
 Never Married                0.0760             0.0805                0.0732              -0.0073∗∗∗
                             (0.2651)           (0.2720)              (0.2605)              [0.0023]
 Separated                    0.0138             0.0130                0.0142                0.0012
                             (0.1165)           (0.1134)              (0.1184)              [0.0011]
 Divorced                     0.1606             0.1718                0.1535              -0.0183∗∗∗
                             (0.3672)           (0.3772)              (0.3604)              [0.0032]
 Widowed                      0.0367             0.0354                0.0375                0.0021
                             (0.1879)           (0.1847)              (0.1899)              [0.0016]
 Divorced in Past Year        0.0069             0.0073                0.0067               -0.0006
                             (0.0829)           (0.0850)              (0.0815)              [0.0007]
 Widowed in Past Year         0.0044             0.0044                0.0043               -0.0001
                             (0.0660)           (0.0663)              (0.0658)              [0.0005]
 Observations                  88788             34356                  54432                88788
 Sample of all teachers. Means weighted at the person level with SD in parentheses and SE in brackets.

Notes: Teacher retirement data are derived from the 2010-2016 American Community Surveys, see text for
details.

                                                  27
         Table 3: Cumulative Retirement Probabilities by Social Security Inclusion

        Not Included in Social Security                  Included in Social Security

 Age      Pct        Remaining       Cum. Ret..           Pct      Remaining      Cum. Ret.
        Retiring      Workers           Rate            Retiring    Workers         Rate
           (1)          (2)              (3)               (4)        (5)            (6)
 50      3.67%         1000            0.0000            4.55%       1000          0.0000
 51      3.95%          963            0.0367            4.28%       954           0.0455
 52      4.51%          925            0.0748            4.74%       914           0.0864
 53      5.01%          883            0.1113            4.43%       870           0.1255
 54      6.26%          839            0.1559            5.67%       832           0.1642
 55      5.77%          787            0.2087            6.78%       785           0.2116
 56      6.31%          741            0.2543            6.60%       731           0.2651
 57      7.72%          695            0.3014            8.58%       683           0.3136
 58      9.28%          641            0.3553           10.06%       624           0.3726
 59     11.39%          581            0.4151           10.47%       562           0.4357
 60     14.09%          515            0.4817           13.44%       503           0.4947
 61     16.52%          443            0.5548           15.51%       435           0.5627
 62     19.14%          370            0.6283           23.48%       368           0.6305
 63     22.43%          299            0.6994           22.60%       281           0.7172
 64     20.58%          232            0.7668           25.08%       218           0.7811
 65     26.75%          184            0.8148           29.27%       163           0.8360
 66     27.79%          135            0.8643           33.34%       115           0.8840
 67     31.84%           97            0.9020           34.89%        77           0.9227
 68     34.19%           66            0.9332           38.24%        50           0.9497
 69     33.59%           44            0.9561           36.83%        31           0.9689
 70     35.02%           29            0.9708           41.45%        20           0.9804
Notes: Teacher retirement data are derived from the 2010-2016 American Community Surveys, see text
for details. Age-specific retirement probabilities are presented in Columns (1) and (4). Using life table
methodology, Columns (2) and (5) present the implied population remaining from a fictitious cohort of
1,000 teachers. Columns (3) and (6) translate these statistics into a cumulative retirement rate for the
population.




                                                   28
                      Table 4: Logit Regression Coefficient Estimates
                                    (1)                       (2)                       (3)
                                  Baseline                 + Pension              + Macroeconomic
                                                         Characteristics             Conditions
 Included in SS              0.0013         (0.0808)    0.0086         (0.0977)    0.0268         (0.0837)
 62-70 Years Old            1.4150∗∗∗       (0.0795)   1.1498∗∗∗       (0.0603)   1.1264∗∗∗       (0.0663)
 Included SS x 62-70         0.1473∗        (0.0866)   0.1543∗         (0.0788)   0.1669∗∗        (0.0835)
 2011                         -0.0003       (0.0509)      0.0016       (0.0519)    0.0444         (0.0460)
 2012                         0.0385        (0.0545)      0.0439       (0.0573)   0.1446∗∗        (0.0598)
 2013                         -0.0368       (0.0669)     -0.0278       (0.0710)   0.1280∗         (0.0772)
 2014                         -0.1127       (0.0767)     -0.1038       (0.0742)    0.1306         (0.0974)
 2015                        -0.1354∗∗      (0.0677)    -0.1174∗       (0.0683)    0.1658         (0.1092)
 2016                       -0.1770∗∗∗      (0.0678)   -0.1532∗∗       (0.0671)    0.1610         (0.1123)
 Demographics                           X                          X                          X
 Full Retirement Eligible                              0.6781∗∗∗       (0.0570)   0.7169∗∗∗       (0.0518)
 Funding Ratio                                          0.1119         (0.3310)    0.1888         (0.3126)
 Percent ARC Paid                                       -0.0938        (0.1183)    -0.0474        (0.1280)
 Unemployment Rate                                                                0.0768∗∗∗       (0.0246)
 Real Income Per 1,000                                                              0.0111        (0.0090)
 Real GDP Per 1,000                                                                -0.0045        (0.0040)
 Marginal Effects 50-61     [0.0001]                 [0.0006]              [0.0019]
 Marginal Effects 62-70 [0.0289]∗                   [0.0316]∗             [0.0374]∗∗
 Observations                 88788                   88788                 88788
Notes: Teacher retirement data are derived from the 2010-2016 American Community
Surveys, see text for details. The dependent variable is the probability of retiring in the
past year. The specifications also include controls for gender and marital status, education,
race/ethnicity. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,∗∗ p <
0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                29
                                    Table 5: Age-Specific Retirement Patterns
                                                                (1)                      (2)
                                                            Pr(Retired)           Labor Force Part.
 Included in SS                                       0.0324        (0.0758)     -0.0022     (0.0031)
                                                            ∗∗∗
 60   Years   Old                                    0.6299         (0.1415)      -0.0049    (0.0031)
 61   Years   Old                                    0.8197∗∗∗      (0.0797)    -0.0105∗∗∗   (0.0032)
 62   Years   Old                                    1.0130∗∗∗      (0.0626)    -0.0151∗∗∗   (0.0035)
 63   Years   Old                                    1.2223∗∗∗      (0.1007)    -0.0212∗∗∗   (0.0029)
 64   Years   Old                                    1.1300∗∗∗      (0.0525)    -0.0236∗∗∗   (0.0025)
 65   Years   Old                                    1.4606∗∗∗      (0.1117)    -0.0282∗∗∗   (0.0037)
 66   Years   Old                                    1.5227∗∗∗      (0.1017)    -0.0327∗∗∗   (0.0026)
 67   Years   Old                                    1.7270∗∗∗      (0.1272)    -0.0347∗∗∗   (0.0030)
 68   Years   Old                                    1.8395∗∗∗      (0.1026)    -0.0385∗∗∗   (0.0033)
 69   Years   Old                                    1.8112∗∗∗      (0.0998)    -0.0379∗∗∗   (0.0040)
 70   Years   Old                                    1.8889∗∗∗      (0.1375)    -0.0385∗∗∗   (0.0032)
 Included     in   SS   and   60   Years   Old        -0.0092       (0.1462)      -0.0001    (0.0028)
 Included     in   SS   and   61   Years   Old        -0.0234       (0.0890)       0.0004    (0.0027)
 Included     in   SS   and   62   Years   Old       0.2553∗∗∗      (0.0909)      -0.0042    (0.0030)
 Included     in   SS   and   63   Years   Old        0.0057        (0.1243)      -0.0014    (0.0023)
 Included     in   SS   and   64   Years   Old       0.2382∗∗       (0.0955)    -0.0049∗∗    (0.0021)
 Included     in   SS   and   65   Years   Old        0.1172        (0.1305)      -0.0050    (0.0031)
 Included     in   SS   and   66   Years   Old       0.2536∗∗       (0.1198)    -0.0046∗∗    (0.0022)
 Included     in   SS   and   67   Years   Old        0.1191        (0.1416)    -0.0056∗∗    (0.0024)
 Included     in   SS   and   68   Years   Old        0.1536        (0.1293)     -0.0047∗    (0.0026)
 Included     in   SS   and   69   Years   Old        0.1166        (0.1310)     -0.0061∗    (0.0033)
 Included     in   SS   and   70   Years   Old        0.2512        (0.1564)    -0.0064∗∗    (0.0024)
 2011                                                 0.0369        (0.0449)    -0.0052∗∗∗   (0.0011)
 2012                                                 0.1174∗       (0.0618)    -0.0100∗∗∗   (0.0019)
 2013                                                 0.0910        (0.0797)    -0.0139∗∗∗   (0.0023)
 2014                                                 0.0707        (0.1002)    -0.0195∗∗∗   (0.0030)
 2015                                                 0.0924        (0.1120)    -0.0238∗∗∗   (0.0036)
 2016                                                 0.0825        (0.1135)    -0.0254∗∗∗   (0.0039)
 Eligible for Full Retirement                        0.5027∗∗∗      (0.0572)     0.0060      (0.0038)
 Funding Ratio                                         0.1239       (0.2929)     0.0052      (0.0063)
 Percent of Required Contribution Paid                -0.0021       (0.1133)     0.0059      (0.0044)
 Unemployment Rate                                   0.0646∗∗∗      (0.0233)    -0.0023∗∗∗   (0.0007)
 Real Income Per 1,000                                 0.0095       (0.0095)      -0.0001    (0.0004)
 Real GDP Per 1,000                                   -0.0050       (0.0043)     -0.0002∗    (0.0001)
  Observations                                     88788                          8064
Notes: Teacher retirement data are derived from the 2010-2016 American Community Surveys, see
text for details. In Column (1), the dependent variable is the probability of retiring in the past
year. Logit estimates are reported with marginal effects in brackets. In Column (2), the dependent
variable is the teacher labor force participation rate, which is defined as the age×state×year×gender
cell probability that an individual with at least a bachelor’s degree is currently working as a teacher.
Estimates are from an OLS regression. Both specifications also include controls for gender and
marital status, education, race/ethnicity. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.
∗
  p < 0.10,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



                                                       30
                                     Data Appendix

A      Retirement Data
Data on the retirement of teachers comes from the American Community Survey (ACS)
from 2010 to 2016.17

Classifying teachers:

       Describe clearly this person’s chief job activity or business last week. If this
       person had more than one job, describe the one at which this person worked the
       most hours. If this person had no job or business last week, give information
       for his/her last job or business.

   We classify an individual as a teacher following Harris and Adams (2007). This includes:
kindergarten teachers, primary and secondary school teachers, special education teachers,
and other teachers not otherwise classified. This excludes all post-secondary teachers.

Worked within the last year:

       When did this person last work, even for a few days?

         1. Within the past 12 months
         2. 1 to 5 years ago − SKIP to [L]
         3. Over 5 years ago or never worked − SKIP to question 47

The population of teachers is restricted to those who report working in the last year.
Retired teachers are defined as individuals whose most recent reported occupation was a
teacher and who worked last year, but are currently not in the labor force.

Retirement status:

       LAST WEEK, did this person work for pay at a job (or business)?

         1. Yes → SKIP to question 30
         2. No Did not work (or retired)

       LAST WEEK, was this person on layoff from a job?
  17
    Steven Ruggles, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek. Integrated Public
Use Microdata Series: Version 7.0 American Community Survey. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota,
2017




                                                 31
       1. Yes → SKIP to question 35c
       2. No

     Has this person been informed that he or she will be recalled to work within
     the next 6 months OR been given a date to return to work?

       1. Yes → SKIP to question 37
       2. No

     During the LAST 4 WEEKS, has this person been ACTIVELY looking for
     work?

       1. Yes
       2. No → SKIP to question 38

     LAST WEEK, could this person have started a job if offered one, or returned
     to work if recalled?

       1. Yes, could have gone to work
       2. No, because of own temporary illness
       3. No, because of all other reasons (in school, etc.)

    We use employment status from the ACS to determine whether an individual is em-
ployed. Employment status in the ACS is categorized as (1) employed, (2) unemployed,
or (3) not in the labor force. It is determined by the respondents answers to the above
questions.


B    Other Occupation Categories
We define two occupation groups as counterfactuals for teachers. The first are state gov-
ernment employees who are not teachers. We identify state government employees using
the following ACS question:

     Was this person Mark (X) ONE box.

       1. an employee of a PRIVATE FOR-PROFIT company or business, or of an
          individual, for wages, salary, or commissions?
       2. an employee of a PRIVATE NOT-FOR-PROFIT, tax-exempt, or charita-
          ble organization?
       3. a local GOVERNMENT employee (city, county, etc.)?
       4. a state GOVERNMENT employee?




                                            32
        5. a Federal GOVERNMENT employee?
        6. SELF-EMPLOYED in own NOT INCORPORATED business, professional
           practice, or farm?
        7. SELF-EMPLOYED in own INCORPORATED business, professional prac-
           tice, or farm?
        8. working WITHOUT PAY in family business or farm?
    The second, and broader, counterfactual group consist of individuals from the following
occupation categories: management, business, science, and arts occupations; business oper-
ations specialists; financial specialists; computer and mathematical occupations; architec-
ture and engineering occupations; life, physical, and social science occupations; community
and social services occupations; legal occupations; arts, design, entertainment, sports, and
media occupations; sales and related occupations; and office and administrative support oc-
cupations. We classify individuals into these categories using the “most recent occupation”
question listed above.


C     Accuracy of Retirement Classification
Because the ACS does not contain a precise measure of retirement, there is some noise in our
constructed measure. We define an individual as retired if she worked within the last year
but was not working at the time of the survey. This definition of retirement will not capture
individuals who retire from teaching and immediately start working elsewhere without a
break in service. Note that in the window of time observed in the ACS, an individual must
not be currently working but may later return to work. Most teacher pension plans require
a break in service before returning to a covered or non-covered employment within that
same plan. Thus, our measure of retirement should capture most job separations.
     As evidence that there is not differential measurement error in our definition of retire-
ment by Social Security inclusion, we conduct a study of “observed” versus “unobserved”
exits. We begin by calculating the weighted total number of teachers age 25 to 75 by age,
first for the years 2011-2016 then for 2010-2015. Teachers are defined as individuals whose
most recent primary occupation is teaching and who reported working in the last year.
This includes individuals who are currently teachers or who are unemployed or not in the
labor force. We then calculate the “loss” of teachers from age a − 1 in year t − 1 to a in t,
which we term unobserved exits.

                        \ Exitsa,t = Teachersa−1,t−1 − Teachersa,t
                   Unobserved                                                             (3)
Note that unobserved exits could theoretically be negative if there are new entrants to
teaching. This measure of unobserved exits will include teachers who move directly into
another occupation after retiring as well as sampling errors. To make our estimate of
unobserved exits comparable by age group, we scale it by the sum of observed exits from




                                             33
teaching and our estimate of unobserved exits. This produces a fraction of exits that are
“missed” by our measure of retirement.

                                                       \ Exitsa,t
                                                  Unobserved
          Percent of Exits Misseda,t =                                                   (4)
                                              \ Exitsa,t + Observed Exitsa,t
                                         Unobserved

    For younger ages, we anticipate a large number of missed exits due to job switching
without a period of non-employment. However, as individuals age, we expect that depar-
tures will be more likely to lead to a termination of employment, at least for some period
of time. Note that even if a teacher returns to work at a later age, we will observe the exit
if she spends a period of not working first. Figure A1 presents graphically the measured
“missed” exits by age at time t. For younger ages, the data are noisier and indicate not
only unobserved exits but also new entrants (i.e., negative values). However, by age 56,
where we begin our analysis, nearly all missing teachers are captured by our definition of
retirement. The dark line represents states where teachers are covered by Social Security,
while the lighter line includes teachers not part of Social Security. Importantly, we observe
that the age-specific loss rates are nearly identical between the two groups of states from
age 55 through age 70. We do not observe any systematic difference in missing teachers
between to the two groups of states at any age. We interpret these findings as strong
evidence that our measure of retirement is a good approximation and that Social Security
inclusion is not correlated with better quality measures of retirement.




                                             34
Figure A1: Estimates of Missed Teachers by Age




                     35
 Table A1: Summary Statistics: Pension Parameters and Macroeconomic Conditions

                                          (1)              (2)                (3)               (4)
                                          All      Not included in SS   Included in SS   Difference:(3)-(2)
Eligible for Full Retirement             0.6341           0.6462            0.6264          -0.0198∗∗∗
                                        (0.4817)         (0.4782)          (0.4838)           [0.0040]
Funding Ratio                            0.7280           0.6612            0.7709          0.1097∗∗∗
                                        (0.1547)         (0.1185)          (0.1600)          [0.0011]
Percent of Required Contribution Paid    0.8192           0.7674            0.8524          0.0850∗∗∗
                                        (0.2582)         (0.2589)          (0.2522)          [0.0023]
Unemployment Rate (%)                    7.1839           7.5727            6.9340          -0.6387∗∗∗
                                        (2.1206)         (2.2326)          (2.0059)           [0.0177]
Real Income Per Capita                  42.3953          43.0516           41.9734          -1.0782∗∗∗
(In Thousands of Dollars)               (4.1823)         (4.4842)          (3.9184)           [0.0346]
Real GDP Per Capita                     49.3823          52.6089           47.3083          -5.3005∗∗∗
(In Thousands of Dollars)               (9.0726)         (8.8783)          (8.5768)           [0.0716]
Observations                             88788            34356             54432              88788
Sample of all teachers. Means weighted at the person level with SD in parentheses and SE in brackets.




                                                    36
                         Table A2: Age-Specific Retirement Rates

                        (1)               (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                        All       Not included in SS      Included in SS      Difference:(3)-(2)
50-59 Years Old       0.0649             0.0633                0.0659                0.0026
                     (0.2463)           (0.2435)              (0.2481)              [0.0025]
60 Years Old          0.1370             0.1409                0.1344               -0.0065
                     (0.3438)           (0.3480)              (0.3411)              [0.0112]
61 Years Old          0.1590             0.1652                0.1551               -0.0100
                     (0.3657)           (0.3713)              (0.3620)              [0.0129]
62 Years Old          0.2180             0.1914                0.2348              0.0434∗∗∗
                     (0.4129)           (0.3934)              (0.4238)              [0.0144]
63 Years Old          0.2253             0.2243                0.2260                0.0017
                     (0.4178)           (0.4171)              (0.4182)              [0.0156]
64 Years Old          0.2331             0.2058                0.2508              0.0450∗∗∗
                     (0.4228)           (0.4043)              (0.4335)              [0.0169]
65 Years Old          0.2825             0.2675                0.2927                0.0252
                     (0.4502)           (0.4426)              (0.4550)              [0.0207]
66 Years Old          0.3113             0.2779                0.3334               0.0556∗∗
                     (0.4630)           (0.4480)              (0.4714)              [0.0233]
67 Years Old          0.3361             0.3184                0.3489                0.0305
                     (0.4724)           (0.4658)              (0.4766)              [0.0276]
68 Years Old          0.3654             0.3419                0.3824                0.0405
                     (0.4815)           (0.4744)              (0.4860)              [0.0308]
69 Years Old          0.3543             0.3359                0.3683                0.0324
                     (0.4783)           (0.4723)              (0.4824)              [0.0332]
70 Years Old          0.3871             0.3502                0.4145                0.0643
                     (0.4871)           (0.4770)              (0.4926)              [0.0395]
Total                 0.1221             0.1182                0.1247               0.0065∗∗
                     (0.3275)           (0.3228)              (0.3304)              [0.0026]
Observations           88788             34356                  54432                88788
Sample of all teachers. Weighted at the person level with SD in parentheses and SE in brackets.




                                                37
           Table A3: Age-Specific Teacher Labor Force Participation Rates

                        (1)               (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                        All       Not included in SS      Included in SS      Difference:(3)-(2)
50-59 Years Old       0.0610             0.0599                0.0617                0.0018
                     (0.0366)           (0.0347)              (0.0378)              [0.0031]
60 Years Old          0.0563             0.0562                0.0564                0.0002
                     (0.0417)           (0.0402)              (0.0426)              [0.0035]
61 Years Old          0.0509             0.0503                0.0513                0.0010
                     (0.0398)           (0.0343)              (0.0430)              [0.0032]
62 Years Old          0.0429             0.0444                0.0420               -0.0024
                     (0.0335)           (0.0323)              (0.0343)              [0.0029]
63 Years Old          0.0376             0.0380                0.0373               -0.0007
                     (0.0323)           (0.0296)              (0.0340)              [0.0027]
64 Years Old          0.0327             0.0350                0.0313               -0.0038
                     (0.0280)           (0.0257)              (0.0293)              [0.0023]
65 Years Old          0.0268             0.0289                0.0254               -0.0035
                     (0.0256)           (0.0249)              (0.0259)              [0.0022]
66 Years Old          0.0213             0.0234                0.0200               -0.0034∗
                     (0.0213)           (0.0195)              (0.0223)              [0.0018]
67 Years Old          0.0180             0.0203                0.0166              -0.0037∗∗
                     (0.0194)           (0.0173)              (0.0204)              [0.0016]
68 Years Old          0.0143             0.0165                0.0129              -0.0036∗∗
                     (0.0175)           (0.0163)              (0.0181)              [0.0015]
69 Years Old          0.0130             0.0154                0.0116              -0.0038∗∗
                     (0.0185)           (0.0166)              (0.0195)              [0.0015]
70 Years Old          0.0106             0.0127                0.0094              -0.0033∗∗
                     (0.0166)           (0.0141)              (0.0178)              [0.0013]
Total                 0.0478             0.0481                0.0476               -0.0005
                     (0.0378)           (0.0354)              (0.0393)              [0.0009]
Observations           8064               2184                  5880                  8064
Sample of all teachers. Weighted at the person level with SD in parentheses and SE in brackets.




                                                 38
                 Table A4: Logit Regression Coefficient Estimates for Married Teachers by
                 Gender

                                                        (1)                                   (2)
                                                  Married Women                           Married Men

Included in SS                                0.0833            (0.0828)           0.0403           (0.1238)
                                             [0.0053]                             [0.0020]

60 Years Old                                0.6328∗∗∗           (0.1679)         0.6969∗∗∗          (0.2550)
61 Years Old                                0.7722∗∗∗           (0.0962)         0.6852∗∗∗          (0.2629)
62 Years Old                                1.0079∗∗∗           (0.0803)         1.0912∗∗∗          (0.1881)
63 Years Old                                1.1113∗∗∗           (0.1021)         1.1820∗∗∗          (0.3235)
64 Years Old                                0.9174∗∗∗           (0.1044)         0.8712∗∗∗          (0.1947)
65 Years Old                                1.4885∗∗∗           (0.1681)         1.1909∗∗∗          (0.2033)
66 Years Old                                1.5525∗∗∗           (0.1203)         1.1139∗∗∗          (0.2512)
67 Years Old                                1.3906∗∗∗           (0.1233)         1.3585∗∗∗          (0.3213)
68 Years Old                                1.5043∗∗∗           (0.1992)         1.7547∗∗∗          (0.2169)
69 Years Old                                1.7040∗∗∗           (0.2087)         1.4665∗∗∗          (0.1877)
70 Years Old                                1.7089∗∗∗           (0.2127)         1.6123∗∗∗          (0.2153)

Included in SS and 60 Years Old               -0.2720           (0.1842)           -0.1014          (0.2832)
                                             [-0.0233]                            [-0.0067]
Included in SS and 61 Years Old               -0.1497           (0.1121)          -0.0269           (0.3044)
                                             [-0.0095]                            [0.0016]
Included in SS and 62 Years Old               0.0785            (0.1250)          -0.0205           (0.2207)
                                             [0.0286]                             [0.0031]
Included in SS and 63 Years Old              -0.0468            (0.1437)           -0.3472          (0.3444)
                                             [0.0067]                             [-0.0490]
Included in SS and 64 Years Old               0.1381            (0.1314)           0.3682           (0.2252)
                                             [0.0393]                             [0.0639]
Included in SS and 65 Years Old               -0.1287           (0.1995)           0.2150           (0.2367)
                                             [-0.0097]                            [0.0466]
Included in SS and 66 Years Old              -0.0265            (0.1810)          0.5206∗           (0.2976)
                                             [0.0125]                             [0.1050]
Included in SS and 67 Years Old             0.4143∗∗∗           (0.1532)           0.2059           (0.3483)
                                             [0.1117]                             [0.0495]
Included in SS and 68 Years Old               0.3155            (0.2541)           0.1077           (0.2972)
                                             [0.0900]                             [0.0323]
Included in SS and 69 Years Old               -0.1275           (0.2513)          0.5394∗∗          (0.2465)
                                             [-0.0101]                            [0.1246]
Included in SS and 70 Years Old               0.0700            (0.2625)          0.5582∗           (0.3233)
                                             [0.0356]                             [0.1344]

Observations                                  45717                                   15196
                                                      Table continues on next page.




                                                      39
                                              Table A4: Continued...

                                                             (1)                                   (2)
                                                       Married Women                           Married Men
2011                                               0.0579            (0.0581)           0.0874             (0.1146)
2012                                              0.1308∗            (0.0679)           0.1525             (0.1259)
2013                                              0.1716∗            (0.0961)           -0.1069            (0.1371)
2014                                               0.0807            (0.0984)           0.0359             (0.1459)
2015                                               0.1345            (0.1181)           0.1398             (0.1762)
2016                                               0.0898            (0.1284)           0.1440             (0.1797)
Advanced Degree                                  -0.2598∗∗∗          (0.0398)          -0.1698∗∗∗          (0.0658)
African American                                   -0.0043           (0.2624)          -0.7227∗∗∗          (0.2713)
Other Race                                         -0.0406           (0.1078)            -0.1655           (0.2935)
Hispanic Origin                                  -0.2540∗∗∗          (0.0805)          -0.5570∗∗∗          (0.1989)
Spouse is < 50 Years Old                          -0.1523            (0.1183)           -0.2439∗           (0.1359)
Spouse is 60 Years Old                           0.1821∗∗∗           (0.0671)           0.2162∗            (0.1262)
Spouse is 61 Years Old                            0.1251∗            (0.0698)            0.1040            (0.1155)
Spouse is 62 Years Old                           0.1731∗∗∗           (0.0651)            0.0617            (0.1368)
Spouse is 63 Years Old                             0.0420            (0.0772)            0.0902            (0.1014)
Spouse is 64 Years Old                           0.2059∗∗∗           (0.0698)            0.1024            (0.1379)
Spouse is 65 Years Old                            0.1748∗∗           (0.0849)            0.1548            (0.1653)
Spouse is 66 Years Old                             0.0673            (0.0879)           -0.2145            (0.1397)
Spouse is 67 Years Old                             0.0314            (0.1038)           0.3537∗∗           (0.1737)
Spouse is 68 Years Old                             0.0127            (0.1026)           -0.0578            (0.2386)
Spouse is 69 Years Old                            -0.0072            (0.1140)           -0.1490            (0.2101)
Spouse is 70 Years Old                            -0.0045            (0.1131)           -0.4214            (0.3320)
Spouse is > 70 Years Old                          -0.1727∗           (0.0916)           -0.0405            (0.3274)
Spouse   is a Teacher                              -0.0066           (0.0582)          0.1789∗∗∗           (0.0671)
Spouse   is Not in Labor Force                   0.6971∗∗∗           (0.0426)          0.9316∗∗∗           (0.0622)
Spouse   Has Advanced Degree                     0.1912∗∗∗           (0.0350)          0.3041∗∗∗           (0.0768)
Spouse   is African American                       -0.2552           (0.2429)           0.4649∗            (0.2692)
Spouse   is Other Race                            -0.2219∗           (0.1194)           -0.0069            (0.1479)
Spouse   is Hispanic Origin                        -0.0765           (0.0983)            0.0454            (0.1648)
Eligible for Full Retirement                     0.3805∗∗∗           (0.0581)          0.4909∗∗∗           (0.1245)
Funding Ratio                                      0.1671            (0.2533)            0.1206            (0.3951)
Percent of Required Contribution Paid             -0.0276            (0.1154)           -0.1279            (0.1510)
Unemployment Rate                                 0.0396∗            (0.0228)           0.0878∗∗           (0.0386)
Real Income Per Capita (In $1,000s)                0.0037            (0.0112)             0.0160           (0.0149)
Real GDP Per Capita (In $1,000s)                  -0.0052            (0.0050)            -0.0005           (0.0061)
Observations                                       45717                                 15196
 Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. Marginal effects in brackets.
 ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



Notes: Teacher retirement data are derived from the 2010-2016 American Community Surveys, see text for details.
The dependent variable is the probability of retiring in the past year. The model includes all covariates as presented
in Table 4, Column (3), plus additional spousal characteristics as indicated.




                                                           40
