NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LDC DEBT:
FORGIVENESS, INDEXATION, AND INVESTMENT INCENTIVES

Kenneth A. Froot
David Scharfstein
Jeremy Stein

Working Paper No. 2541

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1988

We thank Geoff Carliner, Sue Collins, Martin Feldstein, Kala Krishna, Greg Mankiw,
Kathy Mann, and Jeff Sachs for helpful coments, and Kathryn Dominguez for help
in obtaining data. All errors remain our own. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2541
March 1988

LDC Debt:
Forgiveness, Indexation, and Investment Incentives

ABSTRACT

We compare different indexation schemes in terms of their ability to facilitate
forgivenessand reduce the investment disincentives associated with the large LDC
debt overhang. Indexing to an ertdogenous variable (e.g., a country's output)
has

a negative moral hazard

This problem does not arise
variable such as commodity prices.

effect on investment,

when payments are linked to an exogenous

Nonetheless, indexing payments to output may be useful when debtors know
more about their willingnessto invest than lenders. We also reach new conclusions

about the desirability of default penalties under asymmetric information.

Kenneth A. Froot

Sloan School of
Management
E52-436
Cambridge, MA 02139

David Scharfstein
Sloan School of

Jeremy Stein
Harvard Business

Management
Cambridge, MA 02139

School
Cambridge, MA 02138

1. Introduction
As the LDC debt crisis wears on, more and more observers doubt that the debts will
ever be paid in full. Since the loans began trading only two years ago on an established
secondary market, the average price of the debt has fallen steadily and substantially.1
Some observers have argued that the banks should considerexplicitly forgiving a portion

of the debt. Work by Jeffrey Sachs (1985, 1988) and Richard Portes (1987), among others,
suggeststhat partial forgiveness could conceivably make both debtors and creditors better
off: if the banks commit themselves to absorbing a smaller part of a country's output, the
country will be more likely to pursue the types of investment-oriented policies that lead
to higher future levels of output, thereby increasing the total resources available to both
parties.2
Despite the apparent merit of this logic, there has not been much debt forgiveness to

date. It is easy to see why there might be problems in implementing a program of debt
relief. Even if some forgiveness was indeed in the interest of lenders, borrowers would
want much more. Just how much is enough, from the lender's point of view? The amount
of relief needed to stimulate investment in different countries will depend on a variety of
factors,someof which may be known only to borrowers. For example, a borrowing country
may have a better idea about the amount of austerity it can impose on its citizens without
causing serious disruptions.
In negotiating over the amount

of forgiveness, borrowing countries will want

to mis

represent their private information in order to win more generousrelief. To continue with
the above example, once forgiveness is on the table, a country will want to claim that its
citizens are very resistant to further belt-tightening, so that a great deal of relief will be
needed to have a positive impact on investment.3
'Ftom July 1985 to August 1987, the average price across 8 major debtors fell by 31 percent. The decline in the value of
individual country debt over this period was: Brazil (32 percent), Columbia (0 percent), Argentina (28 percent), Mexico (38
percent), Peru (82 percent), Ecuador (38 percent), the Philippines (11 percent), and Venezuela (20 percent)
°See aloo Paul Krugman (19871o) for an explicit ,li,cussionofthe con,litionsunder whichforgivenesswill be Pareto improving.

'In cliocomnajons of debt relief, bankersrepeaterily stress their fear that forgivenessapplied to one

I

country will become the

In this paper, we argue that changing the structure of LDC financing may help remove
some of the harriers to forgiveness. An indexation scheme that links repayment to a
country's future output could help distinguish the appropriate amount of relief on a caseby-case basis. Such indexation would remove the need to rely on countries truthfully
revealing their private information.

Fix

post, a country that producesmore is likely to have

been the type better able to sacrifice for future growth; output serves as

an

indicator of a

country's private information. Therefore, this type of output indexation facilitatesrelief.
We are certainly not the first to consider the use of contingent debt as a means of
tying

a country's obligations to its ability to pay. Included among the many refinancing

proposals that have emerged are debt-for-equity swaps,4 interest-rate caps and moratoria,

as a variety of plans that involve indexed securities. One appealing feature of
many of these schemes is that they tilt the repayment schedule toward the future, when
countries are likely to have higher income. Increasing current liquidity seems like a good
as well

idea given the 5.5 percent decline in GNP per capita and the 5 percent fall in investment

percent of GNP witnessed by the largest debtors since the onset of the debt crises.
However, unlike previous authors, we do not focus on the use of contingent obligations
as a

as

a way of extending the payment period, as this can be achieved with any instrument,

including standard, noncontingent bank loans. Our concern lies instead with the incentive

distortions created by the sheer presence of a large debt overhang, and with the ability of
alternative indexationplans to reduce these distortions.
The indexed obligations envisaged in many reform plans can he divided into two basic
categories. The first are those in which payments are linked to an endogenous variable
—

that is, a variable wbicb is at least partly under the control of the debtor country.

A

otondard applied to the next. They advocate the adoption of a caxe.hy-caee approach, altho,,gh there ix no conseneux on how
oo,ch an approach might be otructotred. See, for example,the commetto of WilliamOg'Ieni,i Martin Feldotein (1985).
4Aithongh we diecueo eec,,ritie, which can he thoght of ao "eq,ti, we avoid ,eing the word eqni in tloie paper. We do
thi, for two ceaoono. Firet, we ore concernedwith oecnritiee indexed to oome oeaonre of a country'o total output, which aoe
not equi' in the uxoaal oenxe of a reeidual claim on a opecific bnoinece within on LnC (hut eve Slhanan Helpman (1557), who
refero to ouch oec,oritieo ax equi'). second, "debt-vqui' ewape' are widelythought of ao a meone by which co,mtrieo can help
alleviate their foreignexchange conetrainto (eec Rudiger Dornho,och (19s7( for a pereaoivv critique of thio view). Our analyoio
deco oot invootigate thio kind of liquidity conotraint.

2

leading example is Norman Bailey's (1983) proposal to convert debt into proportional
claims on exports. Other possible endogenous indices are the country's total output, or

its trade balance. The second category of indexationplan links payments to an exogenous
variable, one out of the debtor country's control. A natural choice of index here would be
the priceof a country's principal export commodityor the growth rate of the industrialized
countries.

The primary purpose of this paper is to provide an analysis of the relative pros and cons
of these two types of indexation. Some researchers have failed to recognize the importance
of the distinction between the two. For example, both Donald Lessard (1987) and Helpman
(1987) have argued that some sort of output indexation might he beneficial as
sharing,

a risk-

or hedging mechanism: risk-averse countries could shift some of their exposureto

better diversified lenders. While this may be true, it does not imply that output indexation
is the best way to accomplish risk sharing — commodity-priceindexation may be better.
Krugman (1987a) does make the distinction between the two types of indexing. He
concludes that commodity price indexation is preferable to linking payments to a variable

that is under the debtor's control. The reason for this is the presence of moral hazard: if
a debtor's payments are increasingin exports,

exports than in the absence of such

it will have less incentive to generate such

an

arrangement.
Our analysis calls for a softening of Krugman's conclusions, We find that indexing
to an endogenous variable such as output may be a sensible strategy under some circumstances. As the earlier discussion suggests, such output indexation will have a role to play
when asymmetric information about some factor relevant to the financial contract is impor-

tant. Output indexinghelps to resolve someof the adverse selection (or misrepresentation)
problems associated with this asymmetricinformation, in a way that commodity-price indexing cannot. Thus in spite of the moral hazard costs it entails, output indexing may be
worthwhile.

To oversimplify somewhat, we find that the preferred form of indexing will depend
3

on the nature

of

the uncertainty facing the lender and borrower. If the uncertainty is
variable (future commodity prices, for instance) then

about a symmetrically-observable
commodity-price indexing will

be better. However, if there is uncertainty about certain

attributes of the debtor country, then there will be a gain from adding output-indexing
features to the security. The analysis therefore implies that schemes such as Bailey's may

be valuablein a world where it is difficult to evaluate the legitimacy

of countries'

appeals

for relief.
is that it leads
An interesting byproduct of our focus on asymmetric information
to novel conclusions about the desirability of banks being able to penalize delinquent
is ez-ante
borrowers. The usual view is that increasing the ability to inflict penalties
Pareto improving, as such penalties make more credible a country's promise to repay, and
the
hence facilitate lending and investment.5 But once a country has gotten into trouble,
do
to impose penalties can create harmful distortions. Ex post, higher penalties

potential
the cost of exacerbating
allow the bank to extract larger payments from the country, but at
that when penalties are higher, attempts
problems arisingfrom adverseselection. We show
of investment that debtors
by banks to extract more from debtors lowers the average level
does not exist
can undertake. It should be noted that this negative feature of penalties
an efficient
under complete information, in which case renegotiationshould always lead to
level ofinvestment.6 When there is asymmetricinformation,however, our analysis suggests

that there is an optimal level of penalties that balances their ex-ante benefits against the
si-post investment inefficiencies they create.
model
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes a simple
effects of a debt overhang, Section 3 then
designed to capture the investment disincentive
schemes to alleviate these disincentives under
the
of several
explores

ability

repayment

and

loseph
by 3o,sotlin Eaton, Mark Gersovit,
°thjs conventionalfunction of penalties in sovereign lending is stressed
can be harmful to the extent that theyencourage risk

Cx
Stiglitz (1980). SacS, (isso), however, points out that, 5g(e,penalties
averse countries to pursue unnecessarilyrisky investment projects.
who
stres, the importance of renegotiation ac a means of avoiding the
tSee Jeremy Bulow and Kenneth Eogolf (1907)
imposition of economically inefficient penalties.

4

symmetric information.

In section 4, we consider how the conclusions from the symmetric

information case are altered once there is asymmetric information about the borrower's
willingness to invest. Section 5 concludes.
2.

The Model

The model has three periods. At date 0, the country and the bank attempt to renethe country
gotiate the country's existing debt, which comes due at date 2. At date I,
allocatesits initial endowment, E, between consumption and investment, given the repayment schedule it will be facing. Because there is no debt to service at date I, investment at
this time is not "liquidity constrained." Rather, as will become clear shortly, the presence
of a debt overhang at date 2 can lead investment to be "incentive constrained."7 Finally,
at date 2 output from the investment project becomes available for consumption and debt
service.

The country is assumed to have the following linear utility function over consumption

at dates 1 and 2:
(1)

where /3 is the country's discount factor, In what follows, we analyze optimal financing
schemes under two alternative assumptions:
1) /3

is observable to both parties; and

2) /3 is private information of the country.
The latter case is intended to capture the spirit of the example in the introduction,
where it was suggested that a borrowing country will have a better idea about the amount
of current austerity its citizens are willing to tolerate.
utility function to abstract away from the type of risk-sharingconcerns
to imply that we think
analyzed by Lessard (1987) and Helpman (1987). This is not
such concerns are unimportant. However, incorporatingthem here would complicate the
We use a linear

Stu,rt Myers (1977) studies the investment disincexives creted by an overhang of corpor.te debt.
&

analysis, without changing our basic conclusions.
At date 1, the country can invest an amount I, which yields 9 units of output at date
2:

Q=f(I),

(2)

where f(I) is a concave increasing function.
The total revenue from production, X, depends on the "commodity price,"

X = 99 = 9f(I)
We assume that 9 is unknown

9

(3)

at date 0, hut is observed at date 1 by both the bank and the

country.8 The variable 9 can represent any publicly-observable shock affecting

the value

of output.
begin the analysis by considering the case in which the country's debt obligation
in period 2 is a fixed constant, D. To keep things simple, we assume that the hank will be
We

able to recover all of the country's revenue, up to the face amount of the debt, D. That
is, the country's repayment at time 2, R, will be:9

R = min(X, D)
Now consider the country's investnìent decision

at date

1.

The country knows that

it will not get to keep all the output from its investment, and hence it may be reluctant

to invest. (This is what was meant by the statement that investment was "incentive
constrained.") Clearly, if the debt is so high that the repayment, R, would equal the total
value of output, X, the country would not invest
endowment

at date

at all, and would instead consume its

1.

The complete resolutionof commodity

price uncertainty at date 1, beforethe good io sold, may appear ,oncealiotic, oince
there may be further change between dates I and 2. llawever, all that is important far thi, model is that there he sante
informationrevealed about commodityprices betweenthe time of renegotiationand the inve,tment decision. For example, we
could make the random walk assumptionthat date 2 price is A, + A,, and that only A, is learned at date 1.
°Models ofsovereignlendingrest upon the assumption that the hank can impooe a penalty on the co,mtry when it default,.
For now we aooume that if the country defaults,the hank confiscatesall of the cosuitry's ot,tp,,t. Later we relax this assumption
and consider a model in whichthe country can confiscateup to a finite amount IC of the co,ntry's output from the investment
project.

6

Investment becomes a possibility only when the debt, D, is lower than the revenue

that would be generatedby the investment,so that R = D. In such a case, if the country
does pursue the investment opportunity, it would choose the level of investmentso as to
maximize:
max /3(91(I) — D) —

I + B.

(5)

The first order conditions for this problem are:
/39ff(J*)

= 1.

(6)

That is, if the country does invest, it will choose a level of investment, 1*, that is socially
optimal. However, it is not assured that the debt payment will be low enough that the
country will want to invest at all. If the country does invest, its utility will be:
U(I") = r3(ef (I") — D) — I" + B.
If, on the other hand, the country consumes all its endowment

(7)

at date 1, its utility

will be E. Thus investment will take place only if the debt payment is less than the critical
level D", given by:

= 91(1") — 1"/,3
A simple

(8)

comparativestatic exercise establishesthe following proposition:

Proposition 1: D" is increasing in both 9 and /3
The amount of debt overhangthat is compatible with the first-best level of investment
increases with both the commodity price (which just measures the marginal productivity

of investment) and the "patience"

of the country.

3. Optimal Financing Arrangements under Symmetric Information about
Suppose

/3

that /3 is common knowledge. From the bank's point of view, what sort of

financing scheme most efficiently resolves the investment-disincentive problem associated
with a large debt overhang? There are three possiblechoices:

7

1)

Pure debt relief, in which the debt payment, D, is reduced from its

earlier level

of D0, but is still fixed across states of the world;
2)

Commodity-price indexation, in which the payment is made contingent on the

outcome of 8; or
3) Output indexation, in which the payment is made contingent on the other observable variable, X, the value of output.
3.1.

Pure Debt Relief

Equation (8) tells us that if the initial level of debt, D0, is too high, the bank may
benefit from lowering it. While lowering the level of debt reduces the amount the bank
can recover in states where 8 is high (and the country would have been prepared to pay
more)

it increases the probability that 8 is high enough to induce investment.

The optimal level of debt relief is determinedby trading off these two considerations.

that pure debt relief is a rather crude instrument: at the optimal level
there will still be some states of the world for which the country finds it unattractive to
Note, however,

invest. This results in an efficiency loss.

3.2. Commodity-Price Indexation
Under symmetric information,

a commodity-price-indexed security can be used to

maintain efficient investment in every state of the world. The indexingscheme is given by
equation (8): if the bank sets D(9) = Gf(V) — J*/f3, the country will always invest, and
the bank will always recover the maximum amount that is compatiblewith investment by
the country.10

3.3. Output Jndexation
Output indexation is another way in which debt payments could be made to depend on
tO
In our model,the outcomeunder commodity.priccindexation can be replicated by a "muddling through5 policy in which
the country and bank wait until date 1 to determine the amount of debt relief. In reality, however, there may be reasons to
predeterminethe contract at date 0. Suppose the country must make a small initial outlay at date 0 to preserve its investment
project at date 1. If the two parties were to wait ,mtil date I to fix the ,lebt payment, the bank would be able to behave
opportunistically and extract more surplusfrom the country. Thus the opportunism associated with a muddling.through policy
leads to an ez-nte inefficiency the country is less willing to invest at date 0

8

the realization of 9, since the value of output, X = OQ = 01(1). With output indexation,
—
however, there is an undesirableside effect: if payments are increasing in X and therefore
increasing in

I

—

the country will not want to choose the first-best level of investment when

it does invest.
To see why this is so, think of the debt payment as a function of output: D = D(X).
Consider the country's maximization problem facing this payment schedule:

max ,0(8f(I)

—

D(X)) — I + E.

(9)

that D(X) is differentiable, the first-order conditions for this problem are:

Assuming

/39f1(j**) =

+ DF(X)Ofl(I**).

(10)

If D'(X) is positive, then equation (10) implies that the level of investment chosen
under output indexation,

I,

is less than the efficient level given by equation (6). Hence

under symmetricinformation about 3, output indexation is strictly inferior to commodityprice indexation, which always achieves first-best levels of investment.

4. The Role of Output Indexation under Asymmetric Information
In each of the three schemes considered in the previous section, countries that are less
willing to invest receive more forgiveness. This is a step in the right direction. But in
practice these plans have a serious shortcoming. Once they are announced, each country
will have an obvious incentive to understate its willingness to invest. A country would

that current circumstances are already poor and that a further
decline in living standards cannot be tolerated. As long as creditors are uncertain about
want to claim, for example,

the truthfulness of countries' claims, a debtor

will see in

these plans an opportunity to

procure more debt relief than it "deserves." Banks are thus reluctant to propose relief in
the first place.
In this section we argue that although commodity-price indexation dominatesoutput
indexation in

a world of symmetric information,output indexation can be useful when
9

there is asymmetric information. In particular, we show that indexing debt to output
prevents countries from misrepresenting their willingness to invest, and thereby facilitates
debt restructuring. Countriesthat wish to invest more placehigher value on future output,
and are therefore more willing to pay for the right to produce more. Thus, by linking debt
payments to output, more ipatiento countries reveal themselves through their actions and
are prevented from getting itoo much" debt relief.
To formalize this idea, we considera variation of the model in the foregoing section.
We assume

that the debtor country has private information about the rate at which it

discountsfuture consumption.To keep matters as simple as possible, we assume that the
debtor's discount factor can take one of only two values,

g > PL,

where

= f3g with

probabilityp.11
A contract in this setting specifies a payment at date 2 conditional on output, X. We
write this payment schedule as D(X). The payment can also he made contingent on 9,
so that for each realization of 8 there is a unique D(X) schedule. Since nothing is added
to the analysis by conditioning the contract on the mutually-observable variable 8,
simplify the notation by assuming that 8 is fixed (9 = 1) and write D = D(X).

we

As in the previous section, the creditor makes a take-it-or-leave-it contract offer which

the country can accept or reject. The country will accept if its utility is greater under the
new contract than under the old one. We assume for the momentthat if the country were
obliged to pay the entire debt overhang, D0, no investment would take place. (We drop

this assumption later.) Thus, the country will accept the offer as long as the contract
provides for discounted consumption greater than the country's endowment, E.
One way

of determining the optimal contract is to solve directly for the optimal

payment schedule, D(X). An alternative approach, developed in the incentives literature,
reframes the problem as a direct revelation game. In that game, the country reports its
''The model cn bo extended in a mecbonicalfachion to allow for a continuous distribution onfl, as in an quesLalfont
and Jean Tirole (1986). Although certain comparative.staticsexercises would he affected o,,r rimplification,the result, and

l

insights offered below ore not.

10

If the country reports flj, it must produce output, X1,
and pay an amount, D, i = H,L. Thus a contract specifies two pairs {Xg,Dff} and
private information, PH or f3L•

{XL,DL} from which the country can choose. The Revelation Principle implies that the
solution to this game will yield the same solution as the original game and is without loss
Althoughthe revelation framework may seem artificial, it provides a simple
and intuitive method for identifying the optimal contract, In our model, X is a monotonic
of generality.

transformationof I, so that we can equivalently write the payment schedule as D(I), and
the contracts as the pairs {Ig,DH} {IL,DL}.'2
The bank's problem is to maximize its expected payments subject to the constraints
that (i) the country reports its type truthfully (incentive compatibility); and (ii) each
type of country accepts the contract only if it provides utility greater than E (individual
rationality). The optimal contract, {I, b1}, that induces both types to sign the contract
is the solution to the program,

(P):
max

pDH+(l-p)DL,

(P)

subject to
13H(f(IH)
/3L(f(IL)

—

—

'L

(ICH)

/3L(f(IH)— DH) — 'H

(ICL)

PH(f(IL) — DL)

DH) — 'H
DL) — 'L
—

DH) — 'H

13L(f(IL) — DL)

—

'L

(IRH)

0,
0.

(IRL)

The first two constraints are the incentive compatibilityconstraints, which guarantee
that neither country receives greater utility from revealing its true type than from pretending it is of the other type. The last two constraints ensure that each type of country
prefers some investment to consumption of its entire endowment

at date 0.

the revelationprinciple ccc l'artha Dacgcspt, Peter Hammond, and Eric Mackin (1979). For more discussionof the
opplication of their result, to optimal contracts see DavidBaron an4 Ro'rMyvrson (1982).

11

It follows from the results of the foregoing section that if there were complete information, the contract chosen by banks would involve

D7=9f(I*)_I*/I31, i=H,L.

(11)

But note that if /3 were not observable and this scheme were adopted, a
would always report that its discount factor is low, I3L Thus

-type country

the optimal contract under

symmetric information is no longer optimal from the banks' point of view under asymmetric
information.

It turns out that at an optimum only incentive constraint (ICH) and

individual ra-

tionality constraint (IRL) are binding. (The intuition for this is provided below.) The
following proposition, which is the main focus of the paper, is verified in the Appendix.13

Proposition 2: If /3 is privately observed by the country, the optimal contracts,
{IL,bL}, {IH,bH} exhibit the following properties:
(i) The /9H-type country chooses an efficient level of investment:
type country, however, underinvests relative to what is efficient:

1L

<

=

I. The

13L-

I. Specifically,

1L

satisfies
/3Lf'(IL)
(ii)

bL < D and L?g <

D:

=1

PPL/13H

> 1.

(12)

both countries pay less than in the symmetric-

information case. Given the chosen levels of investment, 1L and

Ig, the payments

b

and bH solve (ICH) and (IRL).

If 13 is not observable, the optimal symmetric-information contract gives the fig-type
country an incentive to choose the contract intended for the fir-type. To provide an
In
incentive for the fig-typecountry to reveal its type, the bank lowers b11 below

D.

addition, the contract contains disincentives for a /3H-type to report

I3L A

country that

'5Thi, proposition is similar to a number of results in the literature on contracting ,,nder asymmetric information. See,for
example, Sappington(1983). His model shares a similar formal structure although the exact interpretation differs
12

reports

= 1k must choose 1L below I.

a PH-type than for a
making

The cost

of

this underinvestinentis greater for

-type since a PH-type places greater value on future output.

By

it differentially costly for a PH-type to underreport its discountfactor, the bank is

able to extract a greater payment when the country truthfully reveals its type than when

the country always claims it is a /3k-type.
4.1. The Nature

of the Optimal Contract.

In the contract given by Proposition 2, countries must willingly choose to produce
either XL or XH, and not an intermediatevalue. To guarantee they do this, the bank
can specify a complete schedule of payments for all possible levels of output, D(X). The
simplest such schedule is

X> XL

a step function: if X < XL, the country must pay DL; and if

the country must pay DH.

This type of step function is,

of course, a

direct result of our assumption that there

are only two types of borrowers. A more realistic assumption might be that there are a
Then it is straightforwardto show that the D(X) schedule
continuum of types, 3 E
is

a continuous, increasing function. The upwards slope of the D(X) function leads all

types to underiavest, as was suggested by equation (10). The degree of the distortion is
lower for the high-P types. This can be seen in our two-type case, where, analogously, only
the PL-type suffers distorted investment.
4.2. Comparative Statics.
The following comparativestatic results, which we prove in Appendix, are useful in
the analysis below:

Proposition 3:
An increase in PH lowers 'L and DL, and increases bH and 1H
(ii) An increase in 1k increases 'L' bL, lowers DH, and has no effect on 'H(i)

(iii) An increase in

p lowers

1L

and

L, increases DH, and has no effect on
13

The first two parts of the proposition characterizethe effect of making the two types of
country more unlike each other. Under symmetricinformation a change in ,8 should have
no effect on the investment and debt relief of a f31-type country. If the bank is uninformed
about however, a higher 9g implies less investment by the 13L-type country. This follows

,

To induce the country to reveal
because the incentive to underreport increases with
its true preferences, the lender forces the L-type country to give up more output at the
margin.
The last part of the proposition says that as the probability that the country has a high
discount factor increases, the investment inefficiency imposed on a -type country rises,
while the payments DH and DL rise and fall, respectively. The intuition for these results
is that banks' expected profits depend increasingly on the size of the surplus extracted
from the H-type country when p is higher. In these circumstances,the bank takes more

of the surplus from the fIjj-type while raising the investment disincentives for a -type.

4.3. Comparison with Pure Debt Relief.
The ability to index debt to output clearly makes lenders better off; by revealed
preference it dominatespure debt relief. The questionwe address in this section is whether
society is better off under output indexationor pure debt relief.

that the bank cannot make debt relief contingent on output or investment. Since the country would always claim that it is the more impatient type, the
Suppose first

:

DH equals DL. If the bank sets the debt payment low enough, both types of countries will invest. Conditionalon both types investing,
Alternatively, the bank might
it will offer the lowest possible debt relief, namely
amount of debt relief cannot depend on

D.

offer less debt relief, in which case the /IIL-type country would not invest. Conditional
on only the /3H-type investing,

it will offer the minimum possible debt relief, D. More

generous debt relief is optimal provided

D > pD or, in terms of investment, provided

f(Ifl — I//3L > (f(I) — I//3H).
By offering debt relief of

D, the lender ensures that there will be an efficient level of
14

investment regardless of the country's type. Less generous relief reduces the probability
of investment,

but increases the amount the lender receives when investment does occur.

Such a policy, which we refer to as "stonewalling," may raise the bank's expected profits

but results in a gross inefficiency: a j31,-type country undertakes no investment at all.'4
When stonewalling does not occur — that is, when debt relief is generous — the country
undertakes efficient investment, regardless of its type. Stonewalling is more attractive to
the bank, and hence the likclihood of an inefficiency is greater, the greater is the probability

that the country is the PH-type, the higher

is

PH and the lower is PL.

that the lender can index the debt to output. Stonewalling will not
arise: the lender and the country always come to terms. By providing a screening mechaNow suppose

nism, output indexation loosens up the bargaining process and facilitates investment. By
comparison, pure debt relief is

a blunt method because it does not allow the amount

of

forgiveness to be conditioned on the country's type.
Whenever stonewalling would occur under pure debt relief, the output-indexed debt

contract derived in Proposition2 leads to a higher average level of investment. The contract
{

i, Djj, I = H, L, induces the f3-type country to invest an amount greater than zero

(albeit less than the optimum). When stonewalling would not occur, however, pure debt

contracts lead to a higher average level of investment. Under pure debt relief, both types
of country will invest the efficient amount. The following proposition summarizes the
intuition that stonewalling becomes more attractive the greater are

p

and PH, and the

lower is PL:

PropoBition 4 For large enough p and PH, and

enough PL stonewalling is
optimal if the bank is restricted to pure debt relief. In such cases, output-indexedcontracts
low

would result in greater efficiency. In all other cases, pure debt relief is more efficient.

'Stonewalling is analogous to a monopolist'spricesetting behavior, by rtting the price too high, the monopolist drives
away Paretocfficiert tradein an attempt to extract consumersurplus from those who val,,e the good the most.
15

4.4. Extensions:

Bounded Debt Overhang. The above analysis assumes that the initial debt overrelief:
hang, D0, is so large that no investment would take place in the absence of any debt
D0

>

D > DL. This section relaxes this assumption.

We find that in general, lower ini-

tial debt levels lessen tbe incentive for misrepresentation, and hence lead to more efficient
investment.
In

the case where

D > D > D0, the /31-type country chooses efficient investment

even without debt relief. Indeed, in this case there is no scope for debt relief; total output
is

maximized. Any increase in the surplus the country retains is offset one-for-one by

loss in

a

the surplus extracted by the bank.

There are two intermediatecases:

13 > a > D0 > DL

and bjq

> D0 > a >

DL,

a is a cutoff point defined in the proposition below. Absent renegotiation,in either
case the -type country chooses efficient investment while the -type does not invest
at all. The optimal contract thereforesolves the maximization problem (F) except for a
where

new individual rationality constraint for the

-type country:

PH(f(IH)-DH-IH PH(f(1H) -Do)-Ih.
Let (F') be this new maximizationproblem and let {I,D} denote its solution.
An argument identical to that in the proof of Proposition 2 establishes that

(IRH')

I = I.

That proof also established that the individual rationality constraint (IRH) is slack when
D9 is infinite and reservation utility is E, Here, however, reservation utility is greater than

E. Indeed, if the level of debt that solves the original program, DH, is greater than D0,
the solution to (P) will not solve (F'). Instead, (IRH') will be binding and Dr = D0.
What are the implication7 for efficiency? Under the new constraint, the $-type
receives more relief. Therefore it is less attractive for a flu-type to misrepresent its preferences. When D0 is greater than DL, but less than the cutoff point, a, both types of
countriesinvest efficiently. The bank sets = IL because the original debt burden is small
16

enough that a 13H-type country has no incentive to misrepresent its preferences, even when

the /3.type invests efficiently. That is, at low enough levels of debt, the (ICH) constraint
is not binding. When D0 is greater than the cutoff point a, (ICH) is binding. Thus to
induce truthtelling,

I must

fall below

I. Investment is no longer fully efficient. Finally,

when the initial debt overhangexceeds DH, we are in the base case analyzed above. These

results are summarizedin the following proposition and proved formally in the Appendix:
—
Proposition 5: Let the cutoff point be a = f(I) —
(fl'—
i—)I, which
implies that DH > a > D. The initial debt overhang, D0, must fall into one of the

following four cases:

(i) If D0

[0, Dfl,

efficient investment, Ij

there is no scope for renegotiation. Both types of countries choose

= I, i = L, H, and pay D0.

In

this case the debt overhang is not

a problem.
(ii) If Do E
pays

(D,a[, both types of country

choose efficient investment; the flL-type

D and the I3Htype pays D0.
(iii) If D0

e (a, DH[, the NH-type chooses efficient investment

L-type country underinvests, 'L <
the inefficiency

<

and pays D0, and the

I. In this case, an increasein D0 exacerbates

(I falls).

(iv) If D0 e (bH,co[, thesolution to (P') is the solution to (P). A change in D0 does
not affect the optimal contract.

Bounded Penalties. The above analysis assumes that the lender is able to confiscate
the country's entire output

if

the country defaults, This section relaxes this assumption

and assumes instead that there is a fixed finite penalty, K, that the lender can impose on
the country.'5
Suppose first that K

= 0. Then the lender cannot force any future repaymentand the

oltrraotivelormubtion, whirh ori,e, in iho model of Bulow and Rogoif (1587).o that tho bank ran ronliocatea frartion
output. Up to thi, point, oil of our reoult, are ron,i,tent with either the assumption that or = 1 or tho
ao,umptioa that K an,

a < 1 of the rountry',

17

investment.
country will be able to consume all of its future output and undertake efficient
That is, efficiency is maximized when the lender cannot penalize the country. The optimal

contract solves (P), with the additional constraint that D

K,

i = L, if. We then have

the following proposition:
of
Proposition 6: If the bank can impose a fixed penalty, K, in the case default,
then Proposition 5 holds, with D0 replaced in every instance by K.

(i),

The intuition for Proposition 6 corresponds exactly to that of Proposition 5. In part
when penalties are very low, both types will choose efficient levels of investment. In

part (ii), penalties remain low enough that no investment distortion is needed to induce
truthteiling. The basic idea in (iii) is that the penalties are high enough to enable the bank
to extract some surplus from the country, thus reducing the country's incentive to invest.

K < DH, the payment OH is not feasible, and thereforethe payment must be reduced
to K. If K is lower, truthful revelationbecomes more attractive and hence the bank need
If

not reduce 'L by as much to maintain incentive compatibility, in part (iv), when penalties
are very high, we have the case analyzed in (P).
Our focus on asymmetric information leads to different conclusions about the desirability of penalties than the now-standard approach of Eaton, Gersovitz and Stiglitz
and conclude that higher penalties
(1986). These authors focus on ex-ate considerations
are Pareto improving: penalties make countries' promises to repay more credible, and hence
facilitatelending. But

ex post, once the country has borrowed

and gotten into trouble, the

the country, but it conies at
ability to penalize can be harmful. Banks can get more from
the expense of foregone investment. This is true regardless of whether banks adopt indexation or pure debt relief with stonewalling. But note that the inefficiency induced by large
penalties is a problem only under asymmetric information. Under complete information,

18

renegotiationalways leads to

efficient investment.16

Our analysis suggests that in general

there should be an optimal penalty cost that balances ez-ante borrowing incentives and
ex-post investment disincentives.

16SeBulow md Rogoff (1587).
19

5. Conclusion
In the

presence of

a large debt overhang, various indexation schemes may help to

the investment incentives of borrower countries. Under symmetric information,
contracts that make paymentscontingenton variablesthat are out of the country's control
create no disincentive effects, and lead to the first-best level of investment. On the other
improve

under
hand, contracts that make payments contingent on a variable that is atleast partly
the country's control, such as exports or total output, leave scope for moral hazard problems and so lead to inefficient investment. When there is asymmetric information about
and reduce
some attribute of the country, however, output indexationmay facilitate relief
(but not entirely eliminate) investment disincentives.

The same penalties that make sovereign lending possible in the first place, may be
harmful once the country has gotten into trouble. When penalties are high, the bank's
come at the expense of lowering the
gains in either the case of stonewalling or indexation
country's average level of investment. Ex post, the presence of asymmetric information
about the country implies that higher penalties raise the welfare of the bank, but on

as a whole.
average lower the welfare of both the country and possibly society
The simplicity of our approach has its costs, in that we neglect important aspects
of the debt problem. We abstract entirely from liquidity issues. Yet current, not future,
debt-serviceobligations have recently been an important harrier to investment in hUGs.
Other authors, most notably Krugman (1985), have already stressed the fruitlessnessof
of the lQSOs has
squeezing too much too fast out of debtors. While the liquidity squeeze
taken on obvious toll on current investment in LDGs, and, therefore, has already received
considerable attention, the more subtle incentive effects over time of a substantial debt
tried
overhang have been largely o'erlooked. At the risk of oversimplification, we have
to focus on the nature of these investment disincentives and on how they relate to debt
indexation and forgiveness.

20

6. Appendix
Proof of Propoeition 2: First suppose that constraints(IRH) and (ICL) are slack.
We will then show that these constraints are indeed satisfied at an optimum.
Note that (IRL) must be binding at an optimumotherwise DL could be increased still
satisfying

(IRL) while relaxing (ICH) and increasing the objective function. Furthermore,

(ICH) must be binding at an optimum, otherwise the objective function could be increased
Djj.
Given that (IRL) and (ICH) are binding, we can substitute them into the objective

by raising

function. The maximization then becomes:

-

max
'LIII P(f(IH) 'H/PH)

- P)(f(IL)

i

It is clear from the above problem that

Ij

in the equation of the Proposition. Given It,

be that fij < Di,. Finally, given that
positive, D11 must be less than

IL/PL)

- P'L(— - I).

Dt solves (IRL).

Ijj =

Pt

PH

is chosen efficiently and that 1, is as given

I

Because 1j <

I, it must

and the right-hand side of (ICII)

is

It remainsto verify that (IRH) and (ICL) are slack, Since the PH-type country could
have chosen the contract for the PL-type country, but did not, then the PH-type country

must be receiving positive surplus from undertaking the investment project.
The following argument establishesthat (ICL) is indeed slack at an optimum. First,
note that from (ICH) and the fact that 'H > 1, it follows that f(IH)—DH > f(It)—Dr.
Given this, if PH is reduced to Pt

it results in a greater impact on the left-handside than

the right-hand side. Since (ICH) is binding, it means that:

—I + /3rAf(Iii) — DH) <1L + /3L(f('L) — DL),
which is exactly the constraint (ICL). This concludes the proof of Proposition 2.

Proof of Proposition 3:

(i) Inspection

of (12) reveals that an increase in

g

reduces

I. Given this reduction, it follows from (IRL) that b is lowered. Since I = I, an
21

'H Also since 1L is reduced the right-hand side of (ICH) is
reduced. This combined with the increasein 13H enables the bank to increase DR.
(ii) From (12) and (IRL), an increase in /3L increases 'L and h1. This increases

ircrease in

f3j- increases

the right-hand side of (ICH) and given that 'H

=

reduced.

is

unaffected by 8L' DR must be

I

and bL. A similar argument
(iii) From (12) and (IRL) an increasein p decreases
as in (ii) establishes that DR is increased and there is no effect on 'H This concludes the
proof of Proposition3.

Proof of Proposition 5: The argument for part (i) of the proposition

was stated in

the text.
The optimization problem
(IRL),

and

(F')

maximizes expected payments subject to

(ICH),

the additional constraint (IRH').

We first establish the conditions under which first-best efficiency is attained in this

I=
f(I) I//3

program. Supposeonly (IRH') and (IRL) are binding. Then at an optimum,
—
= H, L, D' = and from (IRH'), D' = D0. It follows that if D0 <

i

—

D

(_

= a, the constraint (ICH) is slack. This establishes part (ii) of the

—

Proposition.

If D0 > a the above contract is not implementable and (ICH) is binding. It is

=

straightforwardto verify that
straint (ICH) and (IRH').
Now

note that if D0

because maximizing

net output relaxes both con-

bH the solution to (P) is also a solution to (F') since (IRH')

is then slack. This establishes part (iv) of the Proposition.
The remaining case is where D0 > a but less than DH. In this case, it follows that

= D0.
this case,

In order to maintain incentive compatibility,

I

solves:
—

L

22

D0) —

I

must be reduced below

I. In

wher

(IlL) was substituted into (ICH). It follow. that In this range,

In D. This completes the

— of — (Ill) of the Proposition.

23

is decreasing

7. Bibliography

Bailey, N,,

"A Safety Net for Foreign Lending," Business

Week, January 10, 1983.

a Monopolist with Unknown Costs," EconoBaron, D., and E. Myerson,"Regulating
911-930.
metrica, Vol. 50, 1982, pp.
Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt,"
Bulow, J., and K. Rogoff, "A Constant
NBER Working Paper no. 2088, 1987.
of Social Choice

and E. Maskin, "The Tinpienientation
Dasgupta, P., P. Hammond,
Economic
Rules: Some General Results on Incentive Compatibility," Review of
Studies Vol. XLVI, 1979, pp. 185-216.

Institute of Technology, 1087.
Dornbusch, R., "Our LDC Debts" Massathusetts
of Chicago Press,
Feldstein, M., ed., International Economic Cooperation, University
1988.
(forthcoming)
International Monetary
Helpman, E., "The Simple Analytics of Debt/Equity Swaps,"
Fund, 1987.
in a Uncertain World," in Cuddington
Krugman,P. R., "InternationalDebt Strategies
and Smith, eds. The International Debt Problem, Washington, The World Bank,
1985.

Some Analytical Notes,"
, "Financing vs. Forgiving a Debt Overhang:
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, January 1987a.
, "Bootstrap Debt Relief," Massachusetts

Institute

of Technology, Octo-

ber 1987b,

to Regulate Firms," Journal of
Laffont, J.J., and J. Tirole, "Using Cost Observation
Political Economy, Vol. 94, 1986, pp. 614-641.
a New Vision of Commercial
Lessard, D., "Recapitalizing the Third World: Toward
Financing for Less Developed Countries," Midland Corporate Finance Journal,
(forthcoming) 1987,

Journal of Financial EcoMyers, S. C. "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing,"
nomics, Vol. 5, 1977, pp. 147-175.
Portes, R., "Debt and the Market," Group of Thirty, 1987.
24

Sachs, 3., "LDC Debt: Problems and Prospects," in P. Wachtel ed., Crises in Econornic and Financial Structure, Lexington Books, NBER, 1980.
, "Conditionality and the Debt Crisis: Some Thoughts for the World
Bank," presented at the World Bank ERS, June 1985.
, "The Debt Overhangof Developing Countries," in De Macedo and Findlay eds., Diaz Memorial Volume, Wider Institute, Helsinki, 1988.

Sappington, D., "Limited Liability Contracts between Principal and Agent," Journal
of Economic Theory, Vol. 29, 1983, pp. 1-21.

25

