NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CAUSAL IMPACT OF REMOVING CHILDREN FROM ABUSIVE AND NEGLECTFUL
HOMES
Anthony Bald
Eric Chyn
Justine S. Hastings
Margarita Machelett
Working Paper 25419
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25419

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019, Revised September 2019

The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors. We thank the team at
Research Improving People's Lives (RIPL), the state of Rhode Island, and the Rhode Island
Department of Children, Youth, and Families for making this project possible. We are also
thankful for helpful comments and feedback from Joseph Doyle, Sara Heller, Brian Jacob, Jonah
Rockoff, Maya Rossin-Slater, Bruce Sacerdote, Emilia Simeonova, Sarah Turner, Christina
Weiland, and seminar participants at the University of Michigan, the 2018 Annual Meeting of the
Southern Economic Association, and the NBER Children's Program Meeting. Finally, we are
grateful for financial support from the Smith Richardson Foundation and the Laura and John
Arnold Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Anthony Bald, Eric Chyn, Justine S. Hastings, and Margarita Machelett. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Causal Impact of Removing Children from Abusive and Neglectful Homes
Anthony Bald, Eric Chyn, Justine S. Hastings, and Margarita Machelett
NBER Working Paper No. 25419
January 2019, Revised September 2019
JEL No. H75,I21,I24,I28,I38,J12,J13,J24
ABSTRACT
This paper measures impacts of removing children from families investigated for abuse or
neglect. We use removal tendencies of child protection investigators as an instrument. We focus
on young children investigated before age 6 and find that removal significantly increases test
scores and reduces grade repetition for girls. There are no detectable impacts for boys. This
pattern of results does not appear to be driven by heterogeneity in pre-removal characteristics,
foster placements, or the type of schools attended after removal. The results are consistent with
the hypothesis that development of abused and neglected girls is more responsive to home
removal.
Anthony Bald
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy St
Cambridge, MA 02138
abald@g.harvard.edu
Eric Chyn
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
¸˛Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
eric.t.chyn@dartmouth.edu

Justine S. Hastings
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
justine.s.hastings@gmail.com
Margarita Machelett
Department of Economics
Brown University
margarita_machelett@brown.edu

1

Introduction

Each year, child protective service agencies in the U.S. investigate more than 4 million
allegations of abuse or neglect (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2016). As a
result of these investigations, authorities annually remove nearly 200,000 children from their
homes and place them into foster care (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
2016). The goal of removal is to protect children by reducing exposure to abuse and neglect.
There is relatively little evidence on the causal impact of child protective service removal
on children. Abused children have lower academic performance and are more likely to have
social or emotional conditions such as aggressive behavior or depression (Fantuzzo and Mohr,
1999; Wolfe et al., 2003; Holt et al., 2008; Doyle and Aizer, 2018).1 Because removal is more
likely in acute cases, the relationship between removal and outcomes may not be causal.
Doyle (2007; 2008) addressed the endogeneity of removal from home by using the removal
tendencies of quasi-randomly assigned child protective service investigators as an instrument
for removal. He studied later life outcomes of older children who were subject to investigation
between the ages of five and fifteen using data from Illinois and found that removal increased
delinquency and arrests while decreasing labor market activity.
This paper focuses on young children and provides new evidence on the impact of removal based on comprehensive administrative data from Rhode Island. The data contain
approximately two decades of child protective services case records joined to administrative
records on academic outcomes in public schools. We study impacts of removal in early childhood (prior to age six) for two reasons. First, nearly half of removed children are under the
age of six (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2016). Second, the literature
on child development suggests that early life events and interventions can have particularly
strong influences on outcomes (Cunha et al., 2006; Heckman, 2006; Cunha and Heckman,
2007; Almond and Currie, 2011; Heckman et al., 2013; Heckman and Mosso, 2014; Elango
1

Currie and Tekin (2012) study long-term outcomes of children, finding that maltreatment is associated
with increases in the likelihood of committing crime.

1

et al., 2015; Almond et al., 2017). Our analysis is the first to estimate causal impacts of
home removal for this important group of children.2
We use the removal tendency of child abuse investigators as an instrument for removal.
Our main specification uses a standard leave-out mean removal rate as the measure of the
tendency for each investigator. Prior literature has used this type of measure for judges
and other authorities (Kling, 2006; Doyle, 2007, 2008; Aizer and Doyle, 2015; Bhuller et al.,
2016; Eren and Mocan, 2017; Sampat and Williams, 2015; Dobbie, Goldin and Yang, 2018;
Dobbie, Grönqvist, Niknami, Palme and Priks, 2018; Bhuller et al., 2018). We calculate the
removal rate for all other cases assigned to an investigator using data from the Rhode Island
Department of Children, Youth and Families (DCYF).3 In our robustness checks, we allow
the removal rate to vary by child and case characteristics and use this in an instrumental
variable (IV) approach that relaxes the monotonicity assumption inherent in an IV approach
using the standard measure (Mueller-Smith, 2015). To do this parsimoniously and avoid
overfitting, we use the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO), a machine
learning (ML) regularized regression technique, to select the child and case characteristics
that define removal tendency by subgroup (Belloni et al., 2014). We present all regression
results separately for girls and boys. Our analysis of effects by gender is motivated by prior
research, which shows that girls and boys may respond differently to social programs and
family conditions (Heckman et al., 2010; Bertrand and Pan, 2013; Heckman et al., 2013;
Elango et al., 2015; Conti et al., 2016; Heckman et al., 2017; Garcia et al., 2018; Autor et al.,
2019).
Our main finding is that there are significant and positive effects of removal on achievement outcomes for young girls and no corresponding significant effects for young boys. For
2
Note that age six is the compulsory school starting age in Rhode Island during our sample period
(Rhode Island, 2016). Benson and Fitzpatrick (2018) provide evidence that reports of child maltreatment
increase when children enroll in school. Their findings suggest that the composition of investigated children
may change at age 6 because educators may be an important source of information for instances of neglect
and abuse.
3
In our sample, the leave-out removal rate is a statistically significant predictor of removal and is uncorrelated with child and case characteristics.

2

young girls, the point estimate for the impact of removal indicates a 1.33 student-level standard deviation increase in average standardized test scores (math and reading) in the years
after removal. These large effects are similar to findings from the Perry Preschool program,
where girls randomly assigned to receive high-quality early education had 0.806 higher standardized test scores (Heckman et al., 2013). There are no statistically significant impacts of
removal on standardized test scores for young boys. In our main specification, the point estimate is imprecise and suggests a negative impact of 0.06 student-level standard deviations.
In line with the results for test scores, we find that removal has beneficial impacts on
additional measures of schooling achievement. For young girls, we find that removal reduces
the likelihood of repeating a grade by 22.8 percentage points. Removed young girls are also
significantly less likely to participate in special education.4 As with the test score impacts, we
find no detectable impacts of removal on grade repetition or special education participation
for young boys.
We examine whether these results are due to multiple hypothesis testing or attrition in
the form of changes in public school enrollment. Following Anderson (2008), we calculate
adjusted “q-values” that control for the false discovery rate (FDR). Using the set of results for
gender subgroups, we find that the estimates for young girls are significant at the 10 percent
level using the FDR-adjusted q-values. We also study attrition and find no statistically
significant impacts of removal on enrollment for young girls or young boys. The point
estimates for girls and boys are not statistically different.
Next, we investigate potential explanations for the differences the impacts of removal on
test scores by gender. Our analysis provides suggestive evidence that the pattern of results
stems from differences in how girls and boys respond to removal. The strongest evidence to
support this interpretation comes from analysis of siblings. In a within-family analysis, the
pattern of point estimates is in line with our main analysis and suggests sisters and brothers
4
We measure participation based on whether the child has a written Individualized Education Program
(IEP). An IEP can be given as early as pre-school, and children are assessed each year until they are deemed
to no longer be in need. Note that having an IEP does not generally exempt a student from testing in Rhode
Island. In academic year 2013, 89 percent of Rhode Island students with an IEP took standardized exams.

3

respond differently to removal. Further, we find that young girls and boys have similar
placement outcomes after removal (i.e., type of foster care and days spent in the foster
care system) and attend schools with similar types of characteristics (in terms of school
value-added and student body composition).5 We also find little evidence that suggests the
heterogeneous impacts on achievement are due to differences between girls and boys in terms
of complier characteristics or parental responses to removal.6
As a final analysis, we study removal for older children (investigated at age six or later).
We study schooling outcomes and later-life outcomes such as juvenile delinquency, high school
graduation, the likelihood of having a teen birth, and post secondary school enrollment. This
analysis of later-life outcomes focuses on older children because a child removed at a young
age will not be old enough for us to observe outcomes by the end of our sample period. For
older children of either gender, we find no statistically significant effects on any outcome. The
point estimates tend to suggest that removed boys have worse outcomes in terms of juvenile
convictions and high school graduation. For older girls, the non-significant point estimates
have no consistent pattern. That is, the signs of the point estimates do not consistently
indicate positive impacts for beneficial outcomes or negative estimates for disadvantageous
outcomes. The estimates are sufficiently imprecise that we cannot reject that the effects of
removal are equal for older girls and older boys.
Overall, these findings contribute to a broad literature on the impact of interventions for
children from disadvantaged backgrounds that shows early-life interventions can have large
causal impacts on children’s outcomes (Garces et al., 2002; Ludwig and Miller, 2007; Almond
et al., 2010; Heckman et al., 2013; Campbell et al., 2014; Elango et al., 2015; Aizer et al.,
2016; Chetty et al., 2016; Hoynes et al., 2016; Isen et al., 2017; Chyn, 2018; Currie et al.,
2018; Garcia et al., 2018).7 Our results extend this literature by focusing on interventions
5

We exclude sex abuse reports from all analyses because they make up only 5 percent of all investigations.
For example, the share of compliers that have a married parent is similar in the young girl and young boy
samples. To analyze parental behavior, we study parent perpetrators of abuse and neglect. Approximately
95 percent of the perpetrators in our sample are parents. Using samples of parent perpetrators for young girls
and young boys, we find no statistically significant impacts of removal on criminal charges and incarceration.
7
See Almond and Currie (2011) and Heckman and Mosso (2014) for a review of the literature on child
6

4

for young children at risk of abuse and neglect, and suggest that the impacts of removal
found among young girls may be particular to age. Our findings complement the results
from a growing set of studies showing heterogeneous program impacts by gender. As in our
results, a number of studies find that schooling and social program interventions can have
larger positive impacts for girls (Hastings et al., 2006; Kling et al., 2007; Angrist and Lavy,
2009; Heckman et al., 2013; Deming et al., 2014; Hoynes et al., 2016; Garcia et al., 2018).
2

Background: Child Protective Services and Case Assignment in Rhode
Island

Figure 1 illustrates the process for child abuse and neglect investigations and home removal decisions in Rhode Island. An investigation of child abuse or neglect begins when
an allegation is reported to the DCYF Child Protective Services (CPS) hotline.8 The CPS
hotline workers record details of the allegation, identify previous or pending investigations,
and determine whether the report meets the criteria to initiate an investigation. If the criteria are not met, records of the allegation are expunged from CPS records after a specified
period. If the allegations meet the criteria for an investigation, a CPS report is created and
forwarded to the central Investigative Unit (IU) where a supervisor assign the case to a field
Child Protective Investigator (CPI).9
The supervisor assigns the authorized reports using an internal “rotation list,” which
effectively randomizes the assignment of cases to available field CPIs. This rotation list is
an ordered spreadsheet of CPIs, which does not depend on investigator characteristics such
as age, ethnicity or any geographic consideration. Each day, the supervisor assigns cases as
they arrive based on this ordered list, and CPIs with non-assigned cases are moved to the
development and the impact of interventions for children.
8
Details on DCYF policies and procedures come from conversations with DCYF staff and documentation
from the 2018 DCYF Policy Manual (Rhode Island Department of Children, Youth, and Families, 2018).
9
In Rhode Island, there is one central Investigative Unit, which assigns cases regardless of geography.

5

top of the list for the next day’s rotation.10,11 In interviews, supervisors who assign cases
state that the goal of the list is to provide “fairness” so that each field CPI will receive
similar cases. The only exception for assigning cases through the list is when there is an
allegation of sex abuse, in which case the supervisor may assign the case to a CPI of the
same gender as the victim.12 Every case assigned outside of the rotation list is flagged in
the case management system, and we use this flag to exclude cases from our analysis (we
discuss the sample criteria further in Section 3).
The CPI investigating the case decides whether there is enough evidence of abuse or
neglect to warrant out-of-home placement.13 If there is sufficient evidence, the CPI petitions
the Rhode Island Family Court (RIFC) for removal of the child and placement into DCYF
custody. According to conversations with DCYF staff, the RIFC typically follows the recommendations made by investigators. The average investigation (including those that do
not end in removal) lasts less than one month.14
CPIs have limited ability to impact investigated children and their families other than
through the removal decision.15 The circumstances of the case largely determine the type
of placement and the duration of time in the foster care system. DCYF places children in
a family setting (relatives or a licensed foster family) or in a supervised environment such
as a group home or shelter. The field CPI is not involved in a case once the investigation
is closed following the removal decision. After removal, case management is handled by a
10

Cases left unassigned on a day can be voluntarily picked by CPIs outside of this rotation list. These
cases are flagged and excluded from the analysis.
11
The supervisor uses the rotation list to assign cases even when the child has had previous investigations.
12
Note that sex abuse cases comprise 5 percent of all investigations, and we exclude these from our
analysis.
13
The assigned CPI also makes decisions about whether an allegation of abuse or neglect is indicated or
unfounded (see Figure 1). DCYF dismisses unfounded allegations, and children are not removed in those
cases. The reports associated with unfounded cases are kept in the DCYF system and removed after a
specified period. We obtained a limited sample of unfounded cases and found no statistically significant
relationship between the CPI’s substantiation rate (the rate of determining that an allegation in a case is
founded) and the removal rate for the CPI’s founded cases.
14
In the sample of first investigations (described in Section 3), the average investigation lasts about 22
days. In cases where the CPI recommends removal, the average duration is 11 days.
15
In Section 4.4, we provide a detailed discussion of the exclusion restriction necessary for our empirical
analysis.

6

social worker.
When a child is in DCYF custody, parents can work with case workers to arrange visits,
although the frequency of visitation varies depending on case-specific factors. DCYF releases
children from custody due to reunification with parents, adoption, or aging out of the child
welfare system by reaching the legal adult age. Reunification with parents occurs only after
a parent has completed conditions stipulated by DCYF (e.g., parents may be required to
follow a visitation plan or complete mental health counseling with a DCYF service provider).
DCYF case management (intake) workers monitor whether a parent complies with conditions
for reunification.
3

Data

We use data from anonymized administrative records housed in a secure enclave. All personally identifiable information has been removed from the data and replaced with anonymous identifiers. These identifiers allow researchers with approved access to join records
associated with an individual across a range of social programs and government services
(Hastings, 2019; Hastings et al., 2019). This section describes the samples and key measures
that we construct. Appendix B provides further details and statistics on the process for
joining records.
3.1

Sample of Children Investigated at Young Ages
There are 32,845 DCYF investigations that occurred between January 1, 2000, and De-

cember 31, 2015.16 From these data, we create a sample of investigated children (with substantiated founded reports of abuse or neglect) based on three main restrictions. First, we
exclude sex abuse investigations and investigations where the Investigative Unit supervisor
assigned the case without using the rotation list (N = 7, 533). Second, we drop investigations that occur after the first investigation associated with a child (ages 0-18) (N = 5, 474).
Third, we drop investigations assigned to CPIs with outlier removal tendencies and exclude
16

See Appendix B for further details on the process for data cleaning and sample construction.

7

investigations assigned to CPIs who received less than 10 cases (N = 508).17 This leaves us
with 19,330 investigations. Of these investigations, 13,834 involve children under the age of
six, referred to as “young” children from here forward.18 In this young child investigations
sample, there are 6,449 girls and 7,385 boys.
3.2

School-Age Academic Outcomes
We join the sample of investigated young children to records from the Rhode Island

Department of Education (RIDE), which are available for the academic years 2003-2016.
The RIDE data include records for public school enrollment, identifiers for the school and
grade enrolled, receipt of special education services as indicated by receipt of a written
Individualized Education Program (IEP), and school attendance. Standardized test scores
in reading and math are available in a subset of academic years (2005-2016).
Standardized test scores for exams taken during grades 3-8 are the main post-investigation
outcome that we study. We construct a panel at the academic year level. Investigated
children who were born before 1995 or after 2008 will not have observations in the panel
because they are either too old or young to be enrolled in the testing grades (3-8) during the
period 2005-2016. We focus on the average of the scores in math and reading (standardized
by grade and academic year). There are 2,721 girls and 3,148 boys that have test scores for
both exams in at least one year of the panel. Note that in a given academic year, there are
no data for children who enrolled in a private school, although we do have test scores for
children enrolled in charter schools.
We study additional post-investigation school outcomes such as grade repetition, participation in special education, and average attendance. We use enrollment records from
RIDE to measure whether a child repeats a grade during grades 3-8 (which correspond to
the grades that we study test score outcomes). This grade repetition outcome is only defined
17

We define outliers as values of CPI removal tendency that fall below the first and above the ninety-ninth
percentiles.
18
In Section 5.5, we provide results using alternative age ranges to define a sample of young children. In
Section 7, we also report results studying children who were aged 6 to 18 at the time of an investigation.

8

when individuals are enrolled in two consecutive years. There are 2,778 young girls and 3,225
young boys for whom we can measure grade repetition. For special education participation,
we measure whether a child ever has a written IEP during grades 3-8.19 A child who has
an IEP has at least one of the thirteen disability categories as defined by the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA).20 The determination of an IEP can start as early
as pre-school, when the child is three to four years old. Over half of students with an IEP in
Rhode Island are identified with special needs prior to entering first grade.21 For absences,
we measure the number of absences within a school year and compute the mean across grades
3-8. For consistency, we examine IEP status and absences only for children who have the
retention outcome defined.
Finally, RIDE enrollment records allow us to construct two additional types of outcomes.
First, we use the end-of-year enrollment files from RIDE to measure whether a child is
enrolled during ages 8-13. This age range corresponds to the grades that we use to analyze
achievement and other schooling outcomes. We construct this measure for the investigated
children with a resulting sample of 4,101 young girls and 4,750 young boys. Second, we study
school mobility and characteristics of schools attended. For school mobility, we construct a
measure of switching public schools. For characteristics, we construct school-level measures of
test score value-added, mean test scores, the fraction of enrolled students who are minorities,
and the fraction of students who receive a free or reduced-price lunch (FRL). Value-added
for each school is estimated using all years available for the school and excluding the students
in our DCYF investigation sample. We regress average standardized test scores (the average
19

Not all children will have a complete set of years for which we can measure IEP enrollment. For
example, if a child transfers (permanently) from public to private school in fifth grade, we would only
observe IEP enrollment from third to fourth grade. We retain these children in our analysis and compute
IEP participation for the grades available. Similarly, children born before 1995 or after 2008 can only be
observed in a partial set of academic years due to the limited coverage of the RIDE data (from 2003-2016).
20
The categories are: autism, deaf-blindness, deafness, developmental delay, emotional disturbance, hearing impairment, intellectual disability, learning disability, orthopedic impairment, speech or language impairment, traumatic brain injury, visual impairment including blindness, and other health impairment (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 2004).
21
About 28 percent of children receive their IEP for the first time in kindergarten. An additional 25
percent of children receive an IEP before starting kindergarten and enroll in an Early Childhood Special
Education program for young children with development delays and disabilities, as mandated by IDEA.

9

of math and reading scores) on lagged test scores (including their square and cube), as well
as indicators for a student’s race, gender, special education status, English learner status,
and free or reduced price lunch status. We use the mean residuals within a school as a
single measure of value-added.22,23 The fraction of minority and fraction of FRL students
at a school are calculated in each year. We join these school characteristics to a child-level
panel (covering grades 3-8) to measure the impact of removal on the characteristics of the
schools attended post-investigation. There are approximately 2,800 young girls and 3,300
young boys for whom we can measure mobility and school characteristic outcomes.24
3.3

Parent Perpetrators and Crime Outcomes
We also study impacts of removal on outcomes of parents of investigated children. We

obtain information on parents from DCYF records on perpetrators associated with an investigation.25 For young children in our sample, 95 percent of children have at least one parent
listed as a perpetrator. We use this information to create a sample of parent perpetrators.
We join this sample to criminal charge and incarceration records (1995-2017) from the Rhode
Island Department of Corrections (RIDOC). The unit of analysis is a parent perpetrator,
and the outcome is whether a parent perpetrator is charged or incarcerated at any point
in the two or four years following the conclusion of an investigation. Because the criminal
justice data source ends in 2017, these measures will be partially censored depending on the
end date of the associated investigation.26
22

Our approach follows prior studies such as Kane et al. (2008) and Chetty et al. (2014).
See Appendix 3 for details on the estimation of school value-added and how we join this measure to the
student-level data.
24
Sample sizes slightly vary across these outcomes due to missing data. See Appendix B for further
details.
25
The DCYF investigation records have information on household characteristics, but there is no information on parent identity aside from the information contained in perpetrator records.
26
There are 6,252 parent perpetrators associated with young girls and 7,141 parent perpetrators associated
with young boys.
23

10

3.4

Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the sample of investigated young children in

Rhode Island. Column 1 shows that 58 percent and 16 percent of investigated children are
white and Hispanic, respectively.27 Race in the sample differs notably from Doyle (2007;
2008), which studied the impact of removal for a sample from Illinois where 76 percent of
investigated children were African American. This contrast partly reflects differences in the
demographics. That is, the African American shares of children in Rhode Island and Illinois
are 9 and 15.8 percent, respectively (U.S. Census, 2018). In terms of family background,
only 21 percent of the investigated children in Rhode Island are from married households.
The DCYF data report all allegations associated with an investigation. An allegation
of neglect occurs in about 80 percent of investigations. Allegations of physical abuse or
physical neglect (i.e., neglect that results in a physical injury) occur much less frequently
in about 14 and 7 percent of investigations, respectively. These statistics are broadly in
line with national statistics, where allegations of neglect and physical abuse occur in 75 and
18 percent of investigations, respectively (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
2016).
We also observe the reporter associated with child abuse investigations. For 82 percent
of children, the reporter in the case was a professional such as a teacher, physician, social
worker, or police officer. The remaining fraction of reports are provided by family, friends,
or other individuals such as neighbors or anonymous reporters.
Column 1 shows that removal from home occurs in 20 percent of the sample of first
investigations. This is lower than the removal rate observed in Doyle (2007; 2008), which
studied older children from Illinois when the state’s placement rate (27 percent) was one of
the nation’s highest in the 1990s. Columns 2 and 3 provide separate summary statistics for
children subject to investigations that do not and do result in home removal, respectively.
27
Nationally, 45 percent of child abuse victims were white, and 22 percent were Hispanic (U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, 2016).

11

Column 4 reports the p-values from tests of differences in means for each summary statistic.
Investigations that do not end in removal have significantly different child and case characteristics from investigations where removal does occur. Children who are not removed are
slightly older than those who are removed (1.9 years old versus 1.1), live in households with
7 percentage point higher marriage rates (p-value < 0.01), and are about 4 percentage points
(p-value < 0.01) less likely to be African-American. The final row of Table 1 shows that
Rhode Island children who are removed spend roughly 450 days in foster care, which is less
than the average four-year stay in Doyle’s (2007; 2008) study of Illinois.
4

Empirical Strategy

Consider the following regression model of the relationship between child outcomes and
removal:

Yi = β0 + β1 Ri + β2 Xi + i ,

(1)

where Yi is a post-investigation outcome for child i, Ri is an indicator for whether the child
was removed during the first investigation, Xi is a vector of child and case characteristics
(including fixed effects for the investigation year), and i is an error term.28 Standard OLS
estimates of Equation 1 will be biased if home removal (Ri ) is correlated with unobserved
determinants of child outcomes (i ). The descriptive statistics in Table 1, as well as prior
research, suggest that observed and unobserved family and home conditions affect both the
likelihood of removal and child outcomes (Berger et al., 2009, 2014; Wildeman and Waldfogel,
2014).
To address the endogeneity concern in Equation 1, we rely on an instrumental variable
(IV) strategy that is based on a measure of the removal tendency of the investigator j who
handles case c associated with child i. We denote the removal tendency as Zijc , and the
28

Specifically, Xi contains the child and case characteristics listed in Table 1 and investigation year fixed
effects.

12

first-stage equation is:

Ri = α0 + α1 Zijc + α2 Xi + νi ,

(2)

where Zijc is a leave-out removal tendency measure that is similar to measures calculated
in the literature using judge decision tendencies as instruments for individual case decisions
(Kling, 2006; Doyle, 2007, 2008, 2013; Dahl et al., 2014; Aizer and Doyle, 2015; Bhuller et al.,
2016; Mueller-Smith, 2015; Eren and Mocan, 2017; Sampat and Williams, 2015; Dobbie,
Grönqvist, Niknami, Palme and Priks, 2018; Dobbie, Goldin and Yang, 2018; Bhuller et al.,
2018). In our context, we construct this measure to account for the fact that 30 percent of
the cases in the DCYF sample include siblings.29 We exclude the focal child and siblings on
case c by defining the leave-out removal tendency for each case as:


Zijc =



Nc
X

1
0

Rk  ,
Nj − nc k6=c

(3)

where Nj is the total number of children assigned to the investigator j, nc is the number
of children on case c, and Nc is the number of cases for the investigator. We define k
0

to index the cases handled by investigator j, and Rk is the number of children removed
on case k. The leave out measure is an average that excludes children on the same case.
We calculate the measure of removal tendency using all cases for investigator j within an
eight-year window.30 When we estimate Equation 1 using this leave-out measure, we report
two-way clustered standard errors at the investigator (CPI) and case (i.e., family) level.
If there are heterogeneous impacts of removal, we must make two assumptions to interpret
IV estimates of the parameter β1 from Equation 1 as a local average treatment effect (LATE)
29

See Appendix Section B.5 for further details on siblings.
Ideally, we would calculate the leave-out instrument within each year to allow CPI tendency to evolve
over time. In practice, we find that a version of our leave-out instrument defined at the yearly level has
a relatively weak first stage. Instead, we allow CPI removal tendency to vary by calculating the measure
separately for the 2000-2007 and 2008-2015 periods, respectively. As discussed in Section 5.5, our analysis
is robust to using alternative definitions for defining the leave-out measure of CPI removal tendency.
30

13

of removal for marginal investigations (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). First, the measure of
CPI removal tendency defined in Equation 3 must affect child outcomes only by changing
the probability of removal. In Sections 4.3 and 4.4, we provide evidence that suggests this
assumption is plausible in our setting by examining random assignment of investigators and
analyzing whether CPI removal tendency is correlated with other post-removal decisions
such as the type of placement or whether police were notified during an investigation.
Second, we assume that there is a monotonic impact of CPI assignment on removal across
children. A violation of this assumption may occur if CPI removal tendencies vary with case
characteristics. For example, a given CPI may be relatively strict when it comes to removing
African American children, but lenient when it comes to removing all other children. If there
is a non-monotone impact of removal tendency, the IV estimate would not identify a welldefined LATE.31 As a test of monotonicity, Section 4.5 follows prior work and shows that the
first-stage coefficient for the tendency measure defined in Equation 3 is positive in various
subsamples (Bhuller et al., 2016; Dobbie, Goldin and Yang, 2018).32
To further address concerns regarding monotonicity, we carry out robustness tests in
Section 5.5, which allow the CPI tendency and its impact on removal to vary with observed
case characteristics. We do this by creating a set of potential instruments based on leaveout measures of removal tendency calculated for different categorizations of child and case
characteristics (i.e., gender, minority status, marital status, reporter type, allegation type,
and investigation level). This creates a set of potential instruments. Following Belloni et al.
(2012, 2014), we use the machine-learning (ML) algorithm, Least Absolute Shrinkage and
Selection Operator (LASSO), to select the instruments with greatest predictive power for
31

Under non-monotonicity, the IV estimate would be a weighted average of marginal treatment effects
where the weights do not sum to one (Angrist et al., 1996; Heckman and Vytlacil, 2005).
32
In an additional monotonicity test, Section 4.5 also shows that the first-stage coefficient for a reversesample tendency measure is positive in various subgroups. The reverse sample tendency is calculated by
dividing the sample into subgroups (e.g., by race) and constructing instruments using the complement for
each subgroup. For example, we recalculate the removal tendency for white children using all observations
outside this subgroup (all non-white children).

14

removal in the first stage equation.33,34
4.1

Variation in Child Protective Investigator (CPI) Removal Tendency
Figure 2 plots the distribution of the leave-out CPI removal tendency from Equation 3 in

our sample of investigations of young children. We observe 102 CPIs during 2000-2015. The
average number of children seen by CPIs across all years is 387. The mean of the removal
tendency measure in Figure 2 is 0.178, while the 25th and 75th percentiles of the distribution
are 0.138 and 0.217, respectively. The standard deviation is 0.056.35 Further statistics and
information on the CPIs in our analysis sample are provided in Appendix B.4.
4.2

First Stage Impact
Panel A of Table 2 reports results from Equation 2, measuring the impact of our instru-

ments on whether an investigation resulted in removal of the child from the home. Column
1 shows that the leave-out measure of mean CPI removal tendency is highly predictive of
removal. The estimate in Column 1 implies that moving from a CPI in the lowest quartile of
removal tendency to one in the highest quartile would increase the likelihood of removal by
4.61 percentage points (= 0.584 × 0.079), relative to a mean removal rate of 20.23 percentage
points.36 Columns 2 and 3 show that the effects by subgroups for gender are similar in
magnitude. The point estimates suggest that removal tendency has a larger impact for boys,
but we cannot reject the hypothesis of equal first stage impacts between girls and boys.
4.3

Instrument Validity: Testing Random Assignment
According to the assignment process described in Section 2, investigations in our sample

should be quasi-randomly assigned to CPIs. To test this implication, we regress the removal
33

The use of LASSO for regularization is necessary since there are several potential case characteristics
by which CPI tendencies may vary. An unrestricted model would likely result in too many instruments and
potentially weak instruments, creating challenges for causal inference (Bound et al., 1995).
34
Further details on our ML approach are provided in Appendix D.
35
In Doyle (2007), the standard deviation is 9 percent in the delinquency sample, 10 percent in the teen
motherhood sample, and 7 percent in the labor market outcomes sample.
36
Doyle (2007; 2008) discusses the possibility that the coefficient on the impact of CPI removal tendency
may be less than one due to measurement error.

15

tendency measure on baseline child and investigation characteristics. Panel B of Table 2
reports results from a test for joint significance of baseline characteristics in determining
investigator removal tendency. We report this for all investigations and subgroups based on
gender and age of children at the time of an investigation. Baseline characteristics include
the child demographics and case characteristics listed in Table 1. We consistently fail to
reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients for investigation characteristics are jointly
zero. For example, Column 1 shows that the chi-squared test statistic is 16.50 with a p-value
of 0.284 in the sample of all investigations. Appendix Table A1 reports all point estimates
associated with the regression we used to conduct tests of joint significance.
4.4

Instrument Validity: Exclusion Restriction
The random assignment of cases to investigators is sufficient for a causal interpretation of

the reduced form impact of being assigned to a stricter investigator. However, interpreting IV
estimates as measuring the impact of removal in Equation 1 further requires that the removal
tendency of an investigator should affect children only through the decision to remove a child
from home and not through any other channel. For example, this exclusion restriction would
be violated if CPIs also determined the duration of foster care or the type of foster placement.
In Appendix Table A2, we test whether CPI removal tendency is correlated with other foster
care outcomes for the subgroup of children who have been removed. We also test if there is
a correlation between whether police are notified during an investigation. For girls and boys
who have been removed, we find there are no statistically significant relationships between
removal tendency and the time spent in foster care, the type of placement, or whether police
authorities were notified during an investigation. This pattern of results is consistent with
the idea that CPIs have limited ability to influence a child’s outcomes once a child is placed
into DCYF custody (as discussed in Section 2).

16

4.5

Monotonicity
To interpret IV estimates from Equations 1 as a LATE of removal for marginal inves-

tigations, we must assume monotonicity in the impact of the CPI removal tendency on
the likelihood of removal across children in our sample. As noted in Bhuller et al. (2016)
and Dobbie, Goldin and Yang (2018), one testable implication of monotonicity is that the
first stage estimates should be non-negative for any subgroup of the investigations sample.
Columns 2 and 3 in Panel A of Table 2 provide an initial indication that there is no evidence
of a violation of monotonicity across all cases by showing that the first stage is non-negative
for the subgroups defined by gender. Appendix Table A3 expands on these results by providing additional results for narrower subgroups based on various case characteristics. The first
stage impacts of removal tendency are consistently positive.37 An additional implication of
monotonicity is that CPIs should be stricter for a specific type of investigation if they are
stricter in other investigation types. To test this assumption, we estimate first stage models where we recalculate the leave-out instrument for each subgroup using all investigations
outside of the subgroup. For example, we estimate a first stage model for Hispanic children
using using the CPI’s removal tendency calculated for all non-Hispanic investigations. Results are presented in Appendix Table A4 and are consistently positive and almost always
statistically different from zero.
4.6

Interpreting the LATE in Our Analysis
Assuming the exclusion restriction and monotonicity assumptions hold, the IV estimates

of the parameter β1 from Equation 1 are a local average treatment effect (LATE) of removal
for children who would have received a different removal decision had their case been assigned
to a different investigator. To better understand this treatment effect parameter, we examine
characteristics of compliers in our sample of first investigations for girls and boys, separately.
To conduct this analysis, we calculate these characteristics following the approach from
37

The magnitudes of the first stage estimates for subgroups defined by each case characteristic (shown in
the rows of Appendix Table A3) are generally similar to the impact in the sample of all investigations.

17

Abadie (2003), Dahl et al. (2014), and Dobbie, Goldin and Yang (2018).38
Each row of Appendix Table A5 provides information on the overall sample mean for a
case characteristic and the complier-specific mean. We provide these statistics separately
for girls and boys investigated at young ages. For each gender, we see that compliers are
generally similar to the average child in our investigation sample. The main exception is
that compliers in the sample of young girls are less likely to be white. Comparing Columns
2 and 4, we also see that complier girls and boys have similar characteristics except in terms
of race. For example, complier young girls are 9 percentage points (81 percent) more likely
to be black than complier young boys. This difference is statistically significant at the one
percent level.
5
5.1

Main Results

Standardized Test Scores for Young Children
Table 3 presents estimates of the impact of removal on standardized test scores for young

girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B). Columns 1 and 2 provide IV estimates for effects
on the average of reading and math scores with and without controls for case characteristics.
Similarly, Columns 3-6 provide estimates separately for reading and math scores. Robust
standard errors that are two-way clustered at the case (family) and investigator level are
reported throughout. Note that the sample for test score analysis contains 2,721 and 3,148
children, which differs from the numbers for investigated children in Table 1. As noted in
Section 3, investigated children will not be included in the test score panel if they are not old
enough by the final year of the available school records (2016) or they do not attend public
school in Rhode Island.
The results in Panel A show that the marginal removal has a significant and positive im38

Similar to Dahl et al. (2014) and Dobbie, Goldin and Yang (2018), we define compliers in our setting as
children whose removal decision would have been different had their case been assigned to the most lenient
versus the strictest investigator. We consider investigators in the top percentile of removal tendency as
“strict” and investigators in the bottom percentile of removal tendency as “lenient.” See Appendix Section C
and the notes to Appendix Table A5 for further details on our calculation of complier characteristics.

18

pact on the average standardized test scores for young girls. Column 1 shows that the point
estimate for removal is 1.334 standard deviations. We obtain nearly identical results when
we include controls for case characteristics in Column 2. Results for standardized math and
reading scores are similarly large in magnitude and statistically significant. Evaluations of
high-quality early education programs targeting disadvantaged children serve as an important point of comparison for these impacts. Heckman et al. (2013), for example, found that
the Perry Preschool program increased female standardized test scores by 0.806 standard
deviations. As another benchmark, Bharadwaj et al. (2013) and Chyn et al. (2019) find that
neo-natal investments for babies born at very low birth weight increase standardized test
scores by 0.15-0.34 standard deviations in elementary and middle school.
Our estimated impact is large in magnitude, but note that complier young girls in our
sample would have had very low standardized test scores if they had not been removed.
Following the approach from Dahl et al. (2014) and Bhuller et al. (2016), we calculate
outcomes for compliers if they had not been removed, finding that the mean complier among
young girls would have had an average standardized test score of -1.741.39 This implies that
young girls at the margin benefit from removal, but they are still likely to have below average
test scores.
In contrast to the results for young girls, Panel B shows that there are no detectable
impacts on any measure of test scores of young boys. The point estimates for boys are
generally an order of magnitude smaller than what we obtain for girls, although the standard
errors in our estimates are large and the confidence interval contains effect sizes that are
substantively large. We can consistently reject the hypothesis of equal impacts of removal
on test scores by gender (p-value < 0.10).
In Appendix Figure A1, we report separate estimates and confidence intervals for impacts
on average standardized test scores in each grade (3-8) in the panel of test scores. For girls,
we find positive point estimates that are similar in magnitude across grades. This pattern
39
For detailed discussion of our calculation of the complier average outcome when not removed, see
Appendix C.

19

suggests that the benefits of removal are persistent and may be due to permanent changes
in child ability prior to third grade. We also find that the contrast between the impacts on
test scores for girls and boys is constant across grades. For young boys, the estimates are
never significant and are generally smaller in magnitude for the grades that we examine.
5.2

Grade Retention, Special Education, and Attendance for Young Children
Table 4 tests for impacts on additional schooling outcomes for children. As discussed

in Section 3, we measure impacts on grade retention, special education participation (i.e.,
having a written IEP) and average absences during grades 3-8. The sample for this analysis
differs slightly from the analysis of test scores since we include all enrolled children (regardless
of whether they have a valid standardized test score).40,41 Due to the number of outcomes,
Table 4 only reports estimates from a specification with case controls. The estimates are
robust to a specification without controls, as reported in Appendix Table A6.
The results in Panel A show that young girls are significantly less likely to be retained
during grades 3-8. The point estimate shows that removal decreases the likelihood of any
grade repetition by 22.8 percentage points. As with test scores, this impact is large, but
the mean rate of repeating a grade when not removed is 29.1 percent for compliers. Panel
A also shows that removal has a significant and large (44.1 percentage points) reduction in
special education needs as measured by having a written IEP during grades 3-8.42,43 There is
suggestive evidence of a decrease in the mean number of absences for young girls, although
the point estimate is not statistically significant.
For young boys, the results in Panel B shows that there are no statistically significant
effects of removal on any of these non-testing outcomes. In Columns 1 and 2, the point
40
Approximately 93 percent of investigated children who are enrolled in public school have a standardized
test score.
41
Section 3 provides details on all measures that we construct.
42
All measures are constructed using records from grades 3-8. Because enrollment in special education
can begin as early as pre-school, we also conducted analysis defining the IEP outcome for grades K-8. We
do this for all the additional schooling outcome as well. We find similar results for the measures defined over
this grade range. These results are reported in Appendix Table A7.
43
Note that an IEP does not imply that a student is exempt from testing. In academic year 2013, 89
percent of students with an IEP took a standardized exam.

20

estimates suggest that removal decreases the likelihood that a young boy is retained or
enrolls in special education by 5.3 and 20.1 percentage points, respectively. For absences,
the estimate suggests that removal has relatively small benefits in terms of reducing absences.
Overall, the results for retention, special education participation, and absences match
the pattern of heterogeneous impacts by gender observed for test scores. To summarize
these schooling results, we construct a school index measure, which is the equally weighted
average of the standardized (z-score) measures for the three outcomes.44 One interpretation
of this index is that higher values indicate that children have less schooling ability or more
difficult experiences in school. Column 4 of Table 4 shows that removal leads to a large and
significant 0.92 standard deviation improvement in the school index for young girls. The
corresponding estimate for boys is the much smaller in magnitude, and we can reject the
hypothesis that the effects on this index outcome are equal for boys and girls at the ten
percent level.
5.3

Attrition due to Changes in Public School Enrollment or Test-Taking
A concern for interpreting the test score and schooling results is that removal may affect

whether a child attends a Rhode Island public school or sits for a standardized exam. This
would generate selection into the panel of test scores and other schooling outcomes that we
use for our analysis. To address this concern, we construct a balanced panel with indicators
for enrollment and exam taking during ages 8-13. This is the age range that corresponds
to grades 3-8, which are the focus of the test score analysis. The sample for this analysis
is larger than what appears in Tables 3 or 4 because we include investigated children that
never appear in the enrollment records.
Table 5 shows that we do not find any significant impacts of removal on enrollment
or test-taking for young girls. The insignificant point estimates suggest that, if anything,
removed young girls are more likely to be observed in the test score panel. For young boys,
44

To standardize each component, we calculate the mean and standard deviation of each outcome using investigated children by gender. Next, we compute the standard score by taking each outcome and subtracting
the mean for all investigated children of the same gender and dividing by the standard deviation.

21

we also find no detectable effects, and the point estimates are negative for both outcomes.
We cannot reject the hypothesis of equal impacts on enrollment or test-taking for girls and
boys. Overall, this lack of significant impacts suggests that attrition from public school or
selective test-taking are unlikely to explain our results for young girls.
5.4

Multiple Hypothesis Testing
Given that our analysis tests for impacts for multiple outcomes, one concern is that

the findings for young girls are an artifact of multiple hypothesis testing. To manage the
risk of false positives, we follow the recommended practice of adjusting per comparison pvalues (Anderson, 2008). We use the two-step procedure from Benjamini et al. (2006) to
calculate “q-values” that control for the false discovery rate (FDR), which is the proportion
of rejections that are false positives (Type I errors). Appendix Table A8 shows that the IV
estimates for test scores and retention of young girls are significant at the 5 percent level
after adjusting for the fact that we analyzed multiple outcomes (i.e., impacts for average test
scores, retention, participation in special education, and average absences).
5.5

Robustness Tests
Appendix Tables A9–A11 provide robustness tests for the main analysis. We begin with

checks related to the construction of the sample. For comparison, Column 1 of Appendix
Table A9 provides the estimate for the impact on the average of standardized tests from our
preferred specification. Recall that this specification includes only those children investigated
before age 6 whose assigned CPI handled at least 10 cases. Columns 2-4 provide results for
the samples of children with CPIs who handle at least 100, 200 or 300 cases. The point
estimates largely do not change across these alternative samples. The main change for
young investigated girls is that we lose statistical significance when we impose the 300-case
restriction and exclude approximately half of the original sample. Column 5 shows that our
results do not change when we include children associated with investigations involving sex

22

abuse.45 Columns 6 and 7 test whether the results change when we change the age range
used to define the sample of young investigated children. The estimates do not change when
we define the sample of young children as those investigated during ages 0-4 or during ages
0-6.
Next, we check whether the results are robust to using an approach that allows CPI
removal tendency to vary with case characteristics. As discussed in Section 4, this allows us
to relax the assumption of monotonicity necessary to interpret our main results as the LATE
of removal for marginal investigations (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). The case characteristics
that we consider are sex, race (non-minority and minority), marital status, reporter type,
allegation type, and investigation level. For each of these characteristics, we define mutually
exclusive groups of children and calculate CPI removal tendency for the group. For example,
each CPI will have a leave-out removal tendency calculated separately for non-minority
(white) and minority (non-white) children. Since we consider multiple characteristics, we
have a set of instruments. We use LASSO to select the instruments with greatest predictive
power for removal in the first stage equation (Belloni et al., 2014).46
Appendix Table A10 presents the machine-learning (ML) IV estimates for impacts of
removal on test scores, grade retention, special education (IEP), and the school index measure
from Section 5.47 The ML IV estimates are similar to the main results that we report in
Tables 3 and 4. Panel A shows that we consistently find significant and positive impacts of
removal on test scores for young girls. Similarly, the ML IV estimates indicate that removal
significantly reduces retention and the likelihood of IEP participation. In Panel B, the ML
IV estimates for boys are never statistically significant, and the point estimates suggest that
removal has negative impacts on all achievement and schooling outcomes.
45
Recall that sex allegations are excluded from the main analysis since case assignment to a CPI may
take into consideration the gender of the CPI.
46
See Appendix Section D for further details on the measures and implementation of the LASSO-based
approach.
47
We estimate LASSO separately for separately for each gender and outcome that we consider. The
instruments selected change across specifications. Appendix D provides details on our implementation and
the instruments selected.

23

Finally, we test whether our results are robust to the types of investigations or time period
used to calculate CPI removal tendencies. Column 1 of Appendix Table A11 reproduces our
main preferred estimates for test scores. The main estimate is based on calculating removal
tendency with an eight-year period for each CPI and using all children (i.e., those with first
and repeat investigations).48 By calculating the removal rate within an 8-year period, we
allow the removal tendency of a given CPI to change over time.49 Columns 2-4 shows that
we obtain similar results when we use a measure of removal tendency that is based only on
first investigations or based on pooling investigation decisions for all years (2000-2015).
5.6

Marginal Treatment Effects
To further examine impacts of removal on test scores of young children, we explore

heterogeneity by examining marginal treatment effects (MTEs). MTEs are treatment effects
for individuals with a particular “resistance” to treatment (Cornelissen et al., 2016). These
effects are defined under a generalized Roy model. In our context, let Y1 and Y0 denote the
potential outcomes if a child is removed or not removed, respectively. We assume that each
of these are linear functions of both observable (X) and unobservable factors. The choice
to remove a child by a CPI is given by the indicator function I = 1(v(X, Z)–U ), where v
is any function, Z is the leave-out removal tendency instrument, and U is an unobserved
continuous random variable. Since U enters the removal equation with a negative sign, it is
interpreted as resistance to treatment (removal). We can re-write the CPI choice equation
as P (X, Z) > Ud , where P (X, Z) is the propensity score and Ud represents quantiles of the
unobserved resistance to removal (U ).
The MTE is defined as E(Y1i −Y0i |X = x, Ud = u), and the dependence of the MTE on Ud
reflects unobserved heterogeneity in treatment effects (Heckman and Vytlacil, 1999; Heckman
48

For the analysis of impacts on outcomes, we only use the first investigation associated with a child. In the
construction of the instrument, we use first and repeat investigations. The latter provide more observations
for calculating removal tendencies, allowing us to have more statistical power.
49
As discussed in Section 4, we allow the CPI removal tendency to vary over time by calculating the
measure separately for the 2000-2007 and 2008-2015 periods, respectively. Ideally, we would calculate the
leave-out instrument for each year to allow CPI tendency to evolve over time. A concern is that some CPIs
may see relatively few children within a year, thereby making it difficult to infer their tendency.

24

et al., 2001; Heckman and Vytlacil, 2005, 2007). As in prior studies, we assume separability
between observed and unobserved heterogeneity in treatment effects (Carneiro et al., 2011;
Bhuller et al., 2016; Brinch et al., 2017). Given this assumption and the exogenous instrument
condition from Section 4, the MTE is identified over the common support of the propensity
score P (X, Z) (Carneiro et al., 2011; Bhuller et al., 2016; Brinch et al., 2017). Panels A
and B of Appendix Figure A2 shows the propensity score distribution for the removed and
non-removed children in the young girl and young boy samples, respectively. The dashed
red lines indicate the upper and lower points of the propensity score with common support
(after trimming 5 percent of the sample with overlap in the distributions).
Panels A and B of Appendix Figure A3 shows the MTEs for young girls and young boys,
respectively. We use a local instrumental variable approach using a global quadratic polynomial specification.50 We construct confidence intervals using 100 bootstrap replications. The
results in Panel A show that the MTE estimates for test scores are most positive for young
girls with low unobserved resistance to treatment. The estimates decrease as the unobserved
resistance increases and become negative at the highest quantiles. The decline at the upper
levels of resistance suggests that young girls on the margin of placement with the highest
removal rate CPIs (who likely have less severe unobserved abuse levels) benefit less from
removal. For young boys, the results in Panel B show that the MTE estimates are always
negative, and the estimates decline with increases in the resistance to treatment.
6

Understanding Gender Differences in the Impact of Removal for Young
Children

What explains the pattern of gender differences in the impacts of removal for young
children? This section considers three categories of explanations. First, it is possible there
are gender differences in the pre-investigation characteristics of compliers that could help
determine the effects of removal. Second, removal may have heterogeneous effects on medi50

We conducted robustness checks on the MTE estimates and found similar results when we use linear,
quadratic, or cubic specifications.

25

ating factors such as the type of foster care placement, school mobility or characteristics, or
parental behavior. Third, girls and boys may be responding differently to the same treatment
of removal in early life.
6.1

Complier Characteristics
One possibility is that the compliers among young girls are different in terms of pre-

investigation background characteristics relative to their male counterparts. If effects vary
by these complier characteristics, this could explain why we observe gendered effects on test
scores and the other schooling outcomes such as grade repetition. As noted in Section 4.6,
the average characteristics for compliers are generally similar for young girls and young boys
except in terms of racial composition. Specifically, the average young girl complier is much
more likely to be a minority relative to their male counterparts.51
To understand the importance of race in our analysis, Appendix Table A12 reports impacts of removal by gender and minority status subgroups. These results do not provide
strong evidence that the difference in the minority share among girl and boy compliers explains the pattern of test score effects. Although the results are not always statistically
significant, Panel A generally suggests that removal has large and beneficial estimated impacts on test scores and the school index measure for both minority and non-minority young
girls. In contrast, the results in Panel B show that there are generally no significant impacts
of removal for either the group of minority or non-minority young boys.
6.2

Mediating Factors
As detailed in Section 3, we have extensive measures of mediating factors that could help

determine the impact of removal. Specifically, we focus on factors such as types of foster
care placement associated with the first investigation, school mobility and characteristics,
and the behavior of parents. Our focus is on testing whether there are gender differences in
51

For example, Appendix Table A5 shows that the fraction of compliers who are white is only 42.6 percent
for young girls compared with 62.7 percent for complier young boys.

26

any of these potential mediators.
Table 6 reports impacts of removal on foster care outcomes associated with the first
investigation such as the number of days spent in each type of foster care and the likelihood
of adoption.52 The results show little evidence of differences in these post-removal outcomes
for young girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B). For example, removal has statistically
significant and large positive impacts on the days spent in any type of foster care for both
genders, and there are no detectable impacts of removal on the likelihood of adoption for
boys or girls.53,54
Across placement outcomes, the main gender distinction is the effects of removal on the
number of days spent in the residual category of “other” DCYF placements.55 Column 5
shows that removal has no detectable impact on days spent in the other category of foster care
for young girls. In contrast, the impact for young boys is significant, but it is worth noting
that the point estimate is just 38 days in these residual categories of foster care placement.
This impact is approximately 10 percent of the amount of time that boys typically spend in
foster care.
Next, we test for gender differences in the impact of removal on school mobility or the
types of schools that children attend. Table 7 provides estimates for impacts on schooling
mobility and several characteristics of schools attended for grades 3-8. The results provide
no strong evidence of gendered treatment effects. For young girls and young boys, there
are no statistically significant impacts, and we cannot reject the hypothesis that the point
estimates are equal for young girls and boys, though the standard errors are generally large.56
52

The foster care outcomes in Table 6 are based on placement records for the first investigation. Alternatively, we can measure foster care outcomes associated with any subsequent investigation. When we analyze
the total days spent in foster care including days from the first and subsequent investigations, we also find
statistically significant and large impacts of removal on the first investigation. While the point estimates are
larger for young girls, we fail to reject the hypothesis that these estimated effects on total days are equal for
young girls and young boys.
53
By definition, the number of days spent in each type of foster care after the first investigation is zero
for children who are not removed from home.
54
These results for adoption reflect the fact that this is a relatively rare outcome in our sample. Fewer
than 3 percent of children in our DCYF sample of first investigations are later adopted.
55
These are placements that are not with a relative, licensed foster family or group home.
56
The confidence intervals for mobility and school characteristic results are sufficiently large that we

27

As a last test of mediating factors, we examine post-investigation outcomes for adult
household members. Specifically, we study parent perpetrators of child abuse or neglect and
estimate the impact of child removal on their criminal charges and incarceration within the
two- or four-year period after an investigation concludes.57,58
Appendix Table A13 reports impacts separately for the parent perpetrators of young girls
(Panel A) and young boys (Panel B).59 We find no statistically significant impacts of removal
on the likelihood that a parent perpetrator is charged or incarcerated in the time after an
investigation concludes. The small and imprecise results for young girls provide no strong
evidence for the hypothesis that child removal leads to changes in household environment
that mediate the impacts of removal that we detect.
6.3

Analysis of Siblings
A final explanation that we consider is that girls and boys respond differently to the same

treatment of home removal during early life. This hypothesis is motivated by prior research
that finds that biology and social processes drive development advantages for young girls in
terms of language, temperament, and socioemotional development (Else-Quest et al., 2006;
Zahn-Waxler et al., 2008; Schore, 2017; Magnuson et al., 2016). To test for gender differences
in the impact of removal per se, we compare impacts of removal between brothers and sisters
from the same household.
Table 8 reports estimated impacts of removal, where the sample is limited to young
cannot rule out large positive or large negative impacts. The exception is for school-level value added where
we can rule out positive or negative impacts that are larger than one tenth of a standard deviation in test
scores.
57
Note that all perpetrators in the sample are associated with an investigation where DCYF has substantiated the report of abuse or neglect. The data contain no information on the residence of a perpetrator.
58
There are at least three reasons why charges and incarceration of parent perpetrators might increase
following removal. First, during the hearing and removal decision process, evidence may be uncovered which
would trigger an adult criminal charge that results in post-investigation incarceration. Second, the DCYF
system could affect reporting behavior because parents must regularly check-in with case management staff
(who are not CPIs) as part of a child reunification plan. Third, removal may adversely affect the mental
health of perpetrators resulting in changes in criminal behavior.
59
The unit of analysis is parent who is listed as a perpetrator. We split the analysis by gender of the
investigated child. If a parent is associated with siblings of the opposite sex, they are included in the results
for both young girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B).

28

(investigated before age 6) siblings, and the specification is a modified version of Equation 1
that interacts removal with indicators for gender. In this approach, the IV model has two
endogenous variables, which are interaction terms for removal and an indicator for being a
girl and for removal and an indicator for being a boy.60 While the results are imprecisely
estimated, Columns 1 and 2 and show the point estimates for young girls who have siblings
are nearly identical to the effects in Table 3 for the main sample. In contrast to these large
and positive estimates, the effects for boy siblings are negative. We obtain a similar pattern
of results in Columns 3 and 4 when we restrict the sample to the oldest sibling of the opposite
gender per family. Due to the large standard errors in our estimates, we cannot statistically
reject the hypothesis of equal effects for young siblings. Overall, we interpret these results as
suggestive evidence that young girls are more positively and significantly impacted by home
removal than their male counterparts.
7

Impacts of Removal on Outcomes for Older Children

Finally, we study effects of removal on the older children who are investigated at ages
6-18. We study post-investigation schooling outcomes and the following (post-investigation)
later-life outcomes: having any juvenile court conviction by age 18, graduation from high
school by age 19, teen birth, and enrollment in any post secondary institution by age 22.61
In contrast to the analysis in Section 5, we study these later-life outcomes only for older
children since a child investigated before age six will generally not be old enough to be at
risk for a given later-life outcome by the end of the period covered by the data sources.
Appendix Table A14 reports tests of randomization for the sample of older children.
These results provide an important caveat for the analysis of impacts of removal for older
60

The first stage has two instruments, which are the leave-out measures interacted with gender. The
second and first stages both control for the main effects for gender.
61
Details on the sample construction and outcomes are provided in Appendix B. Note that we construct
schooling outcomes of older children (i.e., the measures of grade retention, special education participation
(IEP), and average absences) using only school year observations that occur after the year that an investigation concludes. Most test score results for older children are based on a sample of children investigated at
ages 6-12 because children investigated at later ages will not be enrolled in the testing grades (3-8).

29

children. Column 2 shows that we reject the null hypothesis at the one percent level in a joint
test of the statistical significance of case characteristics in the sample of older investigated
girls.62 To help assess whether this imbalance threatens the validity of IV estimates for older
children, we conduct two tests, which we discuss in detail in Appendix E. First, we find that
estimates of the impact of removal are not sensitive to the inclusion of case characteristic
controls. This provides some reassurance to the extent that observed case characteristics are
correlated with unobserved explanatory variables (Altonji et al., 2005). Second, unlike the
analysis for young children, we can analyze test scores in the periods before an investigation
begins for older children. This placebo analysis finds that there are no statistically significant
impacts on pre-investigation test scores.
Appendix Table A15 reports estimates for the impact of removal for older girls (Panel
A) and older boys (Panel B). Across outcomes, we find no statistically significant impacts
of removal for either gender. The estimates are relatively imprecise, and we cannot rule out
substantively large positive or negative impacts. For older girls, the point estimates do not
consistently point to beneficial impacts. For example, the results suggest removal increases
the likelihood of having a teenage birth and improves enrollment in a post secondary institution. The results for older boys provide some weak, but suggestive evidence that removal
has detrimental effects in terms of reduced test scores, increases in adverse school experience,
and lower likelihoods of both high-school graduation or post secondary attendance.
Comparing the estimates for older and younger girls allows us to examine whether the
effects of removal are specific to age. For girls investigated at older ages, the estimated
impact on average test scores is -0.230 standard deviations. Despite the large standard error
associated with this estimate, we can reject that the hypothesis that the effects for older and
younger girls are equal at the five percent significance level. This pattern is consistent with
the literature on the importance of early-life interventions (Cunha et al., 2006; Heckman,
2006; Cunha and Heckman, 2007; Almond and Currie, 2011; Heckman et al., 2013; Bharadwaj
62
The regression estimates show that older girls who have physical neglect or emergency cases see CPIs
who have 1.5 and 1.6 percentage points higher removal tendencies.

30

et al., 2013; Heckman and Mosso, 2014; Elango et al., 2015; Almond et al., 2017; Chyn et al.,
2019).
As a final discussion point, we benchmark our results relative to prior studies of home
removal. Using a similar IV approach, Doyle (2007) studied older children investigated at
ages 5 to 15 in Illinois. He found statistically significant and large positive impacts on teenage
pregnancy (29 percentage points) and juvenile delinquency (47 percentage points) for older
girls.63 In our sample, the positive point estimate for teenage pregnancy for older girls is
much smaller in magnitude, but the standard error is sufficiently large that we cannot rule
out the effect size observed by Doyle (2007).
8

Conclusion

Child protection authorities in the U.S. remove more than 200,000 children from their
homes annually (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2016). Despite this fact,
there is relatively little research on the causal impacts of this policy. This paper provides
new evidence on the effects of home removal by using comprehensive administrative data
on educational outcomes. We focus on children removed before the age of six and examine
heterogeneous effects by gender. Our analysis is motivated by the growing literature showing
the importance of early-life interventions (Cunha et al., 2006; Heckman, 2006; Cunha and
Heckman, 2007; Almond and Currie, 2011; Heckman et al., 2013; Heckman and Mosso, 2014;
Elango et al., 2015; Almond et al., 2017) and differential responses by gender (Heckman
et al., 2010; Bertrand and Pan, 2013; Heckman et al., 2013; Elango et al., 2015; Conti et al.,
2016; Heckman et al., 2017; Garcia et al., 2018; Autor et al., 2019).
We use the removal tendency of quasi-experimentally assigned child protective investigators as an instrument for removal. We find that removal causes statistically significant and
substantial improvements in performance on standardized exams for young girls, as well as
63

Warburton et al. (2014) also study crime for older investigated children and use an IV strategy based
on caseworkers. They find imprecise IV estimates of the impact of foster care placement. Lindquist and
Santavirta (2014) conduct a descriptive study and find that, among children placed at ages 13-18, foster care
is associated with higher crime.

31

decreases in grade retention and special education needs. Estimates show similar impacts
on test scores starting from the first testing grade and onward, which suggests a permanent
change in ability prior to when a young removed girl begins taking exams. We do not find significant positive impacts of removal for young boys. In contrast, we find insignificant results
with point estimates implying, if anything, negative impacts on test scores. We show that
our results are robust to several checks, including allowing for heterogeneity in investigator
removal tendency by case and child characteristics.
We investigate several potential explanations for the gendered pattern of treatment effects. An analysis of siblings suggests that young girls benefit from removal while their
brothers do not. We find no evidence of notable differences in the complier characteristics of
girls and boys, and we find that young children of both genders have similar foster care and
school experiences subsequent to removal. Overall, this suggests that the impact of home
removal per se varies based on the gender of young children.
Our findings echo prior studies of schooling and social program interventions that find
girls respond positively and significantly to interventions aimed at improving educational
opportunity or community environment (Hastings et al., 2006; Kling et al., 2007; Angrist
and Lavy, 2009; Heckman et al., 2013; Deming et al., 2014; Hoynes et al., 2016). In addition,
our finding that increases in academic performance accrue to girls removed before age six
contributes to the literature on the importance of early-life conditions (Cunha et al., 2006;
Heckman, 2006; Cunha and Heckman, 2007; Almond and Currie, 2011; Heckman et al., 2013;
Heckman and Mosso, 2014; Elango et al., 2015; Almond et al., 2017).
Given the prevalence of home removal, we conclude by emphasizing the need for additional
research on the impacts of home removal. To the best of our knowledge, we provide the first
estimates of the causal impacts of home removal at early ages. Prior work by Doyle (2007;
2008) provides compelling evidence on the causal effects for children removed at older ages.
Future research that uses administrative data from other states can help facilitate a more
complete understanding of the effects of removal on neglected and abused children.
32

References
Abadie, Alberto. (2003). ‘Semiparametric instrumental variable estimation of treatment
response models’, Journal of Econometrics 113(2), 231–263.
Aizer, Anna and Doyle, Joseph J. (2015). ‘Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and
Future Crime: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges*’, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics .
Aizer, Anna, Eli, Shari, Ferrie, Joseph and Lleras-Muney, Adriana. (2016).
‘The Long-Run Impact of Cash Transfers to Poor Families’, American Economic Review
106(4), 935–971.
Almond, Douglas and Currie, Janet. (2011), Chapter 15 - Human capital development before age five, in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter and David Card., eds,
‘Handbook of Labor Economics’, Vol. 4, Part B, Elsevier, pp. 1315–1486.
Almond, Douglas, Currie, Janet and Duque, Valentina. (2017), Childhood Circumstances and Adult Outcomes: Act II, NBER Working Paper 23017, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Almond, Douglas, Doyle, Joseph J., Kowalski, Amanda E. and Williams, Heidi.
(2010). ‘Estimating Marginal Returns to Medical Care: Evidence from At-risk Newborns’,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(2), 591–634.
Altonji, Joseph G., Elder, Todd E. and Taber, Christopher R. (2005). ‘Selection
on Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools’,
Journal of Political Economy 113(1), 151–184.
Anderson, Michael L. (2008). ‘Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects
of Early Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early
Training Projects’, Journal of the American Statistical Association 103(484), 1481–1495.
Angrist, Joshua D., Imbens, Guido W. and Rubin, Donald B. (1996). ‘Identification of Causal Effects Using Instrumental Variables’, Journal of the American Statistical
Association 91(434), 444–455.
Angrist, Joshua and Lavy, Victor. (2009). ‘The Effects of High Stakes High School
Achievement Awards: Evidence from a Randomized Trial’, American Economic Review
99(4), 1384–1414.
Autor, David, Figlio, David, Karbownik, Krzysztof, Roth, Jeffrey and Wasserman, Melanie. (2019). ‘Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and
Educational Outcomes’, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11(3), 338–381.
Belloni, A., Chen, D., Chernozhukov, V. and Hansen, C. (2012). ‘Sparse Models and
Methods for Optimal Instruments With an Application to Eminent Domain’, Econometrica
80(6), 2369–2429.
33

Belloni, Alexandre, Chernozhukov, Victor and Hansen, Christian. (2014). ‘HighDimensional Methods and Inference on Structural and Treatment Effects’, The Journal of
Economic Perspectives 28(2), 29–50.
Benjamini, Yoav, Krieger, Abba M. and Yekutieli, Daniel. (2006). ‘Adaptive Linear
Step-up Procedures that Control the False Discovery Rate’, Biometrika 93(3), 491–507.
Benson, Cassandra and Fitzpatrick, Maria D. (2018), Beyond Reading, Writing, and
Arithmetic: The Role of Teachers and Schools in Reporting Child Maltreatment.
Berger, Lawrence M., Bruch, Sarah K., Johnson, Elizabeth I., James, Sigrid and
Rubin, David. (2009). ‘Estimating the “Impact” of Out-of-Home Placement on Child
Well-Being: Approaching the Problem of Selection Bias’, Child Development 80(6), 1856–
1876.
Berger, Lawrence M., Cancian, Maria, Han, Eunhee, Noyes, Jennifer and RiosSalas, Vanessa. (2014). ‘Children’s Academic Achievement and Foster Care’, Pediatrics
pp. 2014–2448.
Bertrand, Marianne and Pan, Jessica. (2013). ‘The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior’, American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 5(1), 32–64.
Bharadwaj, Prashant, Loken, Katrine and Neilson, Christopher. (2013). ‘Early
Life Health Interventions and Academic Achievement’, American Economic Review
103(5), 1862–1891.
Bhuller, Manudeep, Dahl, Gordon B., Løken, Katrine V. and Mogstad, Magne.
(2016), Incarceration, Recidivism and Employment, NBER Working Paper 22648, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bhuller, Manudeep, Dahl, Gordon B., Loken, Katrine V. and Mogstad, Magne.
(2018). ‘Intergenerational Effects of Incarceration’, AEA Papers and Proceedings 108, 234–
240.
Bound, John, Jaeger, David A. and Baker, Regina M. (1995). ‘Problems with Instrumental Variables Estimation When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the
Endogeneous Explanatory Variable is Weak’, Journal of the American Statistical Association 90(430), 443–450.
Brinch, Christian N., Mogstad, Magne and Wiswall, Matthew. (2017). ‘Beyond
LATE with a Discrete Instrument’, Journal of Political Economy 125(4), 985–1039.
Campbell, Frances, Conti, Gabriella, Heckman, James J., Moon, Seong Hyeok,
Pinto, Rodrigo, Pungello, Elizabeth and Pan, Yi. (2014). ‘Early Childhood Investments Substantially Boost Adult Health’, Science 343(6178), 1478–1485.
Carneiro, Pedro, Heckman, James J and Vytlacil, Edward J. (2011). ‘Estimating
Marginal Returns to Education’, American Economic Review 101(6), 2754–2781.
34

Chetty, Raj, Friedman, John N. and Rockoff, Jonah E. (2014). ‘Measuring the
Impacts of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates’, American
Economic Review 104(9), 2593–2632.
Chetty, Raj, Hendren, Nathaniel and Katz, Lawrence F. (2016). ‘The Effects of
Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment’, American Economic Review 106(4), 855–902.
Chyn, Eric. (2018). ‘Moved to Opportunity: The Long-Run Effects of Public Housing
Demolition on Children’, American Economic Review 108(10), 3028–3056.
Chyn, Eric, Gold, Samantha and Hastings, Justine S. (2019), The Returns to Earlylife Interventions for Very Low Birth Weight Children, NBER Working Paper 25753, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Conti, Gabriella, Heckman, James J. and Pinto, Rodrigo. (2016). ‘The Effects of
Two Influential Early Childhood Interventions on Health and Healthy Behaviour’, The
Economic Journal 126(596), F28–F65.
Cornelissen, Thomas, Dustmann, Christian, Raute, Anna and Schönberg, Uta.
(2016). ‘From LATE to MTE: Alternative methods for the evaluation of policy interventions’, Labour Economics 41, 47–60.
Cunha, Flavio and Heckman, James. (2007). ‘The Technology of Skill Formation’,
American Economic Review 97(2), 31–47.
Cunha, Flavio, Heckman, James J., Lochner, Lance and Masterov, Dimitriy V.
(2006), Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation, in E. Hanushek and
F. Welch., eds, ‘Handbook of the Economics of Education’, Vol. 1, Elsevier, pp. 697–812.
Currie, Janet, Mueller-Smith, Michael and Rossin-Slater, Maya. (2018), Violence
while in Utero: The Impact of Assaults During Pregnancy on Birth Outcomes, NBER
Working Paper 24802, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Currie, Janet and Tekin, Erdal. (2012). ‘Understanding the Cycle: Childhood Maltreatment and Future Crime’, The Journal of Human Resources 47(2), 509–549.
Dahl, Gordon B., Kostøl, Andreas Ravndal and Mogstad, Magne. (2014). ‘Family
Welfare Cultures’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4), 1711–1752.
Deming, David J., Hastings, Justine S., Kane, Thomas J. and Staiger, Douglas O.
(2014). ‘School Choice, School Quality, and Postsecondary Attainment’, American Economic Review 104(3), 991–1013.
Dobbie, Will, Goldin, Jacob and Yang, Crystal S. (2018). ‘The Effects of Pretrial
Detention on Conviction, Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges’, American Economic Review 108(2), 201–240.

35

Dobbie, Will, Grönqvist, Hans, Niknami, Susan, Palme, Mårten and Priks,
Mikael. (2018), The Intergenerational Effects of Parental Incarceration, Technical Report w24186, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Doyle, Joseph J. (2007). ‘Child protection and child outcomes: Measuring the effects of
foster care’, The American Economic Review 97(5), 1583–1610.
Doyle, Joseph J. (2008). ‘Child Protection and Adult Crime: Using Investigator Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of Foster Care’, Journal of Political Economy 116(4), 746–
770.
Doyle, Joseph J. (2013). ‘Causal effects of foster care: An instrumental-variables approach’, Children and Youth Services Review 35(7), 1143–1151.
Doyle, Joseph J and Aizer, Anna. (2018). ‘Economics of Child Protection: Maltreatment, Foster Care, and Intimate Partner Violence’, Annual Review of Economics 10, 87–
108.
Elango, Sneha, Garcı́a, Jorge Luis, Heckman, James J and Hojman, Andrés.
(2015), Early Childhood Education, Working Paper 21766, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Else-Quest, Nicole M., Hyde, Janet Shibley, Goldsmith, H. Hill and Hulle, Carol
Ann Van. (2006). ‘Gender differences in temperament: a meta-analysis.’, Psychological
bulletin 132(1), 33–72.
Eren, Ozkan and Mocan, Naci. (2017), Juvenile Punishment, High School Graduation
and Adult Crime: Evidence from Idiosyncratic Judge Harshness, NBER Working Paper
23573, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Fantuzzo, John W. and Mohr, Wanda K. (1999). ‘Prevalence and Effects of Child
Exposure to Domestic Violence’, The Future of Children 9(3), 21–32.
Garces, Eliana, Thomas, Duncan and Currie, Janet. (2002). ‘Longer-Term Effects of
Head Start’, The American Economic Review 92(4), 999–1012.
Garcia, Jorge Luis, Heckman, James J. and Ziff, Anna L. (2018). ‘Gender differences
in the benefits of an influential early childhood program’, European Economic Review
109, 9–22.
Hastings, Justine S. (2019), Fact-Based Policy: How Do State and Local Governments
Accomplish It?, Technical report, The Hamilton Project (Brookings Institution).
Hastings, Justine S., Howison, Mark, Lawless, Ted, Ucles, John and White, Preston. (2019), Unlocking Data to Improve Public Policy, preprint, Open Science Framework.
Hastings, Justine S, Kane, Thomas J and Staiger, Douglas O. (2006). ‘Gender
and Performance: Evidence from School Assignment by Randomized Lottery’, American
Economic Review 96(2), 232–236.
36

Heckman, James J, Holland, Margaret L, Makino, Kevin K, Pinto, Rodrigo and
Rosales-Rueda, Maria. (2017), An Analysis of the Memphis Nurse-Family Partnership
Program, NBER Working Paper 23610, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Heckman, James J. and Mosso, Stefano. (2014). ‘The Economics of Human Development and Social Mobility’, Annual Review of Economics 6(1), 689–733.
Heckman, James J. and Vytlacil, Edward. (2005). ‘Structural Equations, Treatment
Effects, and Econometric Policy Evaluation1’, Econometrica 73(3), 669–738.
Heckman, James J. and Vytlacil, Edward J. (1999). ‘Local Instrumental Variables
and Latent Variable Models for Identifying and Bounding Treatment Effects’, Proceedings
of the national Academy of Sciences 96(8), 4730–4734.
Heckman, James J. and Vytlacil, Edward J. (2007), Chapter 70 Econometric Evaluation of Social Programs, Part I: Causal Models, Structural Models and Econometric
Policy Evaluation, in James J. Heckman and Edward E. Leamer., ed., ‘Handbook
of Econometrics’, Vol. 6, Part B, Elsevier, pp. 4779–4874.
Heckman, James, Moon, Seong Hyeok, Pinto, Rodrigo, Savelyev, Peter and
Yavitz, Adam. (2010). ‘Analyzing social experiments as implemented: A reexamination
of the evidence from the HighScope Perry Preschool Program’, Quantitative Economics
1(1), 1–46.
Heckman, James, Pinto, Rodrigo and Savelyev, Peter. (2013). ‘Understanding the
Mechanisms Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes’, American Economic Review 103(6), 2052–2086.
Heckman, James, Tobias, Justin L. and Vytlacil, Edward. (2001). ‘Four Parameters
of Interest in the Evaluation of Social Programs’, Southern Economic Journal 68(2), 211–
223.
Heckman, J. J. (2006). ‘Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged
Children’, Science 312(5782), 1898–1900.
Holt, Stephanie, Buckley, Helen and Whelan, Sadhbh. (2008). ‘The impact of exposure to domestic violence on children and young people: A review of the literature’, Child
Abuse & Neglect 32(8), 797–810.
Hoynes, Hilary, Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore and Almond, Douglas. (2016).
‘Long-Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net’, American Economic Review
106(4), 903–934.
Imbens, Guido W. and Angrist, Joshua D. (1994). ‘Identification and Estimation of
Local Average Treatment Effects’, Econometrica 62(2), 467.
Isen, Adam, Rossin-Slater, Maya and Walker, W. Reed. (2017). ‘Every Breath You
Take—Every Dollar You’ll Make: The Long-Term Consequences of the Clean Air Act of
1970’, Journal of Political Economy 125(3), 848–902.
37

Kane, Thomas J., Rockoff, Jonah E. and Staiger, Douglas O. (2008). ‘What does
certification tell us about teacher effectiveness? Evidence from New York City’, Economics
of Education Review 27(6), 615–631.
Kling, Jeffrey R. (2006). ‘Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings’, The American Economic Review 96(3), 863–876.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Liebman, Jeffrey B. and Katz, Lawrence F. (2007). ‘Experimental
Analysis of Neighborhood Effects’, Econometrica 75(1), 83–119.
Lindquist, Matthew J. and Santavirta, Torsten. (2014). ‘Does placing children in
foster care increase their adult criminality?’, Labour Economics 31, 72–83.
Ludwig, Jens and Miller, Douglas L. (2007). ‘Does Head Start Improve Children’s
Life Chances? Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design’, Quarterly Journal of
Economics .
Magnuson, Katherine A., Kelchen, Robert, Duncan, Greg J., Schindler, Holly S.,
Shager, Hilary and Yoshikawa, Hirokazu. (2016). ‘Do the effects of early childhood
education programs differ by gender? A meta-analysis’, Early Childhood Research Quarterly 36, 521–536.
Mueller-Smith, Mike. (2015), The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration.
Rhode Island. (2016), ‘Rhode Island General Law. The Rhode Island Board of Education
Act, Stat. 16-19-1’.
Rhode Island Department of Children, Youth, and Families. (2018), ‘Policy Manual’.
Sampat, Bhaven and Williams, Heidi L. (2015), How Do Patents Affect Follow-On
Innovation? Evidence from the Human Genome, NBER Working Paper 21666, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Schore, Allan N. (2017). ‘All Our Sons: The Developmental Neurobiology and Neuroendocrinology of Boys at Risk’, Infant Mental Health Journal 38(1), 15–52.
U.S. Census. (2018), ‘S0901: Children Characteristics, 2012-16 American Community Survey 5-year Estimates.’.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2016), ‘Child Maltreatment’.
Warburton, William P., Warburton, Rebecca N., Sweetman, Arthur and Hertzman, Clyde. (2014). ‘The Impact of Placing Adolescent Males into Foster Care on
Education, Income Assistance, and Convictions: Impact of Placing Adolescent Males into
Foster Care’, Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d’économique 47(1), 35–
69.
Wildeman, Christopher and Waldfogel, Jane. (2014). ‘Somebody’s Children or Nobody’s Children? How the Sociological Perspective Could Enliven Research on Foster
Care’, Annual Review of Sociology 40(1), 599–618.
38

Wolfe, David A., Crooks, Claire V., Lee, Vivien, McIntyre-Smith, Alexandra and
Jaffe, Peter G. (2003). ‘The Effects of Children’s Exposure to Domestic Violence: A
Meta-Analysis and Critique’, Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review 6(3), 171–187.
Zahn-Waxler, Carolyn, Shirtcliff, Elizabeth A. and Marceau, Kristine. (2008).
‘Disorders of Childhood and Adolescence: Gender and Psychopathology’, Annual Review
of Clinical Psychology 4(1), 275–303.

39

9

Tables and Figures

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for in the DCYF Investigations Sample
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Sample: Young Children (Age < 6)

Demographics

Female
White
Black
Hispanic
Other race
Age

Family

Married couple
Unmarried couple
Single/other
English language
Other language

Allegation

Neglect
Physical neglect
Physical abuse

Reporter

Professional
Family/friend
Other reporter

Invest. Type

Emergency
Immediate
Routine

Post Invest.

Removed
Days, Foster Care

N

All

Non-removed

Removed

p-value

0.466
(0.499)
0.588
(0.492)
0.168
(0.374)
0.162
(0.369)
0.082
(0.274)
1.81
(1.762)
0.123
(0.328)
0.293
(0.455)
0.584
(0.493)
0.972
(0.166)
0.028
(0.166)
0.795
(0.404)
0.065
(0.246)
0.140
(0.347)
0.825
(0.380)
0.127
(0.333)
0.048
0.214
0.104
(0.305)
0.572
(0.495)
0.325
(0.468)
0.202
(0.402)
92.520
(268.119)

0.463
(0.499)
0.590
(0.492)
0.160
(0.367)
0.170
(0.376)
0.079
(0.270)
1.984
(1.760)
0.137
(0.343)
0.304
(0.460)
0.560
(0.496)
0.970
(0.171)
0.030
(0.171)
0.812
(0.391)
0.059
(0.236)
0.129
(0.336)
0.827
(0.378)
0.125
(0.330)
0.049
(0.215)
0.054
(0.227)
0.607
(0.488)
0.339
(0.473)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)

0.479
(0.500)
0.581
(0.494)
0.198
(0.398)
0.131
(0.337)
0.091
(0.288)
1.125
(1.593)
0.069
(0.253)
0.251
(0.434)
0.680
(0.466)
0.978
(0.146)
0.022
(0.146)
0.729
(0.444)
0.088
(0.283)
0.183
(0.387)
0.816
(0.388)
0.137
(0.344)
0.047
(0.212)
0.298
(0.457)
0.433
(0.496)
0.269
(0.444)
1.000
(0.000)
457.278
(434.224)

0.125

13,834

11,035

2,799

0.364
0.000
0.000
0.050
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.010
0.010
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.189
0.093
0.753
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for young children (investigated before age 6) in the
DCYF sample. Columns 2 and 3 report statistics for non-removed and removed children, respectively.
1
Column 4 reports the p-value from a t-test of difference
in means for Columns 2 and 3.

40

Table 2: Tests of Random Case Assignment and First-Stage Results
Panel A. First-stage Impact of CPI Removal Tendency
(1)

(2)

Dependent variable:
CPI removal tendency

Sample
Mean of dependent variable
Case controls
Investigation year FE
N

(3)

Removed (=1)
0.584***
(0.056)

0.539***
(0.078)

0.622***
(0.075)

Young Children
0.202
Yes
Yes
13,834

Young Girls
0.208
Yes
Yes
6,449

Young Boys
0.197
Yes
Yes
7,385

Panel B. Tests of Randomization
(1)
Dependent variable:
Chi-squared statistic
p-value of joint significance
Sample
Case controls
Investigation year FE
N

(2)

(3)

CPI removal tendency
16.500
0.284

12.950
0.451

16.640
0.216

Young Children
Yes
Yes
13,834

Young Girls
Yes
Yes
6,449

Young Boys
Yes
Yes
7,385

Notes: This table summarizes tests of random case assignment (Panel A) and the first-stage impact of CPI
removal tendency (Panel B). Column 1 reports results for all young children (investigated before age six).
Columns 2 and 3 report results for young female and male children, respectively. In Panel A, the joint
test statistics are from an OLS regression of CPI removal tendency on the set of case characteristics listed
in Table 1. All models include controls for case characteristics and investigation year fixed effects. The
chi-square test-statistic and p-value reported are from a test for joint significance of all variables except
investigation year fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI
level. In Panel B, the first-stage results are from an OLS regression of removal on CPI removal tendency,
controls for case characteristics, and investigation year fixed effects (FE). Removed is an indicator for home
removal at the child’s first investigation. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family
and CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

41

Table 3: Impact of Removal on Test Scores of Young Children
Panel A. Young Girls (Age < 6)
(1)
Dependent variable:

(2)

Average z-score

(3)

(4)

Math z-score

(5)

(6)

Reading z-score

Removed (= 1)

1.334**
(0.586)

1.366**
(0.575)

1.540***
(0.591)

1.544***
(0.578)

1.141*
(0.625)

1.201**
(0.612)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

-0.392
-1.741
No
Yes
15.444
10,391
2,721

-0.392
-1.741
Yes
Yes
17.152
10,391
2,721

-0.460
-1.922
No
Yes
14.657
10,418
2,722

-0.460
-1.922
Yes
Yes
16.321
10,418
2,722

-0.328
-1.550
No
Yes
15.952
10,430
2,725

-0.328
-1.550
Yes
Yes
17.681
10,430
2,725

(4)

(5)

(6)

42

Panel B. Young Boys (Age < 6)
(1)

1

Dependent variable:

(2)

Average z-score

(3)

Math z-score

Reading z-score

Removed (= 1)

0.051
(0.596)

-0.059
(0.561)

0.013
(0.584)

-0.123
(0.570)

0.109
(0.652)

0.024
(0.606)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

-0.571
-0.931
No
Yes
10.492
12,345
3,148

-0.571
-0.931
Yes
Yes
14.238
12,345
3,148

-0.518
-0.867
No
Yes
10.543
12,387
3,149

-0.518
-0.867
Yes
Yes
14.154
12,387
3,149

-0.630
-1.022
No
Yes
10.638
12,406
3,149

-0.630
-1.022
Yes
Yes
14.474
12,406
3,149

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on test scores for young girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B). We standardize scores at
the grade-year level and construct a yearly panel of tests taken in grades 3-8 during school years 2005-2016. All results are from two-stage least squares
models with a leave-out measure of CPI removal tendency as an instrument for removal. Columns 1-2 report impacts for the average of standardized
math and reading scores. Columns 3-4 and 5-6 report results for reading scores and math scores, respectively. All models include investigation year
fixed effects (FE). Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05;
*p < 0.10.

Table 4: Impact of Removal on Additional Schooling Outcomes of Young Children
Panel A. Young Girls (Age < 6)
Dependent variable:
Removed (= 1)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Retention (=1)

IEP (=1)

Absences

School index

-0.228**
(0.108)

-0.441*
(0.248)

-5.629
(5.218)

-0.918**
(0.400)

0.043
0.291
Yes
Yes
21.007
2,778
2,778

0.258
0.726
Yes
Yes
21.007
2,778
2,778

11.982
10.039
Yes
Yes
21.007
2,778
2,778

0.000
0.694
Yes
Yes
21.007
2,778
2,778

43

Panel B. Young Boys (Age < 6)

1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Retention (=1)

IEP (=1)

Absences

School index

Removed (= 1)

-0.053
(0.114)

-0.201
(0.241)

-0.550
(4.859)

-0.228
(0.327)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.064
0.239
Yes
Yes
16.159
3,225
3,225

0.428
0.759
Yes
Yes
16.159
3,225
3,225

12.380
12.955
Yes
Yes
16.159
3,225
3,225

0.000
0.483
Yes
Yes
16.159
3,225
3,225

Dependent variable:

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on schooling outcomes for young girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B). Columns
1-3 report impacts on measures of whether an investigated child was ever retained, ever participated in special education (i.e., has an IEP), and
the average number of days absent during grades 3-8. Column 4 reports results for an index that is constructed from standardized measures of the
retention, IEP, and absence measures. All results are from two-stage least squares models with the leave-out measure of CPI removal tendency as an
instrument for removal. All models include investigation year fixed effects (FE). Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family
and CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Table 5: Impact of Removal on School Enrollment and Test-taking
Panel A. Young Girls (Age < 6)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Dependent variable:

Enrolled, Ages 8-13

Tested, Ages 8-13

Removed (= 1)

0.134
(0.243)

0.072
(0.209)

0.094
(0.231)

0.045
(0.201)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.633
0.595
No
Yes
25.734
17,774
4,101

0.633
0.595
Yes
Yes
33.848
17,774
4,101

0.570
0.537
No
Yes
25.734
17,774
4,101

0.570
0.537
Yes
Yes
33.848
17,774
4,101

(3)

(4)

Panel B. Young Boys (Age < 6)
(1)

(2)

Dependent variable:

Enrolled, Ages 8-13

Tested, Ages 8-13

Removed (= 1)

-0.388
(0.248)

-0.369
(0.242)

-0.336
(0.255)

-0.317
(0.247)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.639
0.946
No
Yes
25.647
21,293
4,750

0.639
0.946
Yes
Yes
31.068
21,293
4,750

0.564
0.740
No
Yes
25.647
21,293
4,750

0.564
0.740
Yes
Yes
31.068
21,293
4,750

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on public school enrollment and test-taking
outcomes for young girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B). These measures are contained in a panel for
investigated children that covers ages 8-13 (i.e., the ages associated with grades 3-8). All results are from
two-stage least squares models with the leave-out measure of CPI removal tendency as an instrument for
removal. All models include investigation year fixed effects (FE). Standard errors in parentheses are two-way
clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

44

Table 6: Impact of Removal on Foster Care Outcomes
Panel A. Young Girls (Age < 6)

Dependent variable:
Removed (= 1)

Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Days in any
foster care

Days w/
relative

Days w/
foster family

Days in
group home

Days in
other care

Adopted
(=1)

334.804***
(116.263)

203.456***
(60.046)

124.461
(109.533)

10.094*
(5.616)

-3.207
(13.520)

0.026
(0.068)

Yes
Yes
46.552
6,449
6,449

Yes
Yes
46.552
6,449
6,449

Yes
Yes
46.552
6,449
6,449

Yes
Yes
46.552
6,449
6,449

Yes
Yes
46.552
6,449
6,449

Yes
Yes
46.552
6,449
6,449

Panel B. Young Boys (Age < 6)

45

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1

Days in any
foster care

Days w/
relative

Days w/
foster family

Days in
group home

Days in
other care

Adopted
(=1)

398.959***
(97.514)

151.555***
(50.360)

181.317**
(71.145)

27.485*
(14.922)

38.603***
(14.688)

-0.019
(0.054)

Yes
Yes
67.242
7,385
7,385

Yes
Yes
67.242
7,385
7,385

Yes
Yes
67.242
7,385
7,385

Yes
Yes
67.242
7,385
7,385

Yes
Yes
67.242
7,385
7,385

Yes
Yes
67.242
7,385
7,385

Dependent variable:
Removed (= 1)

Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on foster care placement outcomes for young girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B).
All foster care outcomes are associated with the child’s first investigation, which implies the means of placement outcomes are zero for non-removed
children. Days in foster care is a measure of total time spent in foster care as a result of the child’s first investigation. We split days in foster care into
four categories: days spent with relatives, days spent with a foster family (non-relatives), days spent in a group home, and other days spent in foster
care. Adoption is an indicator for whether the child is adopted upon discharge from foster care. All models include investigation year fixed effects
(FE). Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Table 7: Impact of Removal on School Mobility and School-level Characteristics
Panel A. Young Girls (Age < 6)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Moved Schools (=1)

Value-Added

Avg. Test Scores

% Minority

% FRL

Removed (= 1)

-0.017
(0.114)

0.041
(0.034)

0.095
(0.179)

0.098
(0.189)

-0.033
(0.158)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.351
0.417
Yes
Yes
21.239
11,314
2,836

-0.046
-0.086
Yes
Yes
21.285
11,380
2,852

-0.118
-0.284
Yes
Yes
21.285
11,380
2,852

0.469
0.377
Yes
Yes
21.371
11,418
2,855

0.578
0.652
Yes
Yes
21.371
11,418
2,855

Dependent variable:

46

Panel B. Young Boys (Age < 6)
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Moved Schools (=1)

Value-Added

Avg. Test Scores

% Minority

% FRL

Removed (= 1)

-0.021
(0.108)

-0.022
(0.032)

-0.285
(0.230)

0.251
(0.152)

0.211
(0.135)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.362
0.410
Yes
Yes
24.941
13,662
3,299

-0.050
-0.045
Yes
Yes
31.068
13,759
3,321

-0.158
-0.247
Yes
Yes
25.677
13,759
3,321

0.468
0.447
Yes
Yes
25.866
13,796
3,325

0.576
0.511
Yes
Yes
25.866
13,796
3,325

1

(1)
Dependent variable:

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on school mobility and school-level characteristics for young girls (Panel A) and young boys
(Panel B). All measures are based on a panel of observations covering grades 3-8. All models include investigation year fixed effects (FE). Standard
errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Table 8: Impact of Removal on Test Scores of Young Siblings
(2)

(1)
Dependent variable:

(3)

(4)

Average z-score

Removed (= 1) × Female

1.475
(1.152)

1.336
(0.961)

1.170
(1.096)

0.964
(0.876)

Removed (= 1) × Male

-0.108
(0.892)

-0.262
(0.827)

-0.241
(0.973)

-0.420
(0.917)

All

All

Oldest

Oldest

-0.496
-0.671

-0.496
-0.671

-0.506
-0.661

-0.506
-0.661

-1.504
-0.230

-1.504
-0.230

-1.317
-0.201

-1.317
-0.201

No
Yes
3.333
5,562
1,347

Yes
Yes
4.168
5,562
1,347

No
Yes
3.615
4,776
1,158

Yes
Yes
4.531
4,776
1,158

Sample
Mean of dependent variable
Female
Male
Complier mean if not removed
Female
Male
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on test score outcomes for young girls and young
boys who are siblings. Results are based on estimating IV models where there are two endogenous variables
which are interactions between removal status gender dummy variables. The first-stage has two instruments
which are the leave-out measures interacted with the same gender dummy variables. Columns 1 and 2 report
impacts using all young siblings. Columns 3 and 4 report estimates using a sample that only includes the
oldest (below age 6) opposite sex siblings in the young children sample. All models include investigation
year fixed effects (FE). Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level.
Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

47

Figure 1: DCYF Process for Abuse and Neglect Allegations

Investigation
authorized
Allegation
reported

Case assigned
(via rotation list)

Investigation
not authorized

Child
removed

Investigation
closed

Child not
removed

Investigation
closed

Founded
allegation
Investigation
opened
Unfounded
allegation

48
CPI
supervisor

CPS hotline workers

Field CPI

Notes: This figure illustrates the process by which an allegation of abuse or neglect is processed by DCYF in Rhode Island. See Section 2 for further
details.

1

Figure 2: CPI Removal Tendency
0.30

6.00

Density (%)

0.25

4.00

0.20
2.00

0.00

0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.20 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.30 0.32

Predicted removal rate
(Local linear first stage regression)

8.00

0.15

CPI removal tendency

Notes: This figure reports the distribution of CPI removal tendency for the sample of young children investigated by DCYF. Section 4 describes how the measure is constructed. The total number of children is
13,384, and the number of unique CPIs is 102.

49

A

Appendix Tables and Figures

Table A1: Tests of Random Case Assignment (Full Regression Results), Young Children Sample
(1)
Dependent variable:
Female
Black
Hispanic
Other race
Age
Married couple
Unmarried couple
English language
Neglect
Physical neglect
Professional reporter
Family/friend reporter
Emergency investigation
Immediate investigation
Chi-squared statistic
p-value of joint significance
Sample
Mean of CPI removal tendency
Investigation year FE
N

(2)

(3)

CPI removal tendency
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.002)
0.002
(0.001)
0.003
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.003
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.003)
0.001
(0.002)
0.002
(0.001)

-0.002
(0.002)
0.004*
(0.002)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.002
(0.004)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.007
(0.005)
0.000
(0.003)
0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.003)
0.001
(0.002)
0.005*
(0.003)
0.000
(0.000)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.004
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.004
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.003)
0.000
(0.003)
0.002
(0.003)
0.002
(0.002)

16.500
0.284
Young Children
0.178
Yes
13,834

12.950
0.451
Young Girls
0.177
Yes
6,449

16.640
0.216
Young Boys
0.179
Yes
7,385

Notes: This table reports regression results testing the random assignment of cases to CPIs. Results
are from a regression of CPI removal tendency on the case characteristics listed and investigation year
fixed effects. Column 1 reports estimates for all young children. Columns 2 and 3 report estimates
for young female and male children, respectively. The chi-square statistic and p-value reported are
from an test of joint significance of all variables except investigation year fixed effects (FE). Standard
errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as
***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Appendix - 1

Table A2: Exclusion Restriction Tests
Panel A. Removed Young Girls (Age < 6)

Dependent variable:
CPI removal tendency

Mean of dependent variable
Case controls
Investigation year FE
N

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Days in any
foster care

Number of
placements

Placed with
relative (=1)

Police Notified
(=1)

-262.755
(261.601)

0.898
(1.002)

-0.250
(0.233)

0.059
(0.094)

457.079
Yes
Yes
1,341

2.078
Yes
Yes
1,341

0.363
Yes
Yes
1,341

0.958
Yes
Yes
1,341

Panel B. Removed Young Boys (Age < 6)

Dependent variable:
1

CPI removal tendency

Mean of dependent variable
Case controls
Investigation year FE
N

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Days in any
foster care

Number of
placements

Placed with
relative (=1)

Police Notified
(=1)

-78.021
(240.844)

1.248
(1.113)

-0.405
(0.264)

-0.024
(0.090)

457.461
Yes
Yes
1,458

2.233
Yes
Yes
1,458

0.353
Yes
Yes
1,458

0.966
Yes
Yes
1,458

Notes: The sample for this analysis is restricted to removed children. The table reports regression results testing whether placement and other investigation outcomes of removed children are correlated with
CPI removal tendency. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level.
Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Appendix - 2

Table A3: First-Stage Impact of CPI Removal Tendency, by Subgroup
(1)
Dependent variable:

(2)

(3)

Removed (= 1)

White

0.570***
(0.076)
[0.200]
N =8,136

0.432***
(0.102)
[0.206]
N =3,768

0.686***
(0.098)
[0.194]
N =4,368

Black

0.411**
(0.205)
[0.238]
N =2,321

0.493**
(0.241)
[0.242]
N =1,103

0.340
(0.283)
[0.235]
N =1,218

Hispanic

0.566***
(0.186)
[0.163]
N =2,247

0.730***
(0.239)
[0.171]
N =1,032

0.408*
(0.238)
[0.156]
N =1,215

Married couple

0.648***
(0.162)
[0.113]
N =1,699

0.556**
(0.221)
[0.120]
N =743

0.715***
(0.204)
[0.108]
N =956

Unmarried couple

0.578***
(0.124)
[0.173]
N =4,054

0.561***
(0.189)
[0.179]
N =1,942

0.586***
(0.147)
[0.168]
N =2,112

Single/other

0.592***
(0.080)
[0.236]
N =8,081

0.555***
(0.099)
[0.240]
N =3,764

0.624***
(0.115)
[0.232]
N =4,317

Neglect

0.563***
(0.071)
[0.186]
N =10,997

0.496***
(0.096)
[0.190]
N =5,225

0.623***
(0.093)
[0.181]
N =5,772

Physical abuse

0.776***
(0.180)
[0.264]
N =1,940

0.827***
(0.282)
[0.281]
N =833

0.757***
(0.231)
[0.251]
N =1,107

Professional reporter

0.615***
(0.063)
[0.200]
N =11,407

0.575***
(0.088)
[0.205]
N =5,280

0.646***
(0.082)
[0.196]
N =6,127

Family/friend reporter

0.493***
(0.184)
[0.218]
N =1,759

0.535**
(0.246)
[0.218]
N =849

0.482*
(0.254)
[0.218]
N =910

Immediate

0.787***
(0.082)
[0.153]
N =7,911

0.744***
(0.107)
[0.155]
N =3,595

0.828***
(0.106)
[0.152]
N =4,316

Routine

0.372***
(0.116)
[0.168]
N =4,490

0.335**
(0.148)
[0.177]
N =2,193

0.419***
(0.143)
[0.158]
N =2,297

Young Children
Yes
Yes

Young Girls
Yes
Yes

Young Boys
Yes
Yes

Sample:
Case controls
Investigation year FE

Notes: This table summarizes the first-stage relationship between removal and CPI removal tendency for subgroups. Subgroups are based on the characteristics listed in Table 1. The subgroups
for physical neglect, other reporter, and emergency cases are not reported because these have relatively few (< 1500) observations. We also omit reporting results based on language since 97 percent
of cases are English language. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family
and CPI level. Means for removal for each subgroup are reported in brackets. Significance reported
as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Appendix - 3

Table A4: First-Stage Impact of CPI Removal Tendency, Reverse Sample Calculation
for Subgroups
(1)
Dependent variable:
White

Black

Hispanic

Married couple

Unmarried couple

Single/other

Neglect

Physical abuse

Professional reporter

Family/friend reporter

Immediate

Routine

Sample
Case controls
Investigation year FE

(2)

(3)

Removed (=1)
0.365***
(0.061)
[0.200]
N =8,107
0.392**
(0.160)
[0.238]
N =2,321
0.488***
(0.177)
[0.163]
N =2,247
0.545***
(0.143 )
[0.113]
N =1,698
0.565***
(0.114)
[0.173]
N =4,051
0.546 ***
(0.102)
[0.236]
N =8,029
0.362***
(0. 074)
[0.185]
N =10,916
0.741***
(0.180)
[0.264]
N =1,940
0.304***
(0.054)
[0.199]
N =11,267
0.471**
(0.191)
[0.217]
N =1,758
0.464***
(0.092)
[0.153]
N =7,873
0.311***
(0.093)
[0.167]
N =4,485

0.296***
(0.077)
[0.206]
N =3,759
0.486**
(0.233)
[0.242]
N =1,103
0.731***
(0.241)
[0.171]
N =1,032
0.415**
(0.198)
[0.120]
N =743
0.540***
(0.169)
[0.179]
N =1,941
0.593***
(0.120)
[0.240]
N =3,740
0.340***
(0.086)
[0.190]
N =5,192
0.753***
(0.266)
[0.281]
N =833
0.316***
(0.079)
[0.204]
N =5,218
0.491**
(0.234)
[0.218]
N =849
0.470***
(0.105)
[0.155]
N =3,577
0.272**
(0.121)
[0.177]
N =2,191

0.429***
(0.083)
[0.195]
N =4,348
0.293
(0.215)
[0.235]
N =1,218
0.261
(0.233)
[0.156]
N =1,215
0.636***
(0.183)
[0.108]
N =955
0.580***
(0.136)
[0.168]
N =2,110
0.510***
(0.138)
[0.232]
N =4,289
0.386***
(0.095)
[0.181]
N =5,724
0.741***
(0.225)
[0.251]
N =1,107
0.289***
(0.079)
[0.195]
N =6,049
0.494*
(0.252)
[0.217]
N =909
0.459***
(0.113)
[0.152]
N =4,296
0.361***
(0.119)
[0.158]
N =2,294

Young Children
Yes
Yes

Young Girls
Yes
Yes

Young Boys
Yes
Yes

Notes: This table summarizes the first-stage relationship between removal and CPI removal tendency for different subgroups. The instrument is recalculated for each subgroup using all observations outside the subgroup (“reverse” sample definition). Subgroups are based on the characteristics
listed in Table 1. The subgroups for physical neglect, other reporter, and emergency cases are not
reported because these have relatively few (< 1500) observations. We also omit reporting results
based on language since 97 percent of cases are English language. Standard errors in parentheses are
two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Means for removal for each subgroup are reported
in brackets. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Appendix - 4

Table A5: Characteristics of Compliers for Young Girls and Young Boys
Young Girls (Age < 6)

Demographics

White
Black
Hispanic
Other race

Family

Married couple
Unmarried couple
Single/other
English language
Other language

Allegation

Neglect
Physical neglect
Physical abuse

Reporter

Professional
Family/friend
Other reporter

Investigation

Emergency
Immediate
Routine

Young Boys (Age < 6)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

P (X = x)

P (X = x|complier)

P (X = x)

P (X = x|complier)

0.584
(0.007)
0.171
(0.005)
0.160
(0.005)
0.085
(0.004)
0.115
(0.004)
0.301
(0.006)
0.584
(0.006)
0.970
(0.002)
0.030
(0.002)
0.810
(0.005)
0.061
(0.003)
0.129
(0.004)
0.819
(0.005)
0.132
(0.004)
0.050
(0.003)
0.102
(0.004)
0.557
(0.006)
0.340
(0.005)

0.426
(0.080)
0.201
(0.070)
0.231
(0.056)
0.128
(0.048)
0.113
(0.048)
0.286
(0.071)
0.629
(0.078)
0.992
(0.023)
0.013
(0.022)
0.756
(0.068)
0.053
(0.042)
0.196
(0.061)
0.899
(0.069)
0.106
(0.057)
0.013
(0.036)
0.071
(0.056)
0.750
(0.084)
0.218
(0.078)

0.591
(0.006)
0.165
(0.004)
0.165
(0.004)
0.079
(0.003)
0.129
(0.004)
0.286
(0.005)
0.585
(0.006)
0.973
(0.002)
0.027
(0.002)
0.782
(0.005)
0.069
(0.003)
0.150
(0.004)
0.830
(0.005)
0.123
(0.004)
0.047
(0.003)
0.105
(0.003)
0.584
(0.006)
0.311
(0.005)

0.627
(0.060)
0.111
(0.049)
0.119
(0.050)
0.142
(0.036)
0.137
(0.037)
0.268
(0.055)
0.600
(0.056)
0.946
(0.025)
0.052
(0.020)
0.793
(0.040)
0.022
(0.004)
0.187
(0.045)
0.864
(0.055)
0.101
(0.042)
0.041
(0.024)
0.041
(0.050)
0.763
(0.068)
0.226
(0.061)

Notes: This table reports characteristics of compliers in the DCYF sample. We define compliers as children
whose removal decision would have been different had they been assigned the most strict versus the most
lenient investigator. To identify compliers, we follow Abadie (2003), Dahl et al. (2014), and Dobbie, Goldin
and Yang (2018). Let z denote the maximum value of the instrument (the most strict investigator) and z
1
denote the minimum value of the instrument
(the most lenient investigator). We can then express the share
of compliers in our sample as: pc = P r(Removed = 1|Zi = z) − P r(Removed = 1|Zi = z). In practice,
we assign the top percentile of our instrument to z and the bottom percentile of our instrument to z. As
discussed in Dahl et al. (2014) and Dobbie, Goldin and Yang (2018), the share of compliers can be directly
estimated as pc = α, where α is the coefficient on the instrument from the first stage regression (Equation 2).
In this table, we estimate the share of compliers in each subgroup (row) and report the likelihood of being
a complier in each subgroup. Standard errors in parentheses are obtained using 500 bootstrap replications.
See Appendix C for further details.

Appendix - 5

Table A6: Impact of Removal on Additional Schooling Outcomes of Young Children (No Case Controls)
Panel A. Young Girls (Age < 6)
Dependent variable:
Removed (= 1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Retention (=1)

IEP (=1)

Absences

School index

-0.234**
(0.111)

-0.442*
(0.246)

-4.645
(5.416)

-0.892**
(0.304)

0.043
0.291
No
Yes
19.743
2,778
2,778

0.258
0.726
No
Yes
19.743
2,778
2,778

11.982
10.039
No
Yes
19.743
2,778
2,778

0.000
0.694
No
Yes
19.743
2,778
2,778

Panel B. Young Boys (Age < 6)
1

Appendix - 6

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

(1)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Retention (=1)

IEP (=1)

Absences

School index

Removed (= 1)

-0.047
(0.116)

-0.192
(0.236)

-0.976
(5.003)

-0.228
(0.326)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.064
0.239
No
Yes
12.677
3,225
3,225

0.428
0.759
No
Yes
12.677
3,225
3,225

12.380
12.955
No
Yes
12.677
3,225
3,225

0.000
0.483
No
Yes
12.677
3,225
3,225

Dependent variable:

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on schooling outcomes for young girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B). This table differs
from Table 4 because the specifications omit controls for case characteristics. Columns 1-3 report impacts on measures of whether an investigated
child was ever retained, ever participated in special education (i.e., has an IEP), and the average number of days absent during grades 3-8. Column 4
reports results for an index that is constructed from standardized measures of the retention, IEP, and absence measures. All results are from two-stage
least squares models with the leave-out measure of CPI removal tendency as an instrument for removal. All models include investigation year fixed
effects (FE). Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05;
*p < 0.10.

Table A7: Impact of Removal on Additional Schooling Outcomes of Young Children (Grades K-8)
Panel A. Young Girls (Age < 6)
Dependent variable:
Removed (= 1)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Retention (=1)

IEP (=1)

Absences

School index

-0.360***
(0.138)

-0.365*
(0.215)

-4.227
(4.912)

-0.803**
(0.325)

0.119
0.442
Yes
Yes
27.367
3,655
3,655

0.273
0.718
Yes
Yes
27.367
3,655
3,655

12.789
11.298
Yes
Yes
27.367
3,655
3,655

0.000
0.609
Yes
Yes
27.367
3,655
3,655

1

Appendix - 7

Panel B. Young Boys (Age < 6)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Retention (=1)

IEP (=1)

Absences

School index

Removed (= 1)

0.041
(0.164)

0.038
(0.205)

1.516
(4.476)

0.120
(0.315)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.153
0.238
Yes
Yes
26.889
4,261
4,261

0.462
0.562
Yes
Yes
26.889
4,261
4,261

12.871
10.087
Yes
Yes
26.889
4,261
4,261

0.000
0.042
Yes
Yes
26.889
4,261
4,261

Dependent variable:

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on schooling outcomes for young girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B). This table
differs from Table 4 because the measures are based on data from grades K-8 (rather than grades 3-8). Note that the sample size increases because
we include children who have not yet reached grade 3 by the end of the schooling records. Columns 1-3 report impacts on measures of whether an
investigated child was ever retained, ever participated in special education (i.e., has an IEP), and the average number of days absent during grades 3-8.
Column 4 reports results for an index that is constructed from standardized measures of the retention, IEP, and absence measures. All results are from
two-stage least squares models with the leave-out measure of CPI removal tendency as an instrument for removal. All models include investigation
year fixed effects (FE). Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01;
**p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Table A8: Adjusted p-values for Impact of Removal on Outcomes of Young Children
Panel A. Young Girls (Age < 6)

Dependent variable (below):
Average z-score

(1)

(2)

(3)

2SLS
Estimate

p-value

FRD q-value

0.017

0.070

0.034

0.070

0.075

0.101

0.281

0.281

1.366**
(0.575)
-0.288**
(0.108)
-0.441*
(0.248)
-5.629
(5.218)

Retention (=1)
IEP (=1)
Absences

Panel B. Young Boys (Age < 6)

Dependent variable (below):
Average z-score
Retention (=1)
IEP (=1)
Absences

(1)

(2)

(3)

2SLS
Estimate

p-value

FRD q-value

0.916

0.917

0.642

0.917

0.404

0.917

0.910

0.917

-0.059
(0.561)
-0.053
(0.114)
-0.201
(0.241)
-0.550
(4.869)

Notes: This table reports adjusted p-values for the impact of removal on outcomes of young children. Column
1 of Panels A and B reproduce the results for young girls and young boys from Tables 3 and 4. Columns 2
and 3 report per-comparison (pairwise) and false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted p-values (“q-values”). The
adjustment takes into account the fact that we tested the four listed outcomes for the gender subgroup. The
FDR-adjusted p-values control for the number of false positives when multiple hypotheses are tested. These
adjusted p-values are calculated using the two-step procedure in Benjamini et al. (2006).

Appendix - 8

Table A9: Robustness to Changes in Sample Definition
Panel A. Young Girls
(1)

(2)

(3)

Dependent variable:

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Average z-score
1.366**
(0.575)

1.339**
(0.587)

1.395*
(0.760)

0.917
(1.123)

1.136*
(0.587)

1.183**
(0.530)

1.017**
(0.563)

Sample

Main
sample
-0.392
-1.741
Yes
Yes
17.152
10,391
2,721

CPI > 100
cases
-0.391
-1.552
Yes
Yes
16.958
9,909
2,597

CPI > 200
cases
-0.401
-1.630
Yes
Yes
10.419
8,024
2,117

CPI > 300
cases
-0.392
-1.741
Yes
Yes
3.229
4,696
1,379

With sex
cases
-0.383
-1.545
Yes
Yes
12.442
11,028
2,873

Ages 0-4

Ages 0-6

-0.385
-1.692
Yes
Yes
15.064
8,683
2,290

-0.388
-1.526
Yes
Yes
17.771
12,216
3,189

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

Panel B. Young Boys
(1)

1

Appendix - 9

Removed (= 1)

(2)

(3)

Dependent variable:

Average z-score

Removed (= 1)

-0.059
(0.561)

-0.061
(0.619)

-0.526
(0.794)

-1.325
(1.283)

-0.234
(0.570)

-0.877
(0.833)

0.003
(0.428)

Sample

Main
sample
-0.571
-0.931
Yes
Yes
14.238
12,345
3,148

CPI > 100
cases
-0.571
-0.942
Yes
Yes
11.729
11,756
2,997

CPI > 200
cases
-0.568
-0.871
Yes
Yes
10.360
9,767
2,488

CPI > 300
cases
-0.583
-0.907
Yes
Yes
3.125
5,694
1,588

With sex
cases
-0.568
-0.755
Yes
Yes
15.177
12,685
3,222

Ages 0-4

Ages 0-6

-0.593
-0.974
Yes
Yes
7.110
8,245
2,156

-0.573
-0.886
Yes
Yes
22.618
14,592
3,721

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on the average of standardized test scores for young girls (Panel A) and young boys
(Panel B). For comparison, Column 1 reproduces estimates from our main sample and preferred specification (as reported in Table 3). Columns 2-7
report results using alternative samples. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as
***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Table A10: Robustness to Estimating Impacts using ML-IV Approach
Panel A. Young Girls (Age < 6)
Test score outcomes

Schooling outcomes

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Dependent variable:

Average
z-score

Math
z-score

Reading
z-score

School
index

Retention
(=1)

IEP
(=1)

Removed (= 1)

1.071**
(0.482)

1.213**
(0.489)

0.940*
(0.508)

-0.837**
(0.335)

- 0.229**
(0.102)

-0.365*
(0.214)

Mean of dependent variable
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

-0.392
Yes
Yes
27.042
10,196
2,672

-0.459
Yes
Yes
26.322
10,221
2,673

0.001
Yes
Yes
27.448
10,234
2,676

-0.059
Yes
Yes
14.560
2,768
2,768

0.043
Yes
Yes
14.560
2,768
2,768

0.258
Yes
Yes
14.560
2,768
2,768

Panel B. Young Boys (Age < 6)
Test score outcomes

1

Appendix - 10

(1)

Schooling outcomes

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Dependent variable:

Average
z-score

Math
z-score

Reading
z-score

School
index

Retention
(=1)

IEP
(=1)

Removed (= 1)

-0.389
(0.559)

-0.564
(0.593)

-0.19
(0.563)

-0.234
(0.291)

-0.083
(0.303)

-0.060
(0.239)

Mean of dependent variable
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

-0.572
Yes
Yes
33.427
12,220
3,108

-0.520
Yes
Yes
33.502
12,262
3,109

-0.630
Yes
Yes
34.435
12,281
3,109

0.001
Yes
Yes
18.211
3,209
3,209

0.064
Yes
Yes
18.211
3,209
3,209

0.428
Yes
Yes
18.211
3,209
3,209

Notes: This table reports results based on an IV approach where the CPI removal rate to vary with case characteristics. See Sections 5.5 and
Appendix D for details on the IV calculations. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported
as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Table A11: Robustness to Estimating Impacts using Alternative Instruments
Panel A. Young Girls
(1)
Dependent variable:
Removed (= 1)

IV Version
Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

(2)

(3)

(4)

Average z-score
1.366**
(0.575)

1.082**
(0.451)

All Cases
All Cases
8-year periods All (16) years
-0.392
-1.741
Yes
Yes
17.152
10,391
2,721

-0.392
-1.741
Yes
Yes
15.029
10,391
2,721

1.480**
(0.620)

1.040**
(0.429)

First Cases
First Cases
8-year periods All (16) years
-0.392
-1.741
Yes
Yes
17.809
10,374
2,718

-0.392
-1.741
Yes
Yes
18.303
10,391
2,721

(3)

(4)

Panel B. Young Boys
(1)
Dependent variable:
Removed (= 1)

IV Version
Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

(2)

Average z-score
-0.059
(0.561)

-0.527
(0.624)

All Cases
All Cases
8-year periods All (16) years
-0.571
-0.931
Yes
Yes
14.238
12,345
3,148

-0.571
-0.931
Yes
Yes
12.612
12,345
3,148

-0.249
(0.505)

-0.856
(0.601)

First Cases
First Cases
8-year periods All (16) years
-0.571
-0.931
Yes
Yes
16.445
12,330
3,143

-0.571
-0.931
Yes
Yes
15.272
12,345
3,148

Notes: This table reports results based on an IV approach where the CPI removal rate is calculated over
different investigations and time periods. Column 1 reproduces the estimates from our preferred measure,
which calculates removal across all of a CPI’s cases (first-time and repeat) during an 8-year window. Column
2 reports estimates using a measure based on all cases (first and subsequent) and the entire sample period
(2000-2015). Columns 3 reports estimates using a measure based on first cases and an 8-year window.
Column 4 reports estimates using a measure based on first cases and the entire sample period (2000-2015).
Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as
***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Appendix - 11

Table A12: Impact of Removal on Outcomes of Young Children, By Minority Status
Panel A. Young Girls (Age < 6)

Dependent variable:
Removed (= 1)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Sample
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Average
z-score

School index

Average
z-score

School index

1.091**
(0.485)

-0.639*
(0.358)

1.593
(1.196)

-1.323**
(0.725)

0.015
-1.424

-0.022
0.401

-0.261
-1.698

0.020
1.030

Minority

Minority

Not Minority

Not Minority

Yes
Yes
9.972
4,652
1,255

Yes
Yes
11.331
1,272
1,272

Yes
Yes
6.751
5,739
1,466

Yes
Yes
7.631
1,506
1,506

Panel B. Young Boys (Age < 6)
Average
z-score

School index

Average
z-score

School index

Removed (= 1)

0.305
(0.595)

0.238
(0.440)

-0.57
(1.211)

-0.967*
(0.580)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed

-0.732
-1.206

0.009
0.103

-0.442
-0.505

-0.007
1.036

Minority

Minority

Not Minority

Not Minority

Yes
Yes
8.600
5,468
1,430

Yes
Yes
8.723
1,467
1,467

Yes
Yes
4.567
6,877
1,718

Yes
Yes
7.449
1,758
1,758

Dependent variable:

Sample
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on test score outcomes for young girls and young
boys by minority status (non-white versus white). Columns 2 and 4 reports results for a school index measure
that is constructed from standardized measures of the retention, IEP, and absence measures. All results are
from two-stage least squares models with the leave-out measure of CPI removal tendency as an instrument
for removal. All models include investigation year fixed effects (FE). Standard errors in parentheses are
two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Appendix - 12

Table A13: Impact of Removal on Criminal Justice Outcomes for Parent Perpetrators
Panel A. Parent Perpetrators of Young Girls (Age < 6)
(1)

(2)

Charged/Incar.,
2-year Post

Charged/Incar.,
4-year Post

Removed (= 1)

-0.024
(0.190)

0.021
(0.197)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.212
0.254
Yes
Yes
29.331
6,252
6,252

0.266
0.270
Yes
Yes
29.331
6,252
6,252

Dependent variable:

Panel B. Parent Perpetrators of Young Boys (Age < 6)
(1)

(2)

Charged/Incar.,
2-year Post

Charged/Incar.,
4-year Post

Removed (= 1)

-0.004
(0.102)

-0.113
(0.105)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.202
0.251
Yes
Yes
55.868
7,141
7,141

0.255
0.360
Yes
Yes
55.868
7,141
7,141

Dependent variable:

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on criminal justice outcomes for the parents of
young girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B). Information on parent perpetrators comes from DCYF
records. In the sample of young investigated children, 95 percent of children have at least one perpetrator
who is a parent. As described in Section 3, we construct samples of parent perpetrators of young girls and
young boys and measure whether parents are charged or incarcerated within 2-year and 4-year windows after
the conclusion of an investigation. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and
CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Appendix - 13

Table A14: Tests of Random Case Assignment (Full Regression Results), Older Children
Sample
(1)
Dependent variable:
Female
Black
Hispanic
Other race
Age
Married couple
Unmarried couple
English language
Neglect
Physical neglect
Professional reporter
Family/friend reporter
Emergency investigation
Immediate investigation
Chi-squared statistic
p-value of joint significance
Sample
Mean of CPI removal tendency
Investigation year FE
N

(2)

(3)

CPI removal tendency
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.002)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.007*
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.003)
0.014**
(0.006)
0.002
(0.001)

0.000
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.001
(0.003)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.005*
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.002)
0.015***
(0.003)
-0.005*
(0.004)
-0.004
(0.003)
0.016**
(0.007)
0.000
(0.002)

0.001
(0.003)
0.003
(0.004)
-0.000
(0.004)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.004)
0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.004)
0.000
(0.004)
0.013
(0.008)
0.004
(0.001)

23.640
0.051
Older Children
0.177
Yes
13,120

31.590
0.003
Older Girls
0.177
Yes
6,643

12.740
0.469
Older Boys
0.177
Yes
6,477

Notes: This table reports regression results testing the random assignment of cases to CPIs. Results are
from a regression of CPI removal tendency on the case characteristics listed and investigation year fixed
effects. Column 1 reports estimates for all older children (investigated at ages 6-18). Columns 2 and 3 report
estimates for young female and male children, respectively. The chi-square statistic and p-value reported are
from an test of joint significance of all variables except investigation year fixed effects (FE). Standard errors
in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01;
**p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Appendix - 14

1

Table A15: Impact of Removal on Outcomes of Older Children
Panel A. Older Girls (Age ≥ 6)

School-age outcomes

Later-life outcomes

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Average z-score

School Index

Delinquent (=1)

HS Grad. (=1)

Teen Birth (=1)

College (=1)

Removed (= 1)

-0.230
(0.582)

-0.373
(0.326)

-0.030
(0.261)

-0.010
(0.187)

0.089
(0.162)

0.133
(0.222)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.068
-0.337
Yes
Yes
22.129
7,517
2,581

-0.005
0.138
Yes
Yes
35.092
3,029
3,029

0.055
0.101
Yes
Yes
9.296
1,829
1,829

0.351
0.263
Yes
Yes
49.213
4,136
4,136

0.194
0.210
Yes
Yes
33.333
2,956
2,956

0.303
0.032
Yes
Yes
38.718
3,326
3,326

Dependent variable:

1

Appendix - 15

Panel B. Older Boys (Age ≥ 6)

School-age outcomes

Later-life outcomes

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Average z-score

School Index

Delinquent (=1)

HS Grad. (=1)

Teen Birth (=1)

College (=1)

Removed (= 1)

-0.237
(0.429)

0.323
(0.216)

-0.016
(0.156)

-0.144
(0.157)

0.119
(0.115)

-0.127
(0.187)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.053
-0.414
Yes
Yes
30.911
8,838
2,965

-0.003
-0.297
Yes
Yes
34.273
3,440
3,440

0.147
0.096
Yes
Yes
24.610
2,185
2,185

0.319
0.385
Yes
Yes
44.810
3,770
3,770

0.059
0.000
Yes
Yes
26.860
3,025
3,025

0.239
0.367
Yes
Yes
41.145
2,953
2,953

Dependent variable:

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on outcomes for older girls (Panel A) and older boys (Panel B). Older is defined as being
investigated at ages 6 or later (up to age 18). All results are from two-stage least squares models with the leave-out measure of CPI removal tendency
as an instrument for removal. The school index is constructed based on standardized measures of whether an investigated child was ever retained, ever
participated in special education (i.e., has an IEP), and the average number of days absent during grades 3-8. All outcomes are measured after the
first investigation. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered at the family and CPI level. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05;
*p < 0.10.

Figure A1: Impact of Removal on Test Scores of Young Children, by Grade

-1

Avg. Std. Test Score (Dep. Var)
0
1
2
3

4

(a) Young Girls

3

4

5

Grade

Removal Est.

6

7

8

95-pct Conf. Interval

-2

Avg. Std. Test Score (Dep. Var)
-1
0
1
2

3

(b) Young Boys

3

4

5

Grade

Removal Est.

6

7

8

95-pct Conf. Interval

Notes: These figures show results for the impact of removal on test scores estimated in separate regressions
for grades 3-8 for young girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B). All results are from two-stage least squares
models with the leave-out measure of CPI removal tendency as an instrument for removal. All models include
controls for the case characteristics in Table 1 and investigation year fixed effects. Confidence intervals are
based on standard errors that are two-way clustered at the family and CPI levels.

Appendix - 16

Figure A2: Common Support of CPI Removal Tendency
(a) Young Girls

0

2

Density
4

6

8

Common support

0

.2

.4
Propensity score
Treated

.6

.8

Untreated

(b) Young Boys

0

2

Density
4

6

8

Common support

0

.2

.4
Propensity score
Treated

.6

.8

Untreated

Notes: These figures show the distribution of the propensity score for treated (removed) and non-removed
(non-removed) children. The dashed red lines in each figure indicate the upper and the lower points of the
propensity score with common support (based on 5 percent trimming).

Appendix - 17

Figure A3: MTE for Test Scores of Young Children
(a) Young Girls

-1

0

Treatment effect
1
2

3

Marginal Treatment Effects

.1

.2
Unobserved resistance to treatment
MTE

95% CI

.3
ATE

(b) Young Boys

-2

Treatment effect
-1
0

1

Marginal Treatment Effects

.1

.2
Unobserved resistance to treatment
MTE

95% CI

.3
ATE

These figures plot MTEs for the impact of removal on young children based on a local instrumental variables
(IV) approach using a global quadratic polynomial specification for the trimmed sample with common
support. Standard errors are constructed based on 100 bootstrap replications.

Appendix - 18

B

Data Appendix

This section describes the data sources, data files, and samples that we use for the analysis
of the main text.
B.1

Data Sources

Our analysis relies on data from several administrative sources. Table B1 lists each
administrative source, files provided, and the time period covered by the associated files.
Table B1: List of Data Sources
Source

Data

Time Period

RI Dept. of Children,
Youth, and Families

Child Protective Services (CPS) files

2000-2017

– CPS report (allegations)
– substantiated investigations
– case assignments (field CPIs)
Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and
Reporting System (AFCARS)
– foster care placements
Juvenile delinquency records

2000-2017

2000-2016

– sentences to the Rhode Island Training
School (RITS)
– placement on probation
RI Dept. of Corrections

Criminal justice records

1995-2017

– criminal charges
– incarceration history
RI Dept. of Education

End-of-Year enrollment records

2003-2016

– school, enrollment dates, grade
– Individualized Education Program
(IEP), free/reduced price lunch status,
grade retention, absences
– high school graduation
Standardized testing records

2005-2016

– testing school and year
– NECAP reading and math test scores
(grades 3-8, school years 2005-2013)
– PARCC reading and math test scores
(grades 3-8, school years 2014-2016)
National Student
Clearinghouse

Postsecondary enrollment records

RI Dept. of Health

Vital records

2004-2015

– college-going
2000-2016

– teen births
RI 360 Database

Demographics

1997-2016

– birth date, gender, race

Notes: This table lists data sources, files, and the time period covered by the associated files.

Appendix - 19

B.2
B.2.1

Description of Files
Child Protective Services and foster care placement files

Child Protective Services (CPS) files (2000-2017) identify victims and perpetrators of child
abuse or neglect. These data contain the CPS reports created at the time a suspected abuse
or neglect allegation is reported via the Rhode Island (RI) Department of Children, Youth
and Families (DCYF) hotline. Note that CPS functions as the investigative arm of DCYF.
The CPS files report family structure, primarily language, reporter type, and allegation type
for each victim-perpetrator combination, and designated investigation level. The investigation and placement files include all substantiated investigations resulting from CPS reports,
as well as the assignment history of investigations to field Child Protection Investigators
(CPIs). The Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data file
contains information on all children in foster care in RI.
B.2.2

Juvenile delinquency records

The DCYF houses the Division of Juvenile Corrections, which oversees youth located at the
Rhode Island Training School (RITS) or sentenced to probation by the RI Family Court.
The RI Family Court handles wayward or delinquent offenses for youth ages 10-17, while
youth can remain at RITS through age 18. Records of juvenile delinquency (2000-2016)
contain the dates of sentencing for each person.
B.2.3

Criminal justice records

The RI Department of Corrections (DOC) records contain the population of charged and
incarcerated individuals in the state of Rhode Island (1995-2017). The dates of each unique
charge or sentence are observed, as well as the type of charge (e.g., assault, property crime)
and the total sentence length.
B.2.4

End-of-year enrollment records

The RI Department of Education (RIDE) maintains records of all students enrolled in RI
public and charter schools; we have access to data from school years 2003-04 through 2016-17.
These data include enrollment dates, grade and school attended, Individualized Education
Program status (which identifies special education status), free/reduced price lunch status,
yearly absences, and high school graduation status.

Appendix - 20

B.2.5

Standardized testing records

RIDE reports standardized mathematics and reading testing results for enrolled students
in grades 3-8. Rhode Island administered the New England Common Assessment Program
(NECAP) test from school years 2005-06 to 2013-14 and the Partnership for Assessment of
Readiness for College and Careers (PARCC) test from 2014-15 to 2016-17. Participation
rates for standardized exams in RI have historically been high (more 95 percent of students
take exams). In 2014, participation rates fell to roughly 90 percent, but rose to previous
levels by 2016.
B.2.6

Post-secondary enrollment records

The National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) reports post-secondary enrollment dates for RI
high school students (2004-2015), regardless of high school completion.
B.2.7

Vital (birth) records

The RI Department of Health (DOH) vital (birth) records contain all Rhode Island births
(2000-2016) and include identifiers for the mother and father, as well as mother’s date of
birth.
B.2.8

Demographics

The RI 360 Database joins records associated with an individual across a range of social
programs and government services (see Hastings et al. (2019)). The database provides demographic information (birth date, gender, and race) for all children in the DCYF sample
born between 1982 and 2015 and appearing in administrative records between 1997 and 2016.
B.3
B.3.1

Samples and Key Outcomes
Sample of DCYF Investigated Children

We use CPS records to construct a sample of children that CPS investigates. As an initial
step, we link alleged abuse or neglect investigation records to a file containing assignment
records. This allows us to determine the Child Protective Investigator (CPI) assigned to
each investigation, and whether the assignment was via the rotation list (see Section 2).
We also link investigations to the AFCARS foster care placement history file to determine
whether DCYF placed investigated children into foster care as the result of an investigation.
Using the assembled CPS investigation records, we impose the following restrictions to
create a final sample of DCYF investigations.
1. Restrictions related to data cleaning:
Appendix - 21

(a) Restrict to children ages 0-18 with known demographics. We join children in
CPS case files to the RI 360 database to obtain a global identifier and verifiable
demographic information (see Hastings et al. (2019)). To be included, children
must have birth date and gender.
(b) Restrict to allegations reported via the DCYF hotline. Allegations are primarily
reported via the hotline.
(c) Restrict to allegations in which the alleged perpetrator is a family member. In the
full CPS case files, 93 percent of reports of neglect or abuse are alleged to have been
perpetrated by a member of the child’s family. The remaining 7 percent involve
DCYF providers of care or institutional abuse allegations, but these investigations
follow a different set of procedures.64
(d) Drop allegations reported after the initial DCYF hotline call.
(e) Drop allegations that do not meet the criteria for investigation (internally designated as “info/referral” reports). These reports would not be forwarded to the
Investigative Unit.
(f) Drop investigations that are unfounded (i.e., there was no preponderance of evidence that child abuse or neglect occurred).
(g) Restrict to investigations from 2000 to 2015. We remove investigations that began
after 2015 to avoid censored foster care placement outcomes.
(h) Drop children involved in at most one investigation per day. CPS may receive
more than one report of abuse or neglect on the same day for the same child; in
such instances, the child could be affiliated with more than one CPI. We exclude
these cases.
(i) Restrict to investigations matched to a CPI assignment. The link between investigations and case assignment history is imperfect, and we are sometimes unable
to identify the CPI assigned to the investigation following the initial hotline call.
We ignore these unmatched observations.
B. Restrictions related to data cleaning:
(a) Restrict to investigations assigned via the rotation list. We do not consider investigations that CPIS assigns to CPIs “off-rotation.” For example, CPIs can volunteer to take an investigation. In order to identify full-time CPIs who received
64

Following DCYF Operating Procedure 500.0035.

Appendix - 22

their daily case assignment via the rotation list, we impose additional restrictions
and do not consider investigations where CPIs were working primarily as hotline
workers or investigations where CPIs had already received their daily assignment
via the rotation list.
(b) Drop investigations based on alleged sex abuse. From conversations with DCYF,
we understand that sometimes the Investigative Unit supervisor attempts to assign sex abuse cases to CPIs of the same gender as the child. This violates random
assignment, and we therefore do not consider these investigations.
(c) Restrict to the first investigation observed for each child. We do not consider
later investigations where the child reappears in the DCYF caseload.
(d) Drop if the associated CPI’s removal tendency (see definition in Section 4) is
calculated using less than 10 cases. We impose this restriction to avoid concerns
regarding small cell sizes.
(e) Drop outliers based on the top or bottom 1 percent of CPI removal tendency.
The items listed (a) – (n) in Table B2 provide the number of distinct allegations, investigations, and children present in CPS case files after imposing the above restrictions.
The first row shows that initial CPS records contain 187,023 allegations of abuse or neglect
that are associated with 54,199 investigations and 63,351 children (more than one child can
be part of the same investigation). The subsequent rows report the remaining number of
observations after imposing data restrictions. For example, the row labeled (a) shows that
there are 176,034 allegations of abuse or neglect associated with 51,864 investigations and
58,429 children. The last two rows of Table B2 report the final statistics for the number of
younger and older children in the final DCYF investigations sample.
The key variables for children in the DCYF investigations sample are:
• Total days in foster care: Days spent in foster care as a result of the child’s first
investigation, from removal date to discharge date (also applies to days spent with
relatives, with foster families, in group homes, and in other care).
• Adopted (=1): Indicator for child adopted upon discharge from foster care.
• Number of placements: Number of foster care placements as a result of the child’s first
investigation.
• Placed with relative (=1): Indicator for any placement with a relative as a result of
the child’s first investigation.
Appendix - 23

Table B2: Summary and Statistics for Data Restrictions

Full DCYF data

(1)

(2)

(3)

Allegations

Investigations

Children

187,023

54,119

63,351

176,034
154,809
146,372
134,684
102,005
81,134
71,451
71,278
70,039

51,864
51,585
49,103
48,943
48,026
38,120
33,492
33,418
32,845

58,429
56,508
54,427
54,079
46,036
38,730
34,364
34,348
33,971

57,986
54,697
39,813
39,636
38,957

27,050
25,312
19,838
19,758
19,330

29,286
27,798
27,606
27,484
26,954

18,611
20,346

11,509
9,853

13,834
13,120

1. Restrictions related to data cleaning
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.

Restrict to children ages 0-18 with known demographics
Restrict to the first allegations reported via the DCYF hotline
Restrict to allegations involving a family
Drop additional info. allegations
Drop allegations not investigated
Drop unfounded investigations
Restrict to investigations from 2000 to 2015
Drop if child in multiple investigations on the same date
Restrict to investigations matched to a CPI assignment

2. Restrictions related to the research design

2

j.
k.
l.
m.
n.

Restrict to investigations assigned via the rotation list
Drop investigations involving sex abuse
Restrict to the first investigation for each child
Drop if the CPI removal tendency is calculated with > 10 obs.
Drop outliers in CPI removal tendency

Final DCYF investigation sample statistics
Young children (age < 6)
Older children (age ≥ 6)

Notes: This table summarizes the data restrictions and the resulting number of allegations, investigations
and children present in the CPS case files after imposing the associated restriction.

• Police notified (=1): Indicator for whether police were notified during the investigation.
Note that we focus on these outcomes measured for investigations from 2000-2015 to ensure
an uncensored foster care placement measure. For children still in care as of Jan. 1, 2018,
foster care variables (e.g., total days in care, days spent with relatives) are measured as of
Jan. 1, 2018.
B.3.2

Sample of Investigated Children with Test Scores

We standardized RIDE math and reading test scores to have a zero mean and a standard
deviation equal to one by school year and grade. We also created an average standardized
test scores that averages math and reading scores. Then, we join the DCYF sample to RIDE
standardized testing records for grades 3-8, available as a yearly panel from 2005 to 2016.
There are several reasons why a child from the DCYF sample may not have testing records
for grades 3-8. Children born before 1995 or after 2008 will not have observations in the panel
because they are either too old or too young to be enrolled in the testing grades during the
sample period. Children who enroll in private school will not have observations in the panel,
nor will children who leave the state of Rhode Island. The DCYF-RIDE matched sample
Appendix - 24

for test scores contains 2,721 young girls and 3,148 young boys who have both standardized
math and reading testing records in at least one year.
The key variables for children in the test-score sample are:
• Reading z-score: Reading test score, standardized with mean equal to zero and standard deviation equal to one at the grade and year level among the full population of
tested students in Rhode Island.
• Math z-score: Math test score, standardized with mean equal to zero and standard
deviation equal to one at the grade and year level among the full population of tested
students in Rhode Island.
• Average z-score: The mean of a child’s reading and math z-scores.
Note that we standardized these scores to maintain comparability across testing years.
B.3.3

Sample of Investigated Children with Non-test-score Outcomes (Grade Retention,
Special Education (IEP), and Absences)

We join the DCYF sample to RIDE public school enrollment records (2003-2016) to construct
additional schooling outcomes at the child level. We create measures defined for outcomes
that occur during grades 3-8. Similar to the test score sample, children born before 1989
or after 2008 will not have observations because they are too old or too young. We do
not condition on test taking when constructing these measures. The DCYF-RIDE matched
sample for non-test score outcomes contains 2,778 young girls and 3,225 young boys.
The key variables for children in the non-test score sample are listed below.
• Retention (=1): Indicator for ever repeating a grade over two consecutive years in
grades 3-8. (This is missing for students not observed in two consecutive years.)
• IEP (=1): Indicator for any enrollment in an Individualized Education Program (IEP;
i.e., special education) in grades 3-8.
• Absences: Average yearly absences (excused and unexcused) in grades 3-8. We set the
top percentile in school absences to missing as these students were likely not enrolled .
• School index: The mean of the retention, IEP, and absences outcomes, where standardize each outcome by gender and age group (e.g., those younger than 6 years old
at the time of an investigation).
For consistency, we restrict analysis in Section 5.2 to children with complete information for
retention, special education participation, and absences.
Appendix - 25

B.3.4

Sample of Investigated Children for Enrollment and Test-taking Analysis

For children in the DCYF sample, we create a panel from 2003 to 2016 that is balanced
at the child and school-year level. This panel includes children who are expected to be
enrolled in grades 3-8 based on their age. We join this panel to RIDE public school records
to determine effective enrollment in public school during grades 3-8. Similar to the test score
and other schooling samples, children who were born before 1989 or after 2008 will not have
observations because they are too old or too young. We consider only post-investigation
years and create an indicator for whether a child was enrolled in a year.
We conduct the analogous exercise with RIDE testing records to create an indicator
for whether a child took a standardized test during ages 8-13. The DCYF-RIDE matched
sample for enrollment and test-taking contains 4,101 young girls and 4,750 young boys.
The key variables for children in the enrollment and test-taking sample are:
• Enrolled (=1): Indicator for enrollment in RI public school, defined as a panel outcome
for children who are ages 8-13 or 9-14 (depending on date of birth) in a given school
year.
• Tested (=1): Indicator for having taken a standardized test, defined as a panel outcome
for chidlren who are ages 8-13 or 9-14 (depending on date of birth) in a given school
year.
B.3.5

Sample of Investigated Children for Enrollment and Test-taking Analysis

For children in the DCYF sample, we create a panel from 2003 to 2016 that is balanced at
the child and school-year level. We join this panel to RIDE public school records to generate
measures of mobility (e.g., school change) and the characteristics of schools attended during
grades 3-8. Similar to the schooling sample, children born before 1989 or after 2008 will not
have observations because they are too old or too young. If a child attends multiple schools
in a year, we consider the characteristics only of the first school attended. The DCYF-RIDE
matched sample for school mobility and characteristics contains 2,855 young girls and 3,325
young boys.
The key variables for children in the mobility and school characteristics sample are:
• Moved Schools (=1): Indicator for changing schools.
• School value-Added: We construct a school-level value-added measure that considers
tests taken by RI students in grades 4-8. We restrict to students not in the DCYF
sample. We exclude test scores for students repeating grades and for students missing
Appendix - 26

any of the baseline controls used in the value-added estimation. We estimate a school’s
value-added measure (µ) from the following student-level regression:
Aijt = Xijt β + νijt
where
νijt = µj + ijt .
For each child i in school j in year t, we observe the dependent variable Aijt as the
child’s test score (standardized by grade and year). We include a vector of control
variables Xijt that includes race, gender, special education status, English learner
status, free/reduced price lunch status, and a cubic in lagged test scores. The residual
vijt is composed of the school j’s value-added measure (µ) and an error term. To
match the students in the DCYF sample to measures of school value-added, we assign
the value-added measure to the first school attended in each of grades 3-8. The final
outcome is the mean of the school value-added measure for schools that a child attends
in grades 3-8.
• School avg. test scores: The raw average standardized test score for each school, used
in the calculation of the value-added measure described above. We restrict to students
not in the DCYF sample.
• School % Minority: Fraction of non-white students in the child’s school, measured at
the school-year level. We restrict to students not in the DCYF sample.
• School % FRL: Fraction of students with free/reduced price lunch subsidies at the
child’s school, measured at the school-year level. We restrict to students not in the
DCYF sample.
B.3.6

Samples for Older Investigated Children

We also create different samples to analyze outcomes of older investigated children (ages 6-18
at the time of an investigation). For short-run outcomes, we examine test score and non-test
score school outcomes for older children. The matched DCYF-RIDE sample for test scores
contains 2,581 older girls and 2,965 older boys who have both standardized math and reading
testing records in at least one year. The matched DCYF-RIDE sample for non-test-scores
(grade retention, participation in special education, and absences) contains 3,029 young girls
and 3,440 young boys. Note that this sample comprises only older children who have records
in years after their first investigation. For example, we do not study a child’s third grade
Appendix - 27

standardized test score if the child was enrolled and took an exam in grade 3 at the time of
the DCYF investigation. Instead, we focus on their post-investigation exams in grades 4-8.
For older children investigated at age 6-18, we also create samples to study the following
later-life outcomes: delinquency, high school graduation, teen births, and college enrollment.
We construct a different sample for each outcome, based on the time period available for
each outcome and the expected age of the investigated children during the time period.
The restrictions ensure that outcomes are uncensored and that children are observable in
the post-investigation period. (See list below for further details on restrictions for each
outcome.)
The variables used in the analysis of outcomes for older investigated children are:
• Average z-score: The mean of a child’s reading and math z-scores. All measures are
based on scores observed after the year of the investigation.
• School index: The mean of the retention, IEP, and absences outcomes, where each
outcome has been standardized by gender and age group (e.g., less than age 6 at the
time of an investigation). All of the components of the index are based on outcomes
observed after the year of the investigation.
• Delinquent (=1): Indicator for RITS enrollment or probation for wayward or delinquent
offenses at ages 12-18. Eligible children are those investigated prior to the age of 12 and
are born between 1988 and 1998 so that they are observable at ages 12-18 in juvenile
delinquency records.
• HS Grad. (=1): Indicator for graduation from a RI high school at ages 18-19. Eligible
children are investigated prior to the age of 18 and are born between 1985 and 1997 so
that they are observable at ages 18-19 in RIDE public school records.
• Teen Birth (=1): Indicator for presence in the DOH vital records as a teen parent
at ages 15-19. Eligible children are investigated prior to the age of 15 and are born
between 1985 and 1997 so that they are observable at ages 15-19 in vital records.
• College (=1): Indicator for any post-secondary educational institution enrollment at
ages 18-20. Eligible children are investigated prior to the age of 18 and are born
between 1986 and 1995 so that they are observable at ages 18-20 in NSC records.
B.3.7

Sample of Parent Perpetrators

For nearly all children in the DCYF sample (99 percent), we observe the set of perpetrators
associated with allegations of abuse or neglect. We focus on parent perpetrators, which make
Appendix - 28

up 95 percent of the perpetrators for children in the DCYF sample.65 We join the sample
of DCYF parent perpetrators to criminal justice records (1995-2017). The outcomes that
we consider are whether the perpetrators were ever charged with a crime or incarcerated
in the post-investigation years. We construct a four-year post-investigation measure that is
partially censored for perpetrators investigated in 2014 or later, as well as a two-year measure
that is uncensored.
The variables used in the analysis of perpetrators are described below.
• Charged/incar., 2-year post: Indicator for whether the parent perpetrators of abuse
or neglect were charged with a crime or incarcerated in the 2-year post-investigation
period.
• Charged/incar., 4-year post: Indicator for whether the parent perpetrators of abuse
or neglect were charged with a crime or incarcerated in the 4-year post-investigation
period.
B.4

Description and Statistics for Child Protection Investigators (CPI)

As detailed in Section 3 and Appendix B.3.1, we create a sample of XXXX young children
subject to a substantiated (founded) DCYF investigation. There are 102 child protection
investigators (CPIs) associated with these investigations. Table B3 reports statistics for
the first and repeat investigations assigned to the 102 CPIs. First refers to whether the
investigation is the initial case that we see for the associated child. We provide statistics
for first and repeat investigations because we use both in the preferred definition of our
instrumental variable. By using first and repeat investigations, we have more information to
use to infer removal tendencies.
To summarize, the average CPI handles investigations in eight of the years covered by the
DCYF records (2000-2015). The average CPI makes decisions for 387 children and removed
70 children over the entire period that we observe them. The average CPI is first observed
(in the administrative records) in 2003, and the median CPI is first observed in 2000. The
average CPI is last observed in 2011, and the median CPI is last observed in 2013.
Note that we calculate the main instrument separately for the 2000-2007 and 2008-2015
periods. Table B3 also provides the average CPI statistics in each of these eight-year periods.
(When a CPI is not observed in one of the two periods, we include a 0 in computing these
summary statistics. There are 30 CPIs who only appear in 2000-2007 period. There are 12
CPIs who only appear in the 2008-2015 period.) In each period, the average CPI handles
nearly 200 cases and removed around 35 children.
65

Note that restricting the sample to children with parent perpetrators does not imply perpetrators live
in the same location (or home) as the child.

Appendix - 29

Table B3: CPI Summary Statistics

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean

p10

p50

p90

N

All Years
# Years
# Children
# Removed Children
Year Start
Year End

8.13
387.09
69.56
2003
2010

2.00
55.00
10.00
2000
2004

8.00
304.50
60.00
2000
2013

14.00
796.00
142.00
2009
2015

102
102
102
102
102

Period 2000-2007
# Children
# Removed Children

188.51
35.81

0.00
0.00

182.50
32.50

384.00
73.00

102
102

Period 2008-2015
# Children
# Removed Children

198.58
33.75

0.00
0.00

66.00
13.50

575.00
100.00

102
102

Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the sample of 102 CPIs that are associated with the
children in the DCYF investigations sample.

B.5

Sibling Statistics

As detailed in Section 4 of the main text and Appendix Section Y, the sample created
from the DCYF investigations records contains 13,834 children investigated before age 6.
These children are associated with 9,749 cases. In 6,778 of these cases (70 percent), there is
only a single young child. The remaining 2,971 cases contain siblings. At the case level, the
average number of young children is 1.42.

1

Appendix - 30

C

Complier Calculations

This section provides details on how we estimate the characteristics and outcomes of
compliers in our sample.
C.1

Estimating Complier Characteristics

In the child protective service context, we define compliers as children whose removal
decision would have been different if they had been assigned to the most lenient (i.e., less
likely to recommend a removal from home) instead of the strictest investigator (CPI). We
follow the approaches developed by Abadie (2003), Dahl et al. (2014), and Dobbie, Goldin
and Yang (2018) to characterize compliers in the sample of investigated children.
Let z denote the maximum value of the instrument (the most strict investigator) and
z denote the minimum value of the instrument (the most lenient investigator). By the
monotonicity and independence assumptions, we define the share of compliers as:
pc = P r(Ri = 1|Zi = z) − P r(Ri = 1|Zi = z) = P r(Ri (z) > Ri (z)),

(C1)

where Ri is an indicator for removal. In practice, we assign the top percentile of our instrument to z and the bottom percentile of our instrument to z. As discussed in Dahl et al.
(2014) and Dobbie, Goldin and Yang (2018), the share of compliers can be directly estimated as pc = α, where α is the coefficient on the instrument from the first stage regression
(Equation 2).
This is useful for studying the characteristics of compliers. For binary characteristic xi ,
we know that:
P r(Ri (z) > Ri (z)|xi = 1)
P r(xi = 1|Ri (z) > Ri (z))
=
P r(xi = 1)
P r(Ri (z) > Ri (z))
E(Ri |Zi = z, xi = 1) − E(Ri |Zi = z, xi = 1)
=
E(Ri |Zi = z) − E(Ri |Zi = z)

(C2)

This expression shows that the relative characteristics of compliers can be recovered by
computing a ratio where the numerator is obtained by estimating the first stage coefficient
for the subgroup xi = 1 and constructing αx (z−z). The denominator is constructed similarly
using the entire sample to estimate a first stage equation.
C.2

Estimating Complier Outcomes When Not-Removed

Our IV estimates are the causal impact of removal for compliers (i.e., the children whose
removal decision would have been different if they had been assigned the most lenient instead
Appendix - 31

of the strictest investigator). In other words, the estimates tell us about the impact of removal
for a child on the marginal case. To better understand this impact, it is helpful to have a
benchmark comparison by estimating complier outcomes when removal does not occur. To
answer this question, we need to estimate the untreated potential outcome (denoted Yi0 ) for
compliers:
E(Y0i |Ri (z) > Ri (z))

(C3)

As discussed in Dahl et al. (2014), this can be obtained by examining children who
are assigned to lenient and strict investigators: For non-removed children (i.e., those with
Ri = 0) assigned to z, we know:

pc
E(Yi |Ri = 0, Zi = z) =
E(Y0i |Ri (z) > Ri (z))
pc + pn


pn
+
E(Y0i |Ri (z) = Ri (z) = 0)
pc + pn


(C4)

where Yi is the observed outcome, pc is the share of compliers, and pn is the share of nevertakers (i.e., children who would never be removed by the most or least strict investigator).
The outcomes for never-takers can be inferred from the outcomes of the non-removed
children who are assigned the strictest investigator:
E(Y0i |Ri (z) = Ri (z) = 0) = E(Yi |Ri = 0, Zi = z)

(C5)

Equation C5 allows us to disentangle the mixture from Equation C4. Specifically, we can
re-write Equation C4 as:



pc + pn
E(Y0i |R(z) > R(z)) =
E(Yi |Ri = 0, Zi = z)
pc
 
pn
−
E(Yi |Ri = 0, Zi = z)
pc

(C6)

To evaluate this expression, we estimate the share of always-takers, never-takers and compliers in the sample.66 With these quantities, we solve Equation C6 by estimating a linear model
for Yi and zi in the subsample of non-removed children (i.e., Ri = 0). In this specification,
we control for investigation year fixed effects.
66

Recall that pa = P r(Ri = 1|Zi = z) and pn = P r(Ri = 0|Zi = z).

Appendix - 32

D

Details on the Machine Learning Approach

As discussed in Section 5.5, we use conduct a complementary approach where we use a
machine learning (ML) approach and re-estimate the impact of removal on school outcomes.
Following Mueller-Smith (2015), this approach relaxes the monotonicity assumption from our
main identification strategy by selecting measures of CPI removal tendencies that vary with
case characteristics. We use LASSO regressions to select from a set of potential instruments
and use the selected instruments in our two-stage least squares models. The following sections
describe the implementation of this approach in more detail.
D.1

Constructing Flexible Leave-out Measures for Machine Learning

As a first step, we build removal tendency measures that vary with case characteristics.
We focus on the following six characteristics:
1. gender;
2. minority (ethnic/race) status (non-minority and minority, respectively);
3. marital status;
4. reporter type;
5. allegation type;
6. investigation level.
For each characteristic, we define mutually exclusive groups of children and calculate the
leave-out measure of removal tendency based on the CPIs tendency for the group.67 For
example, each CPI will have a leave-out removal tendency calculated separately for minority
(non-white) and non-minority (white) children. We do this for six characteristics and create
six versions of leave-out measures of removal tendency. (We do not consider any interactions
between case characteristics.)
To parallel our main measure of CPI removal tendency, we create the case characteristicspecific instruments over two eight-year periods (2000-2007 and 2008-2015). By calculating
the measure using an eight-year period, we address concerns that a CPI may see relatively few
children who have a given case characteristic in a shorter period (e.g., one year). Table D1
on page Appendix - 35 provides statistics for CPIs on the number of investigated children
67

Each removal tendency by case characteristics uses the categories included in Table 1, except for minority
status which divides white and non-white ethnicities/races into two categories. We exclude family language
as a characteristic since 97 percent of children belong to English speaking families, resulting in a tendency
measure close to our standard measure.

Appendix - 33

by types of case characteristics. For example, the first rows show that the average CPI
investigates about 387 children over the entire 2000-2015 period. In addition, the average
CPI investigated 150 and 237 and minority (non-white) and non-minority (white) children.
The means in Column 1 show that the average CPI always sees more than 10 cases for a
given type of case characteristic. Column 2 shows that some CPIs investigate relatively few
children for some of the groups (e.g., “other” types of reporters). In our implementation, we
address concerns over small-sizes by defining a given CPI tendency measure to be missing
when there are fewer than 10 children available to construct the leave-out measure. For
example, if a CPI investigates only 9 children whose cases were at the emergency level over
the relevant period, we define the instrument that varies at the investigation level to be
missing for this CPI.
D.2

Machine Learning Implementation Details

As discussed in Section 5.5, we test the robustness of our main results using an alternative
machine-learning (ML) approach that allows the instrument to vary with case characteristics.
We consider six types of case characteristics: (1) gender, (2) minority (ethnic/race) status
(non-minority and minority, respectively), (3) marital status, (4) reporter type, (5) allegation
type, and (6) investigation level. We have six potential instruments to use in our first-stage
removal equation. Following Mueller-Smith (2015), we use LASSO to select the instruments
with the greatest predictive power (Belloni et al., 2014).
In Appendix Table A10, we present our main results based on the ML approach. For each
outcome, we estimate separate LASSO regressions of removal on the six removal tendencies
by case characteristics to select instruments for use in the first stage. Each of these regressions
always specifies investigation year fixed effects and case characteristic controls as variables
always selected, as these controls are included in our two-stage least squares specifications.
Table D2 reports which instruments are selected by LASSO for each outcome for young girls
and young boys. For young girls, the test score outcomes (average, math, and reading) use
instruments that vary based on gender, minority status, and reporter type. For young girls,
the school index, retention, and IEP outcomes use instruments that vary based on gender
and minority status. For young boys, the test score outcomes (average, math, and reading)
use the instruments that vary by minority status and investigation level. For young boys, the
school index, retention and IEP outcomes use only the instrument that varies by minority
status.

Appendix - 34

Table D1: CPI Summary Statistics by Case Characteristics

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

2000-2015 (# CPIs=102)

Appendix - 35

All children
Girls
Boys
Non-Minority
Minority
Married couple
Unmarried couple
Single/Other
Neglect
Physical neglect
Physical abuse
Professional reporter
Other reporter
Family/friend reporter
Routine
Immediate
Emergency

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

2000-2007 (# CPIs=90)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

2008-2015 (# CPIs=72)

Mean

p10

p50

p90

Mean

p10

p50

p90

Mean

p10

p50

p90

387.1
193.6
193.5
236.7
150.4
63.5
90.0
233.6
288.6
14.3
69.8
309.5
20.5
57.0
111.4
237.9
37.8

55.0
27.0
28.0
34.0
18.0
8.0
8.0
40.0
38.0
1.0
11.0
37.0
4.0
9.0
14.0
33.0
7.0

304.5
149.5
152.5
196.0
108.0
56.0
55.0
202.0
208.5
12.0
64.0
227.0
19.0
49.0
81.0
186.5
32.5

796.0
405.0
395.0
488.0
352.0
129.0
221.0
468.0
624.0
31.0
141.0
629.0
43.0
115.0
235.0
534.0
70.0

213.6
108.1
105.5
137.7
75.9
40.5
35.4
137.8
149.9
9.3
44.3
164.0
14.1
35.5
60.7
128.2
24.7

47.0
24.0
21.0
28.0
16.5
5.5
4.0
33.0
33.5
0.5
9.5
32.5
1.0
7.0
11.5
26.5
6.0

201.0
103.0
101.5
134.5
68.5
38.0
30.5
131.5
138.5
9.0
43.5
157.0
11.0
35.0
55.0
123.0
23.5

390.5
196.5
199.5
258.5
139.0
75.0
69.5
262.0
267.5
18.0
85.5
310.5
27.0
66.0
119.0
237.5
46.0

281.3
139.1
142.3
163.2
118.2
39.4
83.2
158.7
221.5
8.5
43.5
233.5
11.5
36.0
81.9
176.7
22.7

12.0
5.0
6.0
8.0
2.0
2.0
3.0
5.0
10.0
1.0
1.0
12.0
0.0
0.0
4.0
8.0
1.0

205.5
98.0
106.5
119.5
83.0
26.5
56.5
121.0
151.5
6.5
37.5
164.0
8.0
27.5
55.0
130.5
19.0

638.0
390.0
328.0
351.0
275.0
94.0
193.0
349.0
505.0
20.0
96.0
517.0
27.0
88.0
174.0
393.0
50.0

Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the sample of 102 CPIs that are associated with the children in the DCYF investigations sample.
The rows provide summary statistics based on case characteristics. For example, the second row provides summary statistics for the number of girls
involved in a CPI’s cases during different time periods. Column 1 shows that the average CPI had 193 girls in their cases during 2000-2015.

Table D2: Instrument(s) Selected by LASSO for ML Approach
Young Girls (Age < 6)

Young Boys (Age < 6)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Test score
outcomes

Schooling
outcomes

Test score
outcomes

Schooling
outcomes

Gender

Yes

Yes

Minority

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Instruments by case
characteristics:

Marital status
Reporter type

Yes

Allegation type
Investigation level

Yes

Notes: This table reports the version of the removal tendencies by case characteristic instruments selected
in each LASSO regression. Columns 1 and 2 report the selected instruments (denoted by “Yes”) for the test
score and schooling outcomes of young girls. Columns 3 and 4 reports the selected instruments for the test
score and schooling outcomes of young boys. The LASSO regressions always specify investigation year fixed
effects and case characteristic controls as variables always selected.

Appendix - 36

E

Additional Discussion of Impacts for Older Children

As discussed in Section 7, we hope to estimate the causal impact of home removal for older
children investigated at ages 6-18. To assess the validity of our IV approach, we examined
the relationship CPI removal tendency and the case characteristics for older children. The
randomization test results in Appendix Table A14 show that, while we do not reject our
null hypothesis of no joint significance of case characteristics in the sample of older boys, we
reject the null hypothesis in the sample of older girls. Examining the regression results for
older girls in Column 2 shows that there are four case characteristics (out of fourteen) that
have coefficients that are significant at the 10-percent level or lower. The largest statistically
significant coefficient is equal to roughly one quarter of a standard deviation of CPI removal
tendency.
To help assess whether this imbalance threatens the validity of IV estimates for older
children, we conduct two tests. First, we examine estimates of the impact of removal with
and without controls for case characteristics. Altonji et al. (2005) suggest that assessing
whether point estimates are sensitive to the inclusion of controls can provide informative
on the extent of selection bias in some situations. In Table E1, we restrict our analysis to
older (ages 6-18) investigated children and present IV estimates for test scores, the school
index (which is based on retention, special education participation and absences) and post
secondary schooling attendance with and without case characteristic controls. For older
girls, there is no strong pattern of coefficient sensitivity for these outcomes. For example,
the point estimates for the school index are -0.398 and -0.411, respectively. The point
estimates for older boys also display no strong pattern of sensitivity, which is expected given
that the results in Appendix Table A14 provide no evidence of a relationship between case
characteristics and CPI removal tendency for older boys.
In our second test, we assess the validity of our IV approach by examining test scores in
the periods before an investigation begins for older children.68 Due to the random assignment
of cases, we expect that there should be no statistically significant relationship between
removal (and our instrument) and the “pre-treatment” test score outcomes. To conduct
this test, we construct a panel of test scores for older investigated children that includes
observations from school years that precede the year of the first investigation. For most older
removed children, we observe two test scores that precede the year of the first investigation.
For the purpose of comparison, we also include observations in the panel for the year of
the investigation and three school years that follow. Using the panel of test scores for older
children, we estimate separate IV models where the dependent variable is the average of
68

Note that we cannot conduct this type of analysis for young children because their first investigation
occurs before they enter testing grades.

Appendix - 37

standardized test scores in a given school year. We estimate seven models starting with
observations that are two years before the year of a DCYF investigation and ending with
the school year that is three years after a DCYF investigation. Figures E1 displays the
point estimates and confidence intervals associated with these estimates. The y-axis displays
the year relative to investigation. For example, the left-most point estimate for older girls
shows that there is an insignificant 0.19 standard deviation impact of removal on test scores
that occur two years prior to the investigation. Across the school years that we examine,
there are no statistically significant impacts of removal (including in the years that follow
an investigation). The results for test scores that occur two years and one year before an
investigation provide no strong evidence that CPI removal tendency is correlated with child
characteristics, although the standard errors associated with our estimates are large and the
confidence intervals span from -1 to 1 standard deviation.

Appendix - 38

Table E1: Impact of Removal on Outcomes of Older Children, Sensitivity Test
Panel A. Older Girls (Age ≥ 6)

School-age outcomes
(1)
Dependent variable:

(2)

Average z-score

Later-life outcomes

(3)

(4)

School Index

(5)

(6)

College (=1)

1

Appendix - 39

Removed (= 1)

-0.109
(0.625)

-0.230
(0.582)

-0.341
(0.347)

-0.373
(0.326)

0.155
(0.228)

0.133
(0.222)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.068
-0.337
No
Yes
24.050
7,517
2,581

0.068
-0.337
Yes
Yes
22.129
7,517
2,581

-0.005
0.138
No
Yes
37.376
3,029
3,029

-0.005
0.138
Yes
Yes
35.092
3,029
3,029

0.303
0.302
No
Yes
36.367
3,326
3,326

0.303
0.032
Yes
Yes
38.718
3,326
3,326

Dependent variable:

Panel B. Older Boys (Age ≥ 6)

Average z-score

School Index

College (=1)

Removed (= 1)

-0.250
(0.458)

-0.237
(0.429)

0.352
(0.219)

0.323
(0.216)

-0.147
(0.194)

-0.127
(0.187)

Mean of dependent variable
Complier mean if not removed
Case controls
Investigation year FE
F -statistic (instrument)
N
Individuals

0.053
-0.414
No
Yes
27.910
8,838
2,965

0.053
-0.414
Yes
Yes
30.911
8,838
2,965

-0.003
-0.297
No
Yes
30.435
3,440
3,440

-0.003
-0.297
Yes
Yes
34.273
3,440
3,440

0.239
0.367
No
Yes
37.069
2,953
2,953

0.239
0.367
Yes
Yes
41.145
2,953
2,953

Notes: This table reports results for the impact of removal on outcomes for older girls (Panel A) and older boys (Panel B). Older is defined as being
investigated at ages 6 or later (up to age 18). All results are two-stage least squares models with the standard leave-out measure of CPI removal
tendency as an instrument for removal. The school index is constructed based on standardized measures of whether an investigated child was ever
retained, ever participated in special education (i.e., has an IEP), and the average number of days absent during grades 3-8. Standard errors are
two-way clustered at the family and CPI level in parentheses. Significance reported as ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.10.

Figure E1: Impact of Removal on Test Scores of Older Children, by Time Relative to Investigation

-2

Avg. Std. Test Score (Dep. Var)
-1
0
1

2

(a) Young Girls

-2

-1

0
1
Time Relative to Investigation
Removal Est.

2

3

95-pct Conf. Interval

-2

Avg. Std. Test Score (Dep. Var)
-1
0
1

2

(b) Young Boys

-2

-1

0
1
Time Relative to Investigation
Removal Est.

2

3

95-pct Conf. Interval

Notes: These figures show results for the impact of removal on test scores estimated in separate regressions
by time relative to the year of investigation for young girls (Panel A) and young boys (Panel B). All results
are two-stage least squares models with the standard leave-out measure of CPI removal tendency as an
instrument for removal. All models include controls for the case characteristics in Table 1 and investigation
year fixed effects. Confidence intervals are based on standard errors that are two-way clustered at the family
and CPI levels.

Appendix - 40

