                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE CREATION AND EVOLUTION OF ENTREPRENEURIAL PUBLIC MARKETS

                                         Shai Bernstein
                                         Abhishek Dev
                                          Josh Lerner

                                      Working Paper 25414
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25414


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2018




We thank Harvard Business School’s Division of Research, the Private Capital Research
Institute, the Smith-Richardson Foundation, and the Toulouse Network on Information
Technology for financial support. Josh Lerner periodically receives compensation for advising
institutional investors, private equity firms, corporate venturing groups, and government agencies
on topics related to entrepreneurship, innovation, and private capital. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by Shai Bernstein, Abhishek Dev, and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Creation and Evolution of Entrepreneurial Public Markets
Shai Bernstein, Abhishek Dev, and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 25414
December 2018
JEL No. G24,G38,L26

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper explores the creation and evolution of new stock exchanges around the world geared
towards entrepreneurial companies, known as second-tier exchanges. Using hand-collected novel
data, we document the proliferation of these new stock exchanges that were created in a large
number of countries, attracted a significant volume of global IPOs, were introduced fairly
cyclically, and had lower listing requirements when compared to first-tier stock exchanges. We
find that increases in demand for entrepreneurial capital—as proxied for by patenting, IPOs, and
stock market valuations—led to a higher likelihood of the introduction of second-tier exchanges.
We find no evidence that new second-tier exchanges diverted the existing flow of IPOs from
established stock exchanges. Shareholder protection strongly predicted exchange success, even in
countries with high levels of venture capital activity, patenting, and financial market
development. Second-tier exchanges in countries with better shareholder protection allowed
younger, less profitable, but faster-growing companies to raise more capital. These results
highlight the importance of institutions in enabling the provision of entrepreneurial capital to
young companies.

Shai Bernstein                                 Josh Lerner
Stanford Graduate School of Business           Harvard Business School
655 Knight Way                                 Rock Center 214
Stanford, CA 94305                             Soldiers Field
and NBER                                       Boston, MA 02163
shaib@stanford.edu                             and NBER
                                               jlerner@hbs.edu
Abhishek Dev
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
adev@hbs.edu




An internet appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25414
1. Introduction

        How does finance contribute to economic growth? Empirical evidence (see Levine, 2005

for a review) suggests that one important channel through which financial development enables

growth is through the funding of innovative and entrepreneurial projects, activities that have been

long recognized as particularly hard to finance with outside capital (Arrow, 1962). Well-developed

public equity markets have shown to be instrumental in filling this financing gap, allowing young

and fast-growing companies to fund R&D activities (Brown, Fazzari, and Petersen, 2009; Hall and

Lerner, 2010).

        Recognizing the importance of entrepreneurial finance, a major focus of financial

policymakers around the world has been on the creation of new stock exchanges for young and

small-capitalization companies, often characterized by less restrictive listing requirements. Such

exchanges, termed second-tier exchanges, have been heralded in many places as a way to promote

the creation, financing, and retention of job-creating new ventures.2 Anecdotally, while there have

been some highly visible successes (such as NASDAQ in New York, London’s Alternative

Investment Market, and the Shenzhen-based ChiNext market), there have been many more failures

(such as EASDAQ). We describe two such cases in Section 3.




2
  Recent examples from Saudi Arabia, Trinidad and Tobago, India, and China include “New Saudi SME stock market
surges on first day,” http://gulfbusiness.com/new-saudi-sme-stock-market-surges-first-day/, February 20, 2017; Leah
Soriasand, “CinemaONE first up on SME market,” https://www.trinidadexpress.com/business/local/cinemaone-first-
up-on-sme-market/article_dd89dca0-f29d-11e8-aa09-3f220ed53323.html, November 27, 2018; “BSE creates new
division           for           listing        of        startups,”        November             28,          2018,
https://www.livemint.com/Companies/BEFgjhFC1Zupl2hIB5CrYK/BSE-creates-new-division-for-listing-of-
startups.html; and Zhang Yu, Liu Caiping, Qu Yunxu and Fran Wang, “Shanghai’s New High-Tech Board to Lower
Profitability Requirements, Draft Rules Say,” https://www.caixinglobal.com/2018-12-10/the-proposed-high-tech-
board-will-lower-the-requirements-on-candidate-companies-profitability-but-it-will-not-directly-accept-biotech-
firms-that-have-not-had-any-income-a-market-participant-close-to-the-shanghai-stock-exchange-told-caixin-
101357510.html, December 10, 2018.

                                                        2
       Despite the energy devoted by securities regulators to these efforts, there has been very

few systematic explorations in the finance literature of the determinants of the creation and success

of new exchanges geared towards entrepreneurial firms. Among the few exceptions have been

Vismara, Paleari, and Ritter’s (2012) examination of the listing decision of firms in the four largest

European economies in the period from 1995 to 2009 and Aggarwal and Angel’s (1999) clinical

study of the Amex Emerging Company Marketplace during the 1990s. This neglect is particularly

striking in light of the interest in trends in global equity markets. Doidge, Karyoli, and Stultz

document that the number of listed companies in the U.S. has dropped by more than half in the

past two decades (2017), driven in large part by the declining share of American companies going

public (2009, 2013). This reduced propensity to undertake an initial public offering (IPO) appears

to be particularly concentrated among smaller firms in the U.S., as documented by Gao, Ritter,

and Zhu (2013).

       In this paper, we seek to understand the drivers of the creation and success of new second-

tier markets, focusing specifically on the role of countries’ legal provisions for shareholder

protection. Second-tier markets typically allow small market-cap entrepreneurial firms to raise

capital by lowering their listing requirements, as we show below. However, lower listing

requirements increase adverse selection concerns and the risk that investors may be expropriated

by the entrepreneur. Following La Porta et al. (2002, henceforth LLSV), we hypothesize that when

minority shareholder rights are better protected by the law, investors should be more willing to

provide capital to firms on exchanges with low listing requirements, as the risk of expropriation

will be mitigated. Thus, stronger shareholder protection may increase the willingness of

shareholders to invest in new listings and the valuations that they assign to these firms. This greater

willingness will, in turn, attract more entrepreneurs to list their companies in the market. We



                                                  3
hypothesize that stronger shareholder protection may attract more entrepreneurs and investors to

a newly formed second-tier exchange, and thus increase the likelihood of market introduction and

ultimate success.

        To explore this hypothesis, we construct a novel dataset that covers 281 stock exchanges

across 113 countries. We find that since 1990, there were 78 new second-tier exchanges that were

introduced with the aim of facilitating capital flows to entrepreneurial companies. Our analysis

begins in 1990, reflecting the greater coverage of IPO activity in that year, and ends in 2013 to

ensure that we have at least four years of data to evaluate the success of the exchanges.

       To construct this data, we combine information from the Bloomberg, Capital IQ, and SDC

databases with that from the International Encyclopedia of the Stock Market, annual editions of

the World Stock Exchange Factbook, and direct contacts with the exchanges and knowledgeable

local academics and practitioners. We gather information on the exchanges’ creation and listing

requirements, as well as the details of any incumbent exchanges in these countries. Finally, we

supplement these data with information on the exchanges’ listed firms.

       Using this unique dataset, we first document the proliferation of second-tier stock

exchanges around the world over the past three decades. Summary statistics suggest that these new

stock exchanges were introduced in a large number of countries, attracted a significant volume of

IPOs (although much less in terms of value, due to the smaller size of their listed firms), and

appeared fairly cyclically. We confirm that second-tier exchanges indeed had lower listing

requirements when compared to first-tier stock exchanges. Finally, consistent with our hypothesis

above, we find that such exchanges were more likely to be introduced in in countries with stronger

shareholder protection.




                                                 4
       Given the importance of second-tier exchanges in global IPO markets, we examine more

systematically several key questions about these markets. The first of these concerns the key

triggers that lead countries to establish second-tier exchanges. We find that, within a country,

increases in demand for entrepreneurial capital—as proxied for by patenting, IPOs, and stock

market valuations—lead to an increased likelihood of introducing second-tier exchanges. While

more shareholder protection is associated with a greater probability of creating exchanges in

general, differing levels of protection do not generate significantly different sensitivity in most

cases to these factors.

       The previous question raises a related issue: does a new second-tier exchange divert the

existing flow of IPOs from established stock exchange(s) in the country? In other words, does a

new second-tier exchange serve a different segment of the market, or there is a substitution

between the new market and the incumbent first-tier exchange? We find no evidence of a

substitution effect following the introduction of a second-tier exchange, neither in terms of the

flow nor the composition of IPOs listed on existing first-tier exchanges. The newly introduced

exchanges seem to cater to a different segment of firms and investors in the economy.

       Third, we explore the drivers of the success of second-tier exchanges. We find that

shareholder protection strongly predicts a robust new market. Even in countries with high levels

of venture capital activity, much patenting, broad availability of private credit, and high stock

market valuations (all of which are also associated with more successful new exchanges), we find

that shareholder protection remains a key predictor of success.

       Finally, we analyze the mechanisms behind the seeming importance of shareholder

protection to the success of these second-tier exchanges. We find that new second-tier exchanges

in countries with better shareholder protection allow younger and less profitable companies to raise



                                                 5
more capital. This result is consistent with the notion that better shareholder protection mitigates

risk of expropriation, allowing investors to invest in riskier firms. Indeed, these companies

subsequently grow more quickly. Interestingly, we find that the listing requirements of the new

second-tier exchanges in nations with high and low shareholder protection are similar, with an eye

to attracting more entrepreneurial companies. But countries with better shareholder protections are

able to attract offerings from younger firms, despite the fact that they do not have lower listing

requirements.

       Taking stock, these results suggest the importance of institutions in enabling the provision

of entrepreneurial capital to young companies. Second-tier markets in countries with weaker

investor protection seem less able to attract investors in the kind of high-risk, high-growth firms

that the markets are intended to promote. Anticipating these difficulties, fewer exchanges are

created under these circumstances.

       Our findings are consistent with the broader literature on law and finance, particularly the

subset of works that examine the impact of legal conditions on entrepreneurial finance. For

instance, the law and finance literature has highlighted the greater success of markets in common

law nations and those with greater investor protection (e.g., LLSV, 1998, 1999, 2002). Lerner and

Schoar (2005) document that private investments in common law nations are structured similar to

those in the U.S., but differ considerably in those with French and other legal origins, and that

investors in common law nations enjoy substantially greater success. Lerner et al. (2018) show

that in nations where the legal barriers to entrepreneurship are greater, entrepreneurs appear to

hold back from approaching angel groups until later in their development and, even then, ask for

a smaller amount of funds.




                                                 6
       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a conceptual

framework. The two case studies alluded to above are summarized in Section 3. Section 4 describes

the collection of information on the newly established stock exchanges. In Section 5, we provide

a first look at the data and describe several novel stylized facts about these stock exchanges around

the world. Section 6 explores the key determinants that lead to the creation of new second-tier

stock exchanges, and Section 7 the drivers of second-tier market success. In Section 8, we

characterize the firms listed on the new second-tier stock exchanges. Section 9 concludes the paper.



2. Conceptual Framework

       Stock exchanges play a variety of roles, including creating a forum for the execution of

transactions, facilitating the clearing and settlement process, and providing a transparent record of

transaction prices. Exchanges also provide a certification and monitoring function to ensure

investors that the issuing company is of high quality and to mitigate concerns about the

expropriation of shareholders through, for example, insider trading, price manipulation, or

tunneling assets. A reduced risk of expropriation enhances the willingness of investors to provide

capital to listed firms and to assign high valuations.

       One of the central ways through which exchanges can screen the quality of listed firms and

reduce the risk of investor expropriation is through the imposition of listing requirements. These

requirements typically limit firms traded on an exchange to companies with a sufficient track

record of operations and profitability, as well as a minimum scale (e.g., level of assets) and level

of disclosure.

       For example, a firm aspiring to list on the New York Stock Exchange in 2018 must have a

minimum of 1.1 million shares outstanding, with a minimum aggregate market value of $40



                                                  7
million. In addition, the company must have aggregate pre-tax earnings of $10 million over the

past three years, with at least $2 million in each of the preceding two years. This minimum

profitability requirement precludes many fledgling high-tech companies, which often are not

profitable at the time of going public, from listing on the NYSE.

       Indeed, higher listing requirements can reduce the extent of information problems about

firms and their management. Enterprises with a proven track record of success are likely to have

reduced uncertainty, information asymmetries, and risk of investor expropriation. Johnson (2000)

discusses the early history of the Neuer Markt, and argues that its stringent listing and disclosure

requirements attracted investors and “allow[ed] relatively young technology-based firms to go

public in Germany for the first time.”

       On the other hand, high listing requirements can be problematic for entrepreneurial firms.

Venture-backed companies are frequently unprofitable, not just at the time that they go public, but

for several years thereafter (see the data, for instance, in Table 2 of Cao, Jiang, and Ritter, 2015).

Moreover, tests based on the book value of assets or shareholders’ equity will not capture the

intangible capital that is the key asset for many technology and biotech firms. To accommodate

high-growth entrepreneurial companies, second-tier exchanges typically have lower listing

requirements despite adverse selection concerns, as we illustrate empirically below.

       Following the “law and finance” literature, and LLSV (2002) in particular, we explore the

role of country-level legal institutions that are meant to provide shareholder protection. Such legal

rules aim to protect shareholders against the misuse of corporate assets, provide governance

safeguards, and enhance corporate transparency.

       We hypothesize that when shareholder rights are better protected by the law, investors

should be more willing to provide capital to firms on exchanges with low listing requirements, as



                                                  8
the risk of expropriation will be mitigated. Thus, stronger legal shareholder protection may

increase the willingness of shareholders to invest in new listings, as well as the valuations that they

assign to these firms. This greater willingness will, in turn, attract more entrepreneurs to list their

companies in the market. This brings us to the first two hypotheses in the paper:

H1: Countries with stronger shareholder protection are more likely to introduce second-tier

markets.

H2: Conditional on the introduction of a second-tier market, countries with stronger shareholder

protection will attract more listed companies, and more capital will be raised.

       If the previous two hypotheses hold, we expect to find that in countries with legal regimes

that provide stronger shareholder protection, companies listed in the new second-tier markets will

be riskier. This risk will be captured by measures such as lower profitability, younger age, and

higher growth. Moreover, we anticipate that such firms will be able to raise more capital. In other

words, second-tier exchanges will allow more entrepreneurial companies to raise capital.

H3: Second-tier exchanges in countries with stronger shareholder protection will attract riskier

companies that will raise more capital.

       Finally, a natural question relates to the impact of a second-tier exchange on the flow of

IPOs to main exchanges within the same country. Is there a substitution of IPOs from the main

boards to the second-tier exchange? If the previous hypotheses hold, we expect that the second-

tier exchanges would attract companies that could not previously list in existing stock markets due

to the high listing requirements. This leads to the following hypothesis:

H4: The introduction of second-tier exchanges does not affect the flow and composition of IPOs

in existing stock exchanges within the same country.

       In the analysis below, we explore whether these hypotheses hold.



                                                  9
3. Case Studies

           In this section, we discuss the cases of two second-tier markets, ChiNext and the European

Association of Securities Dealers (EASDAQ).3 EASDAQ was introduced in 1996 as a pan-

European exchange, but struggled to gain traction and failed after the dot.com crash of 2000-01.

ChiNext was created in 2010 as a subsidiary of the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, and despite

volatility in valuations and stock prices, has proven a robust home for new listings of

entrepreneurial firms. While the outcomes of the two market development efforts were quite

different, as well as many of the macroeconomic and regulatory conditions, several insights

emerge from the cases:

          The desire to boost entrepreneurial and venture capital activity. The key motivation in

           establishing these exchanges was that such a stock market might facilitate high-growth

           companies, as well as the intermediaries that support them. The establishment of these

           exchanges also was triggered by concerns that the absence of a dedicated market was

           leading such firms to list offshore.

          The tradeoff between inclusiveness and investor protection. Both exchanges sought to list

           entrepreneurial companies, which would otherwise be precluded from going public by the

           requirements of the incumbent exchanges. Of particular concern were rules regarding

           profitability, length of operations, and size. At the same time, they sought to reassure

           investors about the quality of the listed companies. ChiNext’s approach was particularly

           interesting, as it sought to prohibit bad management behavior by, among other steps,




3
    We provide detailed discussion of these cases in Internet Appendices A and B.

                                                          10
       limiting insiders’ access to the IPO proceeds, extending the lock-up period, and facilitating

       delistings.

      The interplay between exchange designers and regulatory officials. While both exchanges

       were nominally independent entities, in each case the involvement of government officials

       was important in their design. The EASDAQ exchange architects actively cultivated the

       support of the European Union and national policymakers, whose support gave greater

       gravitas to the effort and helped overcome some of the barriers to a trans-national market.

       The ChiNext effort dependent critically on the ability to get authorization to proceed from

       the China Securities Regulatory Commission.

      The role of critical mass in exchange success. Both teams of market designers sought to

       establish these exchanges as the dominant market for high-growth companies. They were

       motivated by the perception that market depth would translate into greater liquidity and

       market efficiency, as well the certification that a listing in the dominant national or regional

       exchange would provide to portfolio firms. The success of the two exchanges in achieving

       this goal differed markedly: while ChiNext was the only such market authorized to operate

       in the People’s Republic of China, and thus was able to attract a large number of Chinese

       companies that did not meet the requirements for the main boards of the Shenzhen or

       Shanghai exchanges, EASDAQ soon faced competition from a bevy of national exchanges

       across Europe.



4. The Construction of the Data Set




                                                 11
        In this section, we turn to our large-sample systematic analysis of second-tier stock

exchanges, describing the various sources we utilize to construct a novel data-set on exchanges,

listed firms, and countries.



Exchange-level data

        We obtained our list of exchanges from five sources: (1) Securities Data Company (SDC)

Platinum Global New Issues database, (2) the IPO data in the Bloomberg database, (3) the IPO

data in the S&P Capital IQ’s database, (4) the International Encyclopedia of the Stock Market, and

(5) annual editions of the World Stock Exchange Factbook between 1997 and 2015. Using these

sources, we collected a list of 431 exchanges. We gathered the country of the exchange, the entry

and exit year of the exchange, and any mergers and acquisition dates from the Factbook,

Encyclopedia, and various internet sources, as well direct contacts with the exchanges and

knowledgeable local academics and practitioners.

        We dropped 18 exchanges for which we could not find any information on the country of

the exchange. We further consolidated 83 exchanges which had multiple entries in our data

because of variation in names (e.g., the Poona Regional Stock Exchange and Pune Stock Exchange

Limited) and name changes (e.g., the Cincinnati Stock Exchange was renamed the National Stock

Exchange in 2003). Of these remaining 330 exchanges, we consolidated 45 exchanges because of

name changes due to mergers and acquisitions,4 leaving us with 285 exchanges in 113 countries.

Since the coverage of our data sources becomes significantly better after 1990, in our analysis we


4
  When an exchange was acquired by another exchange and continued to be operational under a different name, we
consolidated the two entries in our data. For example, the American Stock Exchange (AMEX) was acquired by NYSE
Euronext in 2008 to create NYSE Alternext US (which was subsequently renamed as NYSE Amex Equities and later
as NYSE MKT LLC). In our database, all of the four entries were treated as one exchange. If after a merger, only one
of the involved exchanges remained operational, we assumed that the exchange that was more active—determined by
the IPO count—in the five years before the merger continued to operate while the less active exchange went out of
business.

                                                        12
focus on stock exchanges that were introduced between 1990 and 2013. This leaves us with a final

sample of 147 unique new exchanges in 78 countries. Table A1 in the Internet Appendix lists the

exchanges.

        There are a number of exchanges for which we could not find the exact entry year. In such

cases, we considered the year before the first IPO on the exchange as the entry year. Similarly, in

cases in which we did not have explicit exit year of the exchange, we defined it as the two years

after the year of the last IPO. Table A1 also lists the entry and exit years of the exchanges. The

results of our analysis are not sensitive to these assumptions.

        We classified exchanges based on whether they were a first-tier or second-tier exchange.

We defined an exchange as a second-tier exchange if the exchange explicitly noted it is targeting

entrepreneurial high-growth companies.5 Many exchanges in their mission statement clearly stated

what kind of companies they were geared towards. If this information was not available on the

exchange website, we looked for news articles in LexisNexis and on the web to see if the exchange

was described as being geared towards smaller companies. We also examined the historical version

of the stock exchanges’ websites using archive.org. Table A1 also lists the tier of the exchanges.

We erred on the side of conservatism, not including, for instance, regional exchanges (especially

common in India and the U.S.) as second-tier exchanges unless they explicitly announced such a

mission. In total, we ended up with 69 new first-tier and 78 new second-tier exchanges. In no cases

did a nation without an active first-tier exchange introduce a second-tier one.

        The final characteristics of the exchange that we collected were the listing requirements

based on the first few years of operation. We collected listing requirements across 16 categories,

such as the minimum asset size of listed companies, the minimum number of years for which the


5
 Some of the keywords associated with second-tier exchanges were those geared toward small, high-growth, young,
and technological firms, as well as small- and medium-sized enterprises and small- and medium-sized business.

                                                      13
companies had to be profitable, the minimum amount of paid-up capital, and the minimum amount

of companies’ equity owned by the public, among others. We provide the complete description of

listing requirements we gathered in Table A2 of the Internet Appendix.

        Panel A of Table 1 compares the listing requirements of the new first-and second-tier

exchanges in the sample. We are not able to obtain these requirements for all new exchanges. If

an individual listing requirement is not specified, we assume that the exchange did not have that

requirement and assign it a value of zero. For example, first-tier exchanges with a restriction on

the minimum number of years of operation require on average 2.96 years before the IPO, while

second-tier exchanges require 2.00. After we assign the number of required years to be to zero for

exchanges without such requirements, the levels are 1.67 and 0.90. (The latter are the numbers

reported in Panel A.) All requirements with amounts in local currencies were converted to 2010

U.S. dollars using historical exchange rates and the U.S. GDP deflator. As the panel reveals, the

new first-tier markets consistently have more rigorous listing requirements.6


IPO Sample

        We obtained our IPO data from the Bloomberg, Capital IQ, and SDC Platinum databases.

We describe our procedure briefly here, which sought to replicate the IPO samples typically used

in the finance literature; Table A3 in the Internet Appendix provides more details.

        SDC was our largest source for IPO data. We started with 255,312 common stock offerings

from January 1973 to August 2018. We dropped offerings before 1990 and after 2017, secondary

offerings, and IPOs that were withdrawn, rejected, or postponed. We also dropped ADRs, unit

offerings, offers with warrants, closed-end funds, and REITs. In addition, we excluded spin-offs,



6
  In unreported analyses, we show the same patterns hold when we compare the listing requirements of the new second-
tier exchanges to those of older first-tier exchanges.

                                                        14
investment trusts, private placements, and financial firms. We finally dropped offerings if the firm

had zero or missing global proceeds across all markets. Overall, we are left with 33,615 unique

IPOs.

        We also identified 54,928 transactions in the Bloomberg database. We then applied similar

screens. After these filters, we had 19.615 IPOs remaining from Bloomberg. Finally, we started

with 30,485 IPO transactions from Capital IQ database. We excluded a total of 17,129 transactions

using similar criteria. We were left with 13,356 transactions from Capital IQ.

        Many of these transactions were duplicated across the databases. Using Capital IQ

identifiers, we matched the Bloomberg and Capital IQ database to get a total of 22,315 unique

IPOs. We matched these with the transactions from the SDC database and ended up with a grand

total of 40,123 IPOs across 210 exchanges issued from 1990 to 2017, including those on exchanges

established both before and after 1990.7

        Panels B and C of Table 1 compare the level of activity of the first- and second-tier

exchanges, looking first at all exchanges active between 1990 and 2013, and then at markets

introduced during this period. We see few differences in the number of IPOs on these exchanges.

The first-tier exchanges had offerings which raised significantly greater proceeds (in millions of

2010 U.S. dollars). The first-tier exchanges also had considerably greater longevity. Strikingly, by

the end of 2017, 64 of the 78 new second-tier exchanges were no longer active.



Company-level data




7
  Some young firms are cross-listed on multiple exchanges. Conversations with practitioners suggest that these cross-
listing are typically done subsequent to an IPO. Even in cases where firms went public on multiple exchanges, the
databases we employ identified a primary exchange, which we used in this analysis.

                                                        15
         Our IPO sample had Capital IQ identifiers that we used to get the information from that

database. We collected the equity market capitalization of the companies, which we define as the

product of price per share and the total number of shares outstanding at the end of the calendar

year. We also collected total assets, earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization

(EBITDA), total revenues, and gross profit (total revenues – cost of revenues) at the end of the

calendar year for the companies.



Country-level data

         In our analysis, we explore how the creation of second-tier exchanges and their

performance is associated with the level of investor protection. To do so, we used the 2017 edition

of the World Bank’s Doing Business - Protecting Minority Investors database. The data are based

on a questionnaire administered to corporate and securities lawyers and explore the extent to which

shareholders may be protected against misuse of corporate assets, based on their shareholder rights,

governance safeguards, and corporate transparency requirements. The index is on a scale from 0

to 100, where 0 represents the lowest performance and 100 represents the frontier. For example, a

score of 75 means an economy was 25 percentage points away from the highest protecting minority

score.

         We also collected information about countries’ financial development. To measure the

domestic credit to the private sector, we used the World Bank’s Financial Sector Database for the

years 1990 to 2017. This measures non-equity securities provided to the private sector by financial

institutions. The data are taken from the survey of financial corporations and are included in the

International Monetary Fund's (IMF) International Financial Statistics. To measure the market




                                                16
capitalization of listed domestic companies, we summed the share price times the number of shares

outstanding for listed domestic companies in each country in a given year.

         We gathered the total number of patent applications filed annually by the country of

residence of the applicant from the World Intellectual Property Organization’s (WIPO) Intellectual

Property (IP) Statistics database. The number of patent applications includes both resident filings

(patents filed in the home nation), as well as filings in other offices (patents filed internationally

either directly or via regional IP offices and the WIPO-administered Patent Cooperation Treaty

(PCT) system).8

         We gathered country-level venture capital investment data from two sources. First, we

obtained information from various national and regional associations. These organizations

routinely gather data on venture capital investments and can be expected to be of high quality, due

to their close ties to the members. Unfortunately, these data have two substantial limitations. First,

in much of the world, these associations are quite new, and have only recently began tracking

venture investments. Second, in some cases, the groups use differing methodologies.9

         Consequentially, we also use SDC Platinum’s VentureXpert data (other databases seemed

to have limited global overage in the 1990s especially). The data includes 315,310 transactions

with an average of 2.15 investors per deal. We remove transactions with missing total investment



8
  An application filed at a regional IP office is counted multiple times, according to the number of its members. This
method applies to all regional offices where the filing has an immediate legal effect in all member states. For example,
Eurasian Patent Organization has eight members: hence an application to this regional office counts as eight
applications. Applications to two patent regional offices, the European Patent Office and African Regional Intellectual
Property Organization, are not equivalent to filing in all their member states. Rather, the applicant has to list the
member states where the patent will be enforced (and pay fees scaled accordingly). This information is not available
to WIPO, so it counts one application originating from their member states as one resident filing plus one abroad
filing, and counts one application originating from non-members as one abroad filing only. International applications
can also be filed via WIPO’s PCT system. Such applications are counted multiple times according to the number of
member countries the applicant wants the patent to be enforced in.
9
  For instance, Invest Europe compiles investment activity by the headquarters of the fund (rather than the funded
firm, as is standard elsewhere). This leads to misleadingly large activity in Great Britain, which many funds use as a
base for doing investments across Europe.

                                                          17
value, or transactions classified as Buyout, Fund of Funds, Generalist Private Equity, Mezzanine,

Other Investor (Non-Private Equity), Other Private Equity, and Real Estate. Overall, we were left

with a final deal count of 156,165 transactions. We summed the venture capital investment by the

country of the company and year of investment. Table A4 in the Internet Appendix summarizes

the methodology used.

       We used these two sources to construct a measure of venture capital investment as a share

of GDP. Of 3,164 country-year observations, 1,658 country-year observations had no data from

either source. We assumed that they had zero venture capital investments (or a nominal sum, when

we take logarithms). Of 1,506 observations where we have non-zero investments, 119 were

sourced exclusively from the associations. In the 813 observations where we had data from both

sources, we used the investments from SDC. All investments amounts were then converted to

millions of constant 2010 U.S. dollars using the U.S. GDP deflator.

       We used the data from LLSV, 1999 (last updated in 2013) to classify countries as having

common and civil legal origins. We obtained annual data on population (in millions) and GDP

(Purchasing Power Parity-adjusted in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) from the Economist

Intelligence Unit database.

       We use the country of incorporation data from Capital IQ to classify whether a company

was domestic or foreign from the perspective of the exchange where it had its IPO. 5.8% of the

companies do not have the country of incorporation data. For these cases, we use country of

headquarters to determine whether they are foreign or domestic.

       For all our country-level analyses, we made the following country consolidations, due to

limitations in the way that certain data were reported: entries that list British Virgin Islands and

Channel Islands were included under the United Kingdom, the Netherlands Antilles was included



                                                18
under the Netherlands, Serbia and Montenegro10 were included under Serbia (bigger of the two

countries), and Taiwan and Hong Kong were included under China.



5. A First Look at the Data

         In this section, we describe the distribution of exchanges and their success in attracting

IPOs. We highlight several stylized facts:

         1. The introduction of new second-tier markets is intensely cyclical. Figure 1 looks at the

introduction of new exchanges over time. Panel A highlights how the creation of new markets had

peaks in 1996, 2000, and 2008. The relatively slower pace of exchange creation after 2000 is also

clear.

         2. Second-tier markets are the majority of new exchanges. The figure also presents the

breakdown of the 147 new markets between first- and second-tier exchanges. Second-tier

exchanges made up over half (78) of the new markets over the entire period.

         3. European and emerging market exchanges dominate the new exchanges. Panel B of

Figure 1 looks at the geographic distribution of these new markets. The extent to which the number

of new exchanges was dominated by those in Europe, Asia outside of China, and elsewhere in the

world is apparent. The small number of new markets in the U.S. has been dominated by second-

tier exchanges, including the American Stock Exchange’s Emerging Company Market Place,

NASDAQ’s Portal, and the New York Stock Exchange’s Arca (formerly the Archipelago

Exchange).




10
  All the companies in VentureXpert from either Serbia or Montenegro were founded before 2006 (when Montenegro
gained independence from Serbia and Montenegro). VentureXpert lists Serbia and Montenegro as the domestic
country for these companies.

                                                     19
       4. IPOs are highly cyclical as well. Figure 2 looks at the distribution of IPOs across these

markets from 1990 to 2017. (Here we look at all offerings, regardless of whether they occurred on

new exchanges or not.) Panel A looks at the aggregate count of offerings, which was highly

cyclical, though less dramatically so than, for instance, the time series of U.S. offerings

documented by Ritter and Welch (2002).

       5. Second-tier markets account for many offerings, but a smaller share of the IPO proceeds.

The share of offerings on second-tier markets, having been above one-half for much of the 1990s,

declined somewhat in the 21st century, but still remained substantial. In total, there were

25,406 and 14,367 IPOs in the first and second-tier exchanges respectively. Panel B looks at IPO

activity measures using proceeds from these offerings, rather than the count of IPOs (in billions of

constant 2010 U.S. dollars). While second-tier markets hosted 36% of all the IPOs by number, the

picture is very different when using dollars raised, reflecting the fact that first-tier markets hosted

the bulk of the large IPOs. A total of $3,494 billion (in 2010 U.S. dollars) was raised in first-tier

exchanges between 1990 and 2017, while a fifth of that, $658 billion, was raised in second-tier

exchanges over the same period. The mean proceeds raised of IPOs annually across the globe was

$120 billion and $22 billion (again in 2010 U.S. dollars) in active first- and second-tier exchanges

respectively.

       6. The geographic patterns of IPOs on first- and second-tier markets are quite different. In

Figure A1 in the Internet Appendix, we look at the geographic location of the IPOs. The share of

offerings that are in the U.S. in first-tier markets has fallen sharply, reflecting both the rise of

Chinese IPOs in the post-crisis years and the more general rise of offerings in the rest of the world.

Of the IPOs on first-tier exchanges, 9% were in the U.S., 23% in China, 34% in Asia outside of

China, 20% in Europe and 14% in the rest of the world. Among second-tier markets, the U.S. (and



                                                  20
NASDAQ in particular) remains pre-eminent. The decline of second-tier offerings since the 1990s

is consequentially due to the reduction of IPOs in the United States and from Asia outside of China

(especially India). Of the IPOs on second-tier exchanges, 43% were in the U.S., 5% in China, 27%

in other Asian nations, 10% in Europe, and 15% in the rest of the world. Table A5 in the Internet

Appendix lists the countries in each region in our data.

       7. The typical exchange had few offerings. In Figures A2 and A3 in the Internet Appendix,

we show that the median annual number of offerings on each new (and still active) exchange was

quite modest, only one or two in most years (if there is any activity at all). The mean number of

offerings was substantially larger, reflecting the skewed distribution of IPOs. This is particularly

true for second-tier exchanges. In unreported analyses, we show that the relative size of the median

second-tier offering was anomalously high in the second half of the 1990s. But both before and

after that date, the median offering was much smaller than that of the IPOs on first-tier markets.

       8. New exchanges are where a large fraction of IPOs are listed. Figure 3 also looks at all

exchanges established between 1990 and 2013. We look at the fraction of all IPOs and total

proceeds from new first- and second-tier markets. Panel A suggests a rising share (with a few

intermediate dips) of offerings in these new exchanges until 2008, reaching to close to 60% of the

global IPO volume. This increase was largely fueled by the increasing activity at exchanges in

emerging economies. When we look at proceeds in Panel B, the peak level of IPOs was 2008-09,

when over half of total capital was raised in new exchanges formed between 1990 and 2013.

       9. New second-tier exchanges represent a significant share of IPOs on new exchanges,

though the share has fallen in recent years. Figure 4 looks specifically at new second-tier

exchanges. The share of offerings (Panel A) relative to those on all new exchanges was quite high,




                                                21
with peaks in 1995 and 2005, reaching to close to 70%. The share of proceeds in Panel B from

these exchanges was more modest, and fell notably since 2008.11

        10. There are substantial differences between nations that introduced second-tier markets

and those that did not. Finally, Panel D of Table 1 compares whether countries that did and did

not establish new second-tier exchanges between 1990 and 2013. This analysis presents the

summary statistics for the 48 countries that did and 65 countries that did not establish a new

second-tier market during this period (but had at least one active first- or second-tier market). The

countries that did so were larger and wealthier. They were also more innovative, as measured

through patenting and venture capital activity, and had more developed financial markets (as

measured by the ratios of equity market capitalization and domestic private credit to GDP). Finally,

they had stronger shareholder protections and were less likely to have civil law origins.

        The picture so far is one where new markets have had mixed success in promoting

entrepreneurial offerings. On the one hand, the number of markets introduced—especially second-

tier ones—was large, with a pattern that has mirrored market cycles. Numerous IPOs have been

listed on the exchanges. On the other hand, the median second-tier market has only had a handful

of new listings annually, and these are overwhelmingly smaller offerings in terms of proceeds. The

share of offerings on new exchanges peaked in the first decade of the 2000s, and declined

thereafter.



6.      The Determinants of Second-Tier Market Creation




11
    In Figure A4 in the Internet Appendix, we show the corresponding activity on new exchanges measured as a
function of all IPOs; in Figure A5, we do similar calculations, defining new exchanges as those that have been formed
in the past five years.

                                                        22
       In this section, we start by exploring which countries were more likely to introduce second-

tier exchanges, as well as the particular timing when these exchanges were introduced.

       In Table 2, we look at the correlation of investor protection with the tendency to introduce

a second-tier stock exchange. We anticipate that stronger investor protection would be associated

with a greater willingness to introduce second-tier exchanges. The regression analyses use a simple

cross-section of the 113 countries that had at least one active stock exchange between 1990 and

2013. The dependent variable in this section is always one or zero, depending on whether or not

the country established a second-tier stock exchange between 1990 and 2013. We gradually add

controls for the GDP of the nation, population, and regional fixed effects. These control variables

are defined in 1990, or the first year available for our data.

       In column (1), we find that the coefficient of high shareholder protection equals to 0.299

and the effect is highly statistically significant. This implies that high investor protection increased

the probability of introducing a second-tier exchange during the sample period by 29.9%. In

column (2), we add population and GDP controls. The investor protection variable remains largely

unchanged. At the same time, we find that wealthier nations were more likely to introduce second-

tier markets. The results are robust to the use of a continuous investor protection variable as well.

The latter relationship is captured graphically in Figure 5, which displays the relationship between

the minority shareholder protection index and the probability of establishing a second-tier stock

exchange. The figure illustrates a clear monotonic relationship, in which an increase in minority

shareholder protection was associated with a higher probability of introducing a second-tier

exchange. These results are consistent with our first hypothesis that countries with stronger legal

protection of shareholders may be more likely to introduce second-tier exchanges.




                                                  23
       It is also interesting to note that when we explore the impact of the legal regime, using for

common law and civil law dummies, we find that civil law countries were less likely to introduce

a second-tier stock exchange. However, these effects are only weakly statistically significant.

Hence, the effect seems to be arising specifically from the legal regime that relates to investor

protection. We report these results in Table A6 in the Internet Appendix.

       We see similarly strong results when we look at how economic activity in the nation

affected the introduction of new second-tier markets. We first look at the extent of innovation, as

measured through patenting and venture capital activity (the latter of which tends to finance high-

potential new firms). We anticipate that the nations with high levels of venture capital activity and

patenting would be more conducive to the creation of second-tier markets, likely due to the

proliferation of high-growth firms.

       In Table 3, we focus on two independent variables: the extent of venture capital investment

as a share of GDP and patent applications filed by nationals, again measured in 1990. Specifically,

we construct a dummy variable that equals to one if a country is in the top quartile of the patenting

and venture capital investments. In both cases, we find a strong association. Nations with top-

quartile levels of venture and patenting activity were strongly associated with a greater probability

of creating second-tier exchanges. These results continue to hold after controlling for the

population, the level of GDP, and regional fixed effects. Similarly, they hold in unreported

regressions when we use these ratios as continuous variables.

       We then turn to examine the impact of financial development. It might be anticipated that

the creation of second-tier markets would be a function of the extent of financial market

development more generally. In nations without robust debt and equity markets, investors may

anticipate that new firms would be unable to get the resources necessary to grow quickly.



                                                 24
        To examine this hypothesis, we compute the ratio of national market capitalization and

domestic private sector credit to GDP, in 1990 or the earliest available year. Table 4 examines the

impact of being in the top quartile on these measures. In column (1), we find that nations in the

top quartile of the distribution of domestic private sector credit share were 38.5% more likely to

introduce a second-tier market, a strongly statistically significant effect. As illustrated in column

(3), the effect remains statistically significant, albeit slightly smaller, when controlling for GDP,

population, and region and country income group fixed effects. We similarly find that nations with

higher levels of equity market capitalization (as a share of GDP) were more likely to introduce

new exchanges, with the exception of the specification in column (6) that includes region and

country income fixed effects. The results are again robust in unreported regressions to the use of

continuous measures of financial development.

        We turn in the next two tables from a cross-sectional to a panel approach to explore the

timing, within a country, of when second-tier exchanges were introduced. The unit of observation

is at the country-year level for the years 1990 and 2013, with the binary dependent variable now

being coded as one if a second-tier stock exchange (a) was introduced in that nation after 1989 and

prior to the year of the observation and (b) was still active in the year of the observation.

        We focus on the impact of various time-varying measures. Table 5 looks at the market

capitalization of the nation’s equity markets in the prior year normalized by GDP and the volume

of patent applications filed by nationals in the prior year. Note that all regressions include country

fixed effects.

        We find that following periods with high market capitalization, the probability of the

introduction of a new second-tier market increased. Specifically, in column (1), a one standard

deviation increase in lagged stock market value boosted the probability of introducing a new stock



                                                 25
exchange by 7.1%. Some of the effects may be driven by aggregate trends: therefore, we introduce

year fixed effects in column (2), on top of the country fixed effects. We find that the coefficient

decreases from 0.19 to 0.11: one standard increase in stock market capitalization led to a 4% climb

in the probability of introducing a new second-tier market. The effect remains statistically

significant at the 5% confidence level.

           In columns (3) and (4), we interact stock market capitalization variable with a dummy

variable that equals to one for countries that are in the top quartile of the minority investor

protection.12 We find that the probability of second-tier market introduction in countries with better

minority shareholder protection was significantly less sensitive to fluctuations of the value of the

stock market.

           In column (5) onward, we focus on the impact of patent application volume on market

creation. Similarly to fluctuations in stock market value, increases in lagged patent applications

positively contributed to the probability of introducing a new second-tier market. A one standard

deviation increase in lagged patent filings boosted the probability of introducing a second-tier

market by 22.1%, an effect that is highly statistically significant. The effect is robust to the

introduction of year fixed effects in column (6): a one standard deviation increase in patenting led

to a 19.1% boost in the likelihood of establishing a second-tier exchange.

           Interestingly, when interacting lagged patent applications with high shareholder protection

variable in columns (7) and (8), we find that the interaction effect is statistically insignificant and

small. The sensitivity to lagged local patenting activity did not vary with investor protection. One

interpretation of this pattern is that in the absence of strong legal protections for minority investors,

the barriers to new exchange creation can be overcome by a robust market. Meanwhile, a surge of



12
     Since these variables do not change over time, this is subsumed in the fixed effect.

                                                            26
innovation seems to be a powerful spur to second-tier market development, regardless of the extent

of legal protections.

       Table 6 examines the impact of IPO activity in the country, following a structure similar

to that in Table 5. Here the key independent variables are the lagged numbers of IPOs and total

proceeds in such offerings, looking across all exchanges in the country in the previous two years.

These variables are used alongside and interacted with the measure of high shareholder protection.

We again examine if such activity explains the creation of new second-tier markets.

       We find that there was a strong positive relationship between the volume of IPO activity,

however measured, and the likelihood of the establishment of a second-tier exchange. These results

are robust, and the coefficients stable, when we add interactions with the measure of shareholder

protection and year fixed effects. When we include year fixed effects, a one standard deviation

increase in the lagged number of IPOs translated into a roughly 12% increase in the probability of

introducing a second-tier market; a similar increase in IPO proceeds led to a 2.5% increase.



7.     The Drivers of Second-Tier Market Success

       In this section, we seek to understand how the contemporaneous level of investor protection

in a country affects the success of its new second-tier exchanges. Before we do so, however, we

turn to a related question: what was the effect of these new second-tier markets on the incumbent

(typically first-tier) exchanges in the nation? In particular, did these new markets serve as

substitutes, luring IPOs that would otherwise list on the existing exchanges? Or was activity on

the second-tier markets in addition to that on the incumbent exchanges?

       To explore this question, we examine in Table 7 pairs of (a) new second-tier exchanges

and (b) each of the existing first-tier markets operating in a given country in the year the new



                                               27
entrepreneurial market was introduced. In each case, the dependent variables are the total number

and the volume (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) of IPOs on the incumbent first-tier market during

the first five years after the introduction of the second-tier exchange. The key independent

variables are these measures of activity over this same period in the second-tier exchange, as well

as the activity on the incumbent market in the five years preceding the introduction of the new

second-tier exchange.

        The patterns are striking. In each case, there was strong stationarity: the coefficient on

previous activity on the first-tier exchange was about one, suggesting the persistence of IPO

activity in the existing stock market exchanges. The impact of the variables measuring activity in

second-tier markets were modest in size, always positive, and typically insignificant. There is no

evidence that IPO activity on the second-tier market crowds out that on the incumbent first-tier

one. While we cannot fully address the possibility that unobserved shocks that may have boosted

the volume of IPOs on both exchanges, we control for the extent of shareholder protection and a

variety of fixed effects, and find that little change in the relationship.

        It is also interesting to note that we do not find that the introduction of a second-tier

exchange leads to a change in the composition of firms listed on first-tier exchange. In Table A7

in the Internet Appendix, we repeat the specification of Table 7, but explore various characteristics

of firms listing on first-tier exchanges such as the logarithm of age (Panel A), the logarithm of

assets (Panel B), and the EBITDA/Assets ratio (Panel C). In all three panels, we do not find a

statistically significant relationship between the activity in the second-tier exchange and the

change in characteristics of firms listing on the first-tier exchange. Overall, these results are

consistent with the view that second-tier exchanges cater to a different segment in the market,

which is otherwise unable to tap into the existing stock exchanges.



                                                   28
        We now examine the drivers of second-tier exchange success. In each of the tables, the unit

of observation is at the exchange-year level. The sample includes only second-tier exchanges that

were introduced between 1990 and 2013 and includes only exchange-years that are in or after the

first year of operation of the exchange. We do not drop exchanges after they are no longer active,

as we do not want to introduce survivorship bias. Instead, we assume they no longer experience

additional listings. We employ three dependent variables in the analysis: (a) a binary variable if

the exchange is still active in the year of the observation, with active exchanges coded as one and

inactive ones as zero, (b) the log of one plus the number of annual IPOs in that market, and (c) the

log of one plus the total annual proceeds of IPOs in that market, expressed in millions of constant

2010 U.S. dollars.

        In Table 8, we look at the impact of shareholder protection, defined as in the tables above.

We also control for log GDP and log population of the nation and add fixed effects for the year of

the observation and the year of the exchange’s foundation, effectively comparing the performance

of markets introduced in the same year. We find that nations with stronger investor protection

were 14.1% more likely to remain active in a given year. The effect remains similar when

controlling for region fixed effects in column (2). Similarly, we find that countries with stronger

investor protection attracted a higher volume of IPOs and greater IPO proceeds. These effects are

illustrated in columns (3) to (6) and are highly statistically significant.13 These results suggest that

second-tier markets introduced in countries with stronger investor protection are more successful

in attracting firms and raising capital.

        These relationships are captured graphically in Figures 6 and 7, which depict the evolution

of the mean number of IPOs and IPO proceeds over time at these exchanges. These plots illustrate


13
  In Table A8 in the Internet Appendix, we find that common law nations are more likely to have robust IPO markets
(as measured by the number and dollar volume of offerings), while French legal origin nations have weaker ones.

                                                       29
separately the evolution of activity at exchanges in countries above and below the median level of

investor protection. The disparities in both the levels and trends in IPO activity at these new

second-tier exchanges are readily apparent. The IPO activity in second-tier markets with high

shareholder protection gradually increased over time. In contrast, markets in countries with low

shareholder protection experienced a gradual decline in both IPO volume and total proceeds raised.

Again, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that better legal shareholder protection

mitigates the risk of expropriation and enables investors to allocate capital to young firms.

       We then turn to look at the robustness of the effects of shareholder protection on the success

of stock market exchanges, by exploring whether the effects can, in fact, be explained by the

economic activity in the respective countries. We first look at the extent of innovation, as measured

again through patenting and venture capital activity. We anticipate that the nations with high levels

of venture activity and patenting will be more conducive to the success of second-tier markets, due

to higher demand for capital by high-growth entrepreneurial companies.

       In all specifications of Table 9, we include log GDP and log population, as well as fixed

effects for the year of the observation and the origination year of the second-tier market. We

explore whether the investor protection level remains statistically significant, even when

controlling for the effects of the local economic activity.

       We find in Table 9 a strong association between high levels of patenting activity and

venture capital investments on the one hand and second-tier market performance on the other.

Specifically, when the level of activity of both venture capital investment and patenting activity

were in the top quartile, second-tier stock exchanges were more successful. The new exchanges

both had more IPOs and a larger amount of proceeds raised in these offerings, as illustrated in

columns (1) and (5) for venture capital investment, and columns (3) and (7) for patenting activity.



                                                 30
These results continue to hold even when we compare exchanges located within the same region,

as seen in the remaining columns in Table 9 that include regional fixed effects. We find that even

when controlling for the level of venture capital investment and innovation, shareholder protection

remains highly statistically significant and economically important.

       We then turn to examine the more general level of financial development. We again

compute the ratios of total national market capitalization and domestic private sector credit to

GDP. Table 10 examines the impact of being above the median on these measures. Even after

controlling for GDP and investor protection levels and region fixed effects, we find that new

exchanges in nations with higher levels of credit and (less consistently) equity market development

were more likely to be successful. And yet again, high shareholder protection remains a key driver

that explains the success of second-tier exchanges, even when controlling for the level of financial

development in the country.

       We repeat the analyses in Tables 8, 9, and 10 in the Appendix, but separately estimating

the performance of second-tier exchanges for domestic and foreign firms. This analyses are

reported in Tables A9, A10, and A11 in the Appendix. It is interesting to note that the sensitivity

of domestic firms to shareholder protection when listing on a second-tier exchange is significantly

larger relative to foreign listed companies.



8. Firm Listing Choice and Listing Requirements

       In this section, we explore the characteristics of firms listed on second-tier exchanges, as

well as the rules that the exchanges employ in determining who can list. Again, we focus only on

new second-tier exchanges that were introduced between 1990 and 2013.




                                                31
       In Table 11, we use each firm listing on one of these new second-tier exchanges as an

observation. In each case, one characteristic of the listing firm is used as the dependent variable.

We examine the impact of investor protection in the nation, defined as above. The sample size

varies with data availability, with over 3500 observations in the case of the most available variable

(firm age). We control, as before, for population and GDP, as well as for the year of the exchange’s

creation and the year of the IPO.

       The patterns in this analysis are striking. The IPOs in the new second-tier markets differed

markedly in nations with strong investor protection. In countries with stronger investor protection,

listed firms tended to be significantly younger, as illustrated by the highly statistically significant

coefficient in column (1) of -1.021. The coefficient suggests that firms listed in markets with high

investor protection were about 60% less than the average age of listed firms in the sample. In

column (2), we find that firms listed in second-tier markets with high investor protection had fewer

assets at the time of the IPO: the coefficient implies roughly one-tenth the sample mean. We find

in column (3) that listed firms in second-tier markets based in nations with high investor protection

were less profitable; column (4) illustrates that these firms were significantly less likely to be

profitable at the time of the IPO. Again, the magnitudes of the differences were substantial: firms

are about 40% less likely to be profitable when listing in countries with high investor protection.

        At the same time, firms listed in second-tier markets with high investor protection tended

to raise more (expressed as a share of asset pre-offering) in the IPOs, as illustrated in column (5).

This seeming paradox can be partially addressed by the final two columns, which show that these

firms also enjoyed faster growth in assets and revenues in the years around the IPO (from three

years before to three years after). Specifically, these firms experienced a 4.5% higher annualized

asset growth rate, and 5.2% higher annualized growth rate of revenues. The stronger shareholder



                                                  32
protection may provide investors with greater assurances that the IPO will be successful (or more

precisely, that if the business succeeds, that the investors will be able to harvest the gains), leading

to a willingness to provide more financing to riskier firms.

       A natural follow-on question is whether this pattern is due to the imposition of differing

listing requirements in second-tier markets in nations with stronger investor protection. Table 12

examines this question. We explore various measures of listing requirements, including an index

of the 16 distinct listing requirements that we identified, as well as key areas where markets set

thresholds, such as the minimum number of profitable years or shareholders. If a requirement was

not mentioned, we assumed that the requirement had a value of zero. We find that in all cases, with

the exception of paid-up capital in column (4), there were no statistically significant relationships

between shareholder protection and listing requirements. Despite the fact that second-tier

exchanges have similar listing requirements across nations, countries with institutions that provide

better shareholder protection allow more entrepreneurial firms to raise more capital.



9.     Conclusions

       In this paper, we explore the creation of evolution of new stock exchanges around the world

geared towards entrepreneurial, fast-growing companies, known as second-tier exchanges. Using

a hand-collected novel data, we find that since 1990 most of the newly created exchanges were

second-tier exchanges, and that these exchanges attracted a significant proportion of the global

IPO market activity.

       We show that increases in demand for entrepreneurial capital, as measured for instance by

patenting, IPOs, and stock market valuations, led to the introduction of second-tier exchanges.

These markets did not divert offerings from existing first-tier exchanges. Exchange success was



                                                  33
driven by the presence of strong shareholder protection, even in countries with high levels of

venture capital activity, patenting, private credit availability, and stock market valuations. Second-

tier exchanges in countries with better shareholder protection allowed younger and less profitable

companies to raise more capital. These results suggest the importance of institutions in enabling

the provision of entrepreneurial capital to young companies: these markets alone cannot boost

entrepreneurial activity but need enabling institutions.

       The study suggests a number of issues for further exploration. One fascinating—though

difficult to measure (see the discussion in Lerner and Schoar, 2010) —question is how the presence

of these markets affects the rate and nature of entrepreneurship in these nations, especially high-

potential ventures. Another little-explored area is how the choice of listing venue impacts the

future evolution of entrepreneurial firms.




                                                 34
References

Kenneth J. Arrow, “Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention.” In Richard
R. Nelson, editor, The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors,
Princeton. Princeton University Press, 1962, pp. 609-626.

Reena Aggarwal and James J. Angel. “The rise and fall of the Amex Emerging Company
Marketplace,” Journal of Financial Economics, 52 (1999), 257–289.

James R. Brown, Steven M. Fazzari, and Bruce C. Petersen. "Financing innovation and growth:
Cash flow, external equity, and the 1990s R&D boom," Journal of Finance, 64 (2009), 151-185.

Jerry X. Cao, Fuwei Jiang, and Jay R. Ritter, “Patents, innovation, and performance of venture
capital-backed IPOs,” Working paper 1-205, Lee Kong Chian School of Business, Singapore
Management University, 2015.

Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and Rene M. Stulz, “Has New York become less competitive
than London in global markets? Evaluating foreign listing choices over time,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 91 (2009), 253-77.

Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and Rene M. Stulz, “The U.S. left behind? Financial
globalization and the rise of IPOs outside the U.S.,” Journal of Financial Economics, 110 (2013),
546-573.

Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and Rene M. Stulz, “The U.S. listing gap,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 123 (2017), 464-487.

Xiaohui Gao, Jay R. Ritter, and Zhongyan Zhu, “Where have all the IPOs gone?,” Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 48 (2013), 1663–92.

Bronwyn H. Hall, and Josh Lerner. "The financing of R&D and innovation." In Bronwyn H. Hall
and Nathan Rosenberg, editors, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, New York, North-
Holland, 2010, volume 1, pp. 609-639.

Simon Johnson, "Coase and the reform of securities markets,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Conference Series, 44 (2000), 187-221.

Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, “Law and
finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (1998), 1113-55.

Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. “The quality of
government,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 15 (1999), 222-279.

Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, “Investor
protection and corporate valuation,” Journal of Finance, 57 (2002), 1147-70.


                                               35
Josh Lerner and Antoinette Schoar, “Does legal enforcement affect financial transactions?: The
contractual channel in private equity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (2005), 223-246.

Josh Lerner and Antoinette Schoar, editors, International Differences in Entrepreneurship,
Chicago, University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010.

Josh Lerner, Antoinette Schoar, Stanislav Sokolinski, and Karen Wilson, “The globalization of
angel investing: Evidence across countries,” Journal of Financial Economics, 127 (2018), 1-20.

Ross Levine. "Finance and growth: Theory and evidence." In Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf,
editors, Handbook of Economic Growth, New York, Elsevier, 2005, volume 1, chapter 12, pp. 865-
934.

Jay R. Ritter and Ivo Welch, “A review of IPO activity, pricing, and allocations,” Journal of
Finance, 57 (2002), 1795-1828.

Silvio Vismara, Stefano Paleari, and Jay R. Ritter, “Europe’s Second Markets for Small
Companies,” European Financial Management, 18 (2012), 352–388.




                                             36
Figure 1. New Exchanges over Time.

This figure shows the number of new exchanges that were created between 1990 and 2013. Panel A shows the
counts for first‐tier and second‐tier exchanges. Panel B breaks the creation of new second‐tier exchanges by
region. Table A1 in Internet Appendix lists the names of the exchanges, their entry and exit years, and their
tiers. Table A4 in the Internet Appendix lists the countries in each region.


                        20                                                                       15
                                                             First-tier                                                              USA
                                                             Second-tier                                                             China
                                                                                                                                     Other Asia
                                                                                                                                     Europe
                        15                                                                                                           Rest of the World

                                                                                                 10
  Number of Exchanges




                                                                           Number of Exchanges
                        10



                                                                                                 5

                        5




                        0                                                                        0
                             1990      1995    2000   2005       2010                                 1990   1995     2000    2005            2010




                                    A. Number of new exchanges                                        B. New second-tier exchanges by region




                                                                            37
Figure 2. Number of IPOs and Total IPO Proceeds Raised, by Market Tier.

This figure shows the number of IPOs and total proceeds raised in IPOs (in billions of 2010 U.S. dollars) across
all exchanges from 1990 to 2017. Panel A shows the number of IPOs on first and second‐tier exchanges. Panel
B shows the proceeds raised in IPOs on first and second‐tier exchanges.



                            First-tier    Second-tier                                                                         First-tier       Second-tier
                 2500                                                                                               300




                 2000




                                                                         Proceeds (Billions of 2010 U.S. dollars)
                                                                                                                    200
Number of IPOs




                 1500




                 1000

                                                                                                                    100



                 500




                    0                                                                                                 0
                     1990       1995     2000       2005   2010   2015                                                 1990       1995         2000          2005   2010   2015




                                     A. Number of IPOs                                                                                     B. Total Proceeds




                                                                                                                    38
Figure 3. Fraction of IPO Activity and Proceeds Raised in New Exchanges.

This figure shows the fraction of total IPOs and proceeds raised in each year in new exchanges begun between
1990 and 2013. Panel A shows the fraction of IPO activity in new exchanges. Panel B shows the fraction of total
proceeds raised in new exchanges.


            .6                                                          .6




            .4                                                          .4
 Fraction




            .2                                               Fraction   .2




            0                                                            0
             1990   1995      2000    2005     2010   2015                1990   1995       2000    2005    2010   2015



                           A. Number of IPOs                                            B. Total Proceeds




                                                                        39
Figure 4. Fraction of New Exchange IPO Activity and Proceeds Raised in New Second‐
Tier Exchanges.

This figure shows the fraction of IPOs and proceeds raised in exchanges opened between 1990 and 2013 that
were in second‐tier exchanges. Panel A shows the fraction of IPO activity on new exchanges in new second‐tier
exchanges. Panel B shows the fraction of total proceeds raised on new exchanges in new second‐tier exchanges.

            1                                                            1




            .8                                                          .8




            .6                                                          .6
 Fraction




                                                             Fraction
            .4                                                          .4




            .2                                                          .2




            0                                                            0
             1991   1996       2001    2006    2011   2016                1991   1996        2001    2006   2011   2016




                           A. Number of IPOs                                            B. Total Proceeds




                                                                        40
Figure 5. Introduction of New Second‐Tier Exchanges and Minority Shareholder
Protection.

The bin‐scatter plot depicts the mean probability of a nation establishing a second‐tier exchange between 1990
and 2013. The protecting minority investor index ranges from a score of 0 to 100, representing the lowest
performing economy and highest score respectively. The index was taken from World Bank’s Doing Business
Report for the year 2017.
                      1
  Probability(New second-tier exchange)
           .4         .6
                      .2         .8




                                          30   40            50             60              70   80
                                                    Minority Shareholder Protection Index




                                                                     41
Figure 6. Number of IPOs in New Second‐Tier Exchanges and Minority Shareholder
Protection.

The bin‐scatter plot depicts the mean of the log of the number of IPOs in second‐tier exchanges created between
1990 and 2013, by year since the exchanges’ formation. The protecting minority investor index ranges from a
score of 0 to 100, representing the lowest performing economy and highest score respectively. The index was
taken from World Bank’s Doing Business Report for the year 2017. High Shareholder Protection includes
countries with index values above the median. Remaining countries are classified as Low Shareholder
Protection.




                                                      42
Figure 7. Total IPO Proceeds in New Second‐Tier Markets and Minority Shareholder
Protection.

The bin‐scatter plot depicts the mean of the log of total IPO proceeds (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) in second‐
tier exchanges created between 1990 and 2013, by year since the exchanges’ formation. The protecting
minority investor index ranges from a score of 0 to 100, representing the lowest performing economy and
highest score possible respectively. The index was taken from World Bank’s Doing Business Report for the year
2017. High Shareholder Protection includes countries with index values above the median. Remaining countries
are classified as Low Shareholder Protection.




                                                        43
Table 1: Summary Statistics.

This table explores the difference in characteristics between first and second-tier exchanges (Panels A through C) and
countries that introduced new second-tier exchanges (Panel D). Panel B compares all first- and second-tier exchanges
active between 1990 and 2013; panels A and C only look at exchanges introduced during this period. Panel A analyzes
the total number of requirements for the companies to list in the exchange across 16 categories. When analyzing the
listing requirements, if a requirement was not in place or not mentioned, we assumed that the requirement had a value
of zero. In Panels B and C, all annual activity measures are computed between 1990 and 2017, or the subset of years
during that period where the exchange was active. The Survival time of exchanges that exited (years) is the number of
years from the introduction of the exchange until its exit (this includes only exchanges that had exited as of 2018).
Years in operation of exchange is the number of years since entry that the exchange has been operational (as of the
end of 2017 or the time of exit). In Panel D, GDP is purchasing power parity (PPP)-adjusted (in billions of 2010 U.S.
dollars). Patent applications are the total applications filed by nationals. The Minority shareholder protection index
ranges from a score of 0 to 100, representing the lowest performing economy and highest score possible respectively.
*** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

Panel A – Comparison of listing requirements in new exchanges.

                                                              First-tier      Second-tier         Diff
                                                                 (1)              (2)             (3)
                                                               Mean             Mean
 Number of listing requirements                                 9.87             8.34         1.52*
 Market capitalization (USD 2010 millions)                      3.09             0.29         2.80**
 Number of profitable years                                     0.77             0.19         0.58***
 Years of operation                                             1.67             0.90         0.77***
 Paid-up capital (USD 2010 millions)                            2.13             0.04         2.09***
 Free float (percent)                                           0.12             0.06         0.06***
 Shareholder equity (USD 2010 millions)                         0.80             0.24         0.56*
 Minimum number of shareholders                                112.92           76.56         36.36
 Minimum value of shares traded (USD 2010 millions)             0.71             0.03         0.67
 Listing fee (USD 2010 per year)                                0.15             0.04         0.11**

 Number of exchanges                                             69                 78


Panel B – Comparison of first- and second-tier exchanges.

                                                                      First-tier           Second-tier        Diff
                                                                     (1)           (2)     (3)       (4)      (5)
                                                                   Mean             N     Mean        N
 Total number of IPOs per exchange                                 171.9           184    103.2     101    68.7
 Total IPO proceeds per exchange (USD 2010 millions)              21,613.2         184   5,134.2    101    16,479.0***
 Mean number of IPOs per year per exchange                          6.6            184     4.9      101    1.7
 Mean IPO proceeds per year per exchange (USD 2010
                                                                                   184              101
 millions)                                                          791.4                255.3             536.1**
 Survival time of exchanges that exited (years)                     60.6           110    8.7       81     51.9***
 Years in operation of exchange as of end of 2017 or exit           76.4           184   11.4       101    65.0***




                                                         44
Panel C – Comparison of new first- and second-tier exchanges.

                                                                      First-tier              Second-tier            Diff
                                                                      (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)          (5)
                                                                     Mean         N          Mean        N
 Total number of IPOs per exchange                                    102        69            72       78       30
 Total IPO proceeds per exchange (USD 2010 millions)                9,946.7      69         2,094.5     78       7,852.1*
 Mean number of IPOs per year per exchange                            4.3        69           3.9       78       0.4
 Mean IPO proceeds per year per exchange (USD 2010
 millions)                                                           404.3       69          158.1       78      246.2
 Survival time of exchanges that exited (years)                       8.9        41           5.0        64      3.9***
 Years in operation of exchange as of end of 2017 or exit            13.8        69           7.2        78      6.5***

Panel D – Introduced a new second-tier stock exchange?

                                                          Yes                        No
 Average of Characteristics, 1990-2017            Mean            Std        Mean           Std        Diff

 Log GDP (PPP-adjusted; USD 2010 billions)       5.657           1.725       4.481         1.395     1.176***
 GDP per capita (PPP-adjusted; USD 2010)         23,436          17,617      15,305        18,798    8,130***
 Log population (millions)                       2.908           1.603       2.463         1.159     0.445***

 Annual log (# patent applications)               5.483         4.066        3.488         3.094     2.109***
 Annual log(VC funding) (USD 2010 millions)       4.57         2.385          2.46         1.828     41.489***
 Domestic credit to private sector (% of GDP)    77.246        54.988        35.757        25.877    43.058***
 Stock market capitalization to GDP (%)          82.376       122.475        39.318        38.079    5.623***

 Minority shareholder protection                 61.273          12.762      55.65         12.648    5.623***
 Legal origin – Common Law (%)                    0.438           0.496      0.207          0.405    0.231***
 Legal origin – Civil Law (%)                    0.286           0.452       0.466          0.499    -0.180***

 Number of countries                                        48                        65




                                                         45
Table 2: Shareholder Protection and Introduction of Second-Tier Exchanges.

This table explores the association between minority investor protection and the probability of introducing a new
second-tier stock exchange. The sample is a country-level cross-section. The dependent variable Second-Tier equals
one if a country introduced a new second-tier stock exchange between 1990 and 2013. High Shareholder Protection
equals one if the country’s protecting minority investor index is in the top quartile among all countries in the sample.
The protecting minority investor index ranges from a score of 0 to 100, representing the lowest performing economy
and highest score possible respectively. The variables Log(GDP) and Log(Population) are the log of the PPP-adjusted
GDP (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) and population respectively in 1990. More information on the variables is
available in the Appendix. The coefficients are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions with robust
standard errors. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

                                                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                                                          Second-tier    Second-tier    Second-tier    Second-tier

 High Shareholder Protection                               0.299***       0.241**        0.223**        0.215**
                                                            (0.100)        (0.092)        (0.098)       (0.096)
 Log(Population)                                                            -0.029         -0.041        0.030
                                                                           (0.045)        (0.049)       (0.069)
 Log(GDP)                                                                 0.117***       0.128***        0.078
                                                                           (0.036)        (0.042)       (0.059)

 Region FE                                                    No             No             Yes            Yes
 Country Income FE                                            No             No             No             Yes
 Observations                                                 113            113            113            113
 R-squared                                                   0.076          0.185          0.194          0.250




                                                          46
Table 3: Innovation and Introduction of New Second-Tier Exchanges.

This table explores the association between innovation measures and the probability of introducing a new second-tier
stock exchange. The sample is a country-level cross-section. The dependent variable Second-tier equals one if a
country introduced a new second-tier stock exchange between 1990 and 2013. Log(Patents)-top quartile equals one
if the level of patent applications filed by nationals in 1990 was in the top quartile among all countries in the sample.
Log(VC)-top quartile equals one if the country level of VC funding in 1990 was in the top quartile among all countries
in the sample. The variables Log(GDP) and Log(Population) are the log of the PPP-adjusted GDP (in millions of 2010
U.S. dollars) and population respectively in 1990. More information on the variables is available in the Appendix. The
coefficients are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions with robust standard errors. *** denotes
significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

                                         (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
                                       Second-       Second-       Second-      Second-       Second-       Second-
                                         tier          tier          tier         tier          tier          tier

  Log (Patents) – top quartile        0.495***      0.383***      0.382***
                                       (0.091)       (0.120)       (0.132)
  Log (VC) – top quartile                                                       0.551***      0.521***      0.340***
                                                                                 (0.016)       (0.013)       (0.211)
  Log(Population)                                     -0.034        -0.019                      -0.004        0.020
                                                     (0.043)       (0.065)                     (0.046)       (0.066)
  Log(GDP)                                           0.074*          0.069                       0.050        0.044
                                                     (0.040)       (0.055)                     (0.042)       (0.058)

  Region FE                              No            No            Yes           No            No           Yes
  Country Income FE                      No            No            Yes           No            No           Yes
  Observations                           113           113           113           113           113          113
  R-squared                             0.192         0.217         0.280         0.129         0.258        0.183




                                                          47
Table 4: Financial Development and Introduction of New Second-Tier Exchanges.

This table explores the association between financial development measures and the probability of introducing a new
second-tier stock exchange. The sample is a country-level cross-section. The dependent variable Second-tier equals
one if a country introduced a new second-tier stock exchange between 1990 and 2013. Credit (% of GDP)-top quartile
equals one if the country ratio of private credit to GDP in 1990 was in the top quartile among all countries in the
sample. Market Cap (% of GDP) top quartile equals one if the country ratio of Market Capitalization to GDP in 1990
was in the top quartile among all countries in the sample. The variables Log(GDP) and Log(Population) are the log
of the PPP-adjusted GDP (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) and population respectively in 1990. More information on
the variables is available in the Appendix. The coefficients are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
regressions with robust standard errors. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

                                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                             Second-tier    Second-tier    Second-tier   Second-tier   Second-tier   Second-tier

  Credit (% of GDP)
  top quartile                0.385***       0.278**           0.246**
                               (0.100)        (0.106)          (0.116)
  Market Cap (% of GDP)
  top quartile                                                            0.360***      0.218*          0.119
                                                                           (0.107)      (0.122)        (0.139)
  Log(Population)                             -0.011            0.022                    -0.020         0.030
                                             (0.045)           (0.067)                  (0.047)        (0.069)
  Log(GDP)                                   0.093**            0.077                   0.101**         0.075
                                             (0.039)           (0.059)                  (0.041)        (0.060)

  Region FE                      No             No               Yes        No            No            Yes
  Country Income FE              No             No               Yes        No            No            Yes
  Observations                   113            113              113        113           113           113
  R-squared                     0.113          0.188            0.248      0.089         0.164         0.222




                                                          48
          Table 5: The Timing of Introduction of New Second-Tier Exchanges.
          This table explores the variation in stock market valuation and innovation in a country over time, and their association
          with the probability of introducing a new second-tier stock exchange. The sample has a panel structure, with
          observations for each country-year pair between 1990 and 2017. The dependent variable Second-tier equals one if (a)
          the country introduced a new second-tier stock exchange after 1989 and in or after the year of the observation, and (b)
          the exchange was active in the year of the observation. Lagged Stock Value (% of GDP) equals the ratio of stock
          market value to GDP in year t-1. Lagged Log # Patents is the lagged log number of patent applications filed by
          nationals. High Shareholder Protection equals one if the country’s protecting minority investor index is above the
          median among all countries in the sample. The protecting minority investor index ranges from a score of 0 to 100,
          representing the lowest performing economy and highest score respectively. The variables Log(GDP) and
          Log(Population) are the log of the PPP-adjusted GDP (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) and population respectively
          in a given year. More information on the variables is available in the Appendix. The coefficients are estimated using
          Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *** denotes significance
          at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

                          (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)               (8)
                      Second-tier     Second-tier    Second-tier     Second-tier     Second-tier    Second-tier    Second-tier       Second-tier

Lagged Stock
Value (%GDP)           0.199***        0.110**        0.144***            0.103
                        (0.053)        (0.055)         (0.050)           (0.063)
Lagged Stock
Value (%GDP) X                                         -0.123**        -0.109*
High Shareholder
Protection                                             (0.060)           (0.062)

Lagged Log #
Patents                                                                               0.082***        0.071**        0.087**          0.081**
                                                                                       (0.028)        (0.031)        (0.036)          (0.040)
Lagged Log #
Patents X
High Shareholder
Protection                                                                                                           -0.011             -0.025
                                                                                                                     (0.051)           (0.051)

Log GDP                 0.129**          0.094        0.153***            0.092       0.072**          0.013         0.073**            0.009
                        (0.054)         (0.168)        (0.057)           (0.159)      (0.034)         (0.094)        (0.036)           (0.088)
Log Population          -0.189           -0.213         -0.209            -0.215       -0.268         -0.346*         -0.263          -0.341*
                        (0.163)         (0.172)        (0.164)           (0.170)       (0.181)        (0.180)        (0.174)          (0.175)

Country FE                Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes
Year FE                   No              Yes            No               Yes            No             Yes            No               Yes
Observations             1,777           1,777          1,777            1,777          2,036          2,036          2,036            2,036
R-Squared                0.088           0.140          0.071            0.138          0.099          0.134          0.099            0.136




                                                                    49
          Table 6: The Timing of Introduction of New Second-Tier Exchanges (2).
          This table explores the variation in measures of IPO activity in a country over time, and their association with the
          probability of introducing a new second-tier stock exchange. The sample has a panel structure, with observations for
          each country-year pair. The dependent variable Second-tier equals one if (a) the country introduced a new second-tier
          stock exchange after 1989 and in or after the year of the observation, and (b) the exchange was active in the year of
          the observation. Lagged Log Number of IPOs is the logarithm of the total number of IPOs across all exchanges in the
          country in the years t-2 and t-1. Lagged Log Total Proceeds is the logarithm of the total amount of IPO proceeds (in
          millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) raised across all exchanges in the country in the years t-2 and t-1. High Shareholder
          Protection equals one if the country’s protecting minority investor index is in the top quartile among all countries in
          the sample. The protecting minority investor index ranges from a score of 0 to 100, representing the lowest performing
          economy and highest score respectively. The variables Log(GDP) and Log(Population) are the log of the PPP-adjusted
          GDP (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) and population respectively in a given year. More information on the variables
          is available in the Appendix. The coefficients are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions. Standard
          errors are clustered at the country level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

                          (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)            (6)             (7)         (8)
                      Second-tier      Second-       Second-tier      Second-tier      Second-tier      Second-       Second-tier   Second-
                                         tier                                                             tier                        tier

Lagged Log
Number of IPOs        0.0522***        0.0422*        0.0544***         0.0609**
                        (0.013)        (0.014)          (0.018)          (0.019)
Lagged Log
Number of IPOs
X                                                       0.0235           0.0196
High Shareholder
Protection                                              (0.033)         (0.032)

Lagged Log
Total Proceeds                                                                         0.0112***        0.0152*        0.096**      0.0142*
                                                                                         (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.005)      (0.005)
Lagged Log
Total Proceeds X                                                                                                        0.0072      0.0064
High Shareholder
Protection                                                                                                              (0.011)     (0.011)

Log GDP                 0.082*          -0.0291        0.0872*          -0.0269         0.1025**        -0.0169        0.1023**     -0.0165
                        (0.049)         (0.089)        (0.049)          (0.089)          (0.050)        (0.092)         (0.050)     (0.092)
Log Population          -0.0288         -0.0854        -0.0220          -0.0731          -0.0527          -0.990       -0.0274      -0.0972
                        (0.178)         (0.196)        (0.176)          (0.194)          (0.181)         (0.199)       (0.179)      (0.197)

Country FE                Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes         Yes
Year FE                   No              Yes            No               Yes              No              Yes            No          Yes
Observations             2,566           2,566          2,566            2,566            2,566           2,566          2,566       2,566
R-Squared                0.090           0.117          0.092            0.118            0.068           0.098          0.069       0.099




                                                                   50
            Table 7: Relationship between First and New Second-Tier Exchanges Performance.

            This table explores the association between the performance of new second-tier and first-tier exchanges in the same
            country. The sample includes pairwise observations of all new second-tier exchanges with each first-tier exchange
            operating in the same country in the year of the introduction of the new second-tier exchange. In columns (1) - (2) and
            (5) - (6), the dependent variable is the log of the total number of IPOs in a first-tier exchange in the first five years
            after the introduction of a new second-tier exchange. In columns (3) – (4) and (7) – (8), the dependent variable is the
            log of total proceeds in a first-tier exchange (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) in the first five years after the
            introduction of a new second-tier exchange. Log # IPOs - Second-tier and Log Proceeds - Second-tier are the logs of
            the total number of IPOs and the total proceeds (again in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) raised across all IPOs in a
            second-tier exchange in its first five years of operation. Log # IPOs - First-tier - pre-period and Log Proceeds – First-
            tier - pre-period are the logs of the total number of IPOs and the total proceeds raised across all IPOs in a first-tier
            exchange in the five years before the introduction of a new second-tier exchange. High Shareholder Protection equals
            one if the country’s protecting minority investor index is above the median among all countries in the sample. The
            protecting minority investor index ranges from a score of 0 to 100, representing the lowest performing economy and
            highest score respectively. The variables Log(GDP) and Log(Population) are the log of the PPP-adjusted GDP (in
            millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) and population respectively in a given year. More information on the variables is
            available in the Appendix. The coefficients are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions. Standard
            errors are clustered at the exchange level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

                                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)             (8)
                                          Log #        Log #       Log Total    Log Total      Log #        Log #      Log Total     Log Total
                                          IPOs         IPOs        Proceeds     Proceeds       IPOs         IPOs       Proceeds      Proceeds
                                         First-tier   First-tier   First-tier   First-tier   First-tier   First-tier    First-tier      First-tier


Log # IPOs –Second-tier                    0.128       0.104                                   0.142       0.167*
                                          (0.080)     (0.075)                                 (0.088)      (0.090)
Log # IPOs - First-tier - pre-period     1.004***     1.027***                               1.008***     1.018***
                                          (0.048)     (0.043)                                 (0.048)      (0.048)
Log Proceeds - Second-tier                                          0.106        0.096                                   0.160*          0.158
                                                                    (0.090)      (0.098)                                (0.095)         (0.103)
Log Proceeds - First-tier - pre-period                             0.883***     0.885***                               0.875***         0.869***
                                                                    (0.084)      (0.087)                                (0.090)         (0.101)
High Shareholder Protection                                                                   -0.037        0.381        0.434           0.987
                                                                                              (0.309)      (0.407)      (0.696)         (0.933)
High Shareholder Protection                                                                   -0.023        -0.118
X Log # IPOs - Second-tier                                                                    (0.124)      (0.151)
High Shareholder Protection                                                                                              -0.109          -0.148
X Log Proceeds - Second-tier                                                                                            (0.110)         (0.130)
Log GDP                                  -0.382***    -0.331*       -0.353       -0.451      -0.396***     -0.327*       -0.347          -0.388
                                          (0.116)     (0.171)       (0.237)      (0.323)      (0.122)      (0.171)      (0.262)         (0.327)
Log Population                           0.324**       0.230        -0.132       -0.015      0.337**        0.232        -0.131          -0.067
                                          (0.126)     (0.172)       (0.286)      (0.381)      (0.135)      (0.171)      (0.317)         (0.377)

Entry Year FE                               Y            Y            Y            Y            Y             Y            Y               Y
Income Group FE                             N            Y            N            Y            N             Y            N               Y
Region FE                                   N            Y            N            Y            N             Y            N               Y
Observations                               188          188          188          188           188          188          188             188
R-squared                                 0.726        0.739        0.626        0.630         0.726        0.741        0.628           0.633



                                                                       51
Table 8: Shareholder Protection and the Performance of New Second-Tier Exchanges.

This table explores the association between shareholder protection and the performance of new second-tier stock
exchanges. The sample has a panel structure, with observations for each country-year pair. Only years from the
introduction of a second-tier stock exchange onward are included. In columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is
Active which equals one if a second-tier stock exchange is still active in a given year, and zero otherwise. In columns
(3) and (4), the dependent variable is the log number of IPOs in new second-tier exchanges in a given year. In columns
(5) and (6), the dependent variable is the log of total proceeds of all IPOs in new second-tier exchanges in a given
year, in 2010 U.S. dollars. High Shareholder Protection equals one if the country’s protecting minority investor index
is above the median among all countries in the sample. The protecting minority investor index ranges from a score of
0 to 100, representing the lowest performing economy and highest score respectively. The variables Log(GDP) and
Log(Population) are the log of the PPP-adjusted GDP (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) and population respectively
in a given year. More information on the variables is available in the Appendix. The coefficients are estimated using
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *** denotes significance
at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

                                            (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)
                                                                      Log #         Log #         Log          Log
                                           Active       Active
                                                                      IPOs          IPOs        proceeds     proceeds

 High Shareholder Protection               0.141*      0.162**       0.464***      0.464***     0.797***    0.802***
                                           (0.084)      (0.079)       (0.145)       (0.136)      (0.234)     (0.203)
 Log GDP                                 -0.129***    -0.108***      0.175**        0.207*      0.440***    0.517***
                                          (0.032)      (0.038)        (0.083)       (0.123)      (0.099)     (0.134)
 Log Population                           0.110**       0.085*         -0.095        -0.150      -0.252*    -0.359**
                                           (0.042)      (0.044)       (0.093)       (0.143)      (0.127)     (0.170)

 Observations                              1,479         1,479         1,479         1,479        1,479       1,479
 R-squared                                 0.307         0.334         0.199         0.215        0.233       0.243
 Year FE                                    Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
 Entry Year FE                              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
 Region FE                                  No            Yes           No            Yes          No          Yes




                                                         52
           Table 9: Innovation and the Performance of New Second-Tier Exchanges.

           This table explores the association between innovation measures and the performance of new second-tier stock
           exchanges. The sample has a panel structure, with observations for each country-year pair. Only years from the
           introduction of a second-tier stock exchange onward are included. In columns (1) through (4), the dependent variable
           is the log number of IPOs in new second-tier exchanges in a given year. In columns (5) through (8), the dependent
           variable is the log of total proceeds of all IPOs in new second-tier exchanges in a given year, in millions of 2010 U.S.
           dollars. High Shareholder Protection equals one if the country index of protecting minority investor is above the
           median among all countries in the sample. The protecting minority investor index ranges from a score of 0 to 100,
           representing the lowest performing economy and highest score respectively. Log(VC)-top quartile equals one if the
           country level of VC funding is in the top quartile in the year. Log(Patents)-top quartile equals one if the number of
           patent applications filed by nationals is abo the top quartile in the year. The variables Log(GDP) and Log(Population)
           are the log of the PPP-adjusted GDP (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) and population respectively in a given year.
           More information on the variables is available in the Appendix. The coefficients are estimated using Ordinary Least
           Squares (OLS) regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level,
           ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

                                    (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)
                                   Log #         Log #         Log #         Log #          Log           Log            Log            Log
                                   IPOs          IPOs          IPOs          IPOs         proceeds      proceeds       proceeds       proceeds

High Shareholder Protection       0.321**       0.310**       0.478***      0.484***      0.468**        0.569**      0.744***        0.843***
                                  (0.154)       (0.140)        (0.055)       (0.055)      (0.203)        (0.222)       (0.096)         (0.105)
Log(VC) – top quartile            0.446*        0.458**                                    0.728*        0.694**
                                  (0.257)       (0.206)                                   (0.363)        (0.300)
Log(Patents) – top quartile                                   0.296***     0.442***                                   0.732***        0.886***
                                                               (0.077)      (0.081)                                    (0.134)         (0.154)
Log GDP                           0.145**         0.185       0.112***     0.115***       0.323***      0.483***      0.229***        0.331***
                                  (0.065)        (0.112)       (0.036)      (0.042)        (0.099)       (0.124)       (0.066)         (0.080)
Log Population                     -0.104         -0.170       -0.071*     -0.119***       -0.243*      -0.389**      -0.176***       -0.297***
                                  (0.090)        (0.144)       (0.037)      (0.042)        (0.134)       (0.167)       (0.065)         (0.081)

Observations                       1,479         1,479         1,479          1,479         1,479         1,479         1,479           1,479
R-squared                          0.224         0.240         0.207          0.231         0.144         0.258         0.142           0.260
Year FE                             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
Entry Year FE                       Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
Region FE                           No            Yes           No             Yes           No            Yes           No              Yes




                                                                     53
          Table 10: Financial Development and the Performance of New Second-Tier Exchanges.
          This table explores the association between financial development measures and the performance of new second-tier
          stock exchanges. The sample has a panel structure, with observations for each stock exchange-year pair. Only years
          from the introduction of a second-tier stock exchange onward are included. In columns (1) through (4), the dependent
          variable is the log number of IPOs in new second-tier exchanges in a given year. In columns (5) through (8), the
          dependent variable is the log of total proceeds of all IPOs in new second-tier exchanges in a given year, in millions of
          2010 U.S. dollars. High Shareholder Protection equals one if the country index of protecting minority investor is
          above the median among all countries in the sample. The protecting minority investor index ranges from a score of 0
          to 100, representing the lowest performing economy and highest score respectively. Credit (% of GDP)-above median
          equals one if the country ratio of private credit to GDP is above the median in the sample in the year. Market Cap (%
          of GDP)-above median equals one if the country ratio of Market Capitalization to GDP is above the median in the
          sample in the year. The variables Log(GDP) and Log(Population) are the log of the PPP-adjusted GDP (in millions
          of 2010 U.S. dollars) and population respectively in a given year. More information on the variables is available in
          the Appendix. The coefficients are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions. Standard errors are
          clustered at the country level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.



                                   (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)              (8)
                                  Log #        Log #         Log #         Log #          Log           Log           Log              Log
                                  IPOs         IPOs          IPOs          IPOs         proceeds      proceeds      proceeds         proceeds

High Shareholder Protection     0.450***      0.456***      0.394***      0.383**      0.828***      0.835***      0.801***      0.764***
                                 (0.141)       (0.138)       (0.072)      (0.180)       (0.232)       (0.210)       (0.137)       (0.237)
Credit (% of GDP)
above median                     0.339**      0.360**                                  0.679***      0.674***
                                 (0.134)      (0.146)                                   (0.230)       (0.223)
Market Cap (% of GDP)
above median                                                0.330***       0.282                                    0.382***       0.315
                                                             (0.075)      (0.173)                                    (0.142)      (0.233)
Log GDP                           0.049         0.052       0.189***       0.258         0.211        0.274*        0.534***     0.645***
                                 (0.104)       (0.100)       (0.055)      (0.187)       (0.154)       (0.153)        (0.105)      (0.221)
Log Population                    0.021         0.005        -0.094*       -0.193       -0.035        -0.120       -0.272***      -0.428*
                                 (0.108)       (0.109)       (0.054)      (0.187)       (0.166)       (0.169)        (0.103)      (0.233)

Observations                      1,273         1,273        1,094         1,094         1,273         1,273         1,094            1,094
R-squared                         0.232         0.240        0.207         0.226         0.269         0.277         0.249            0.258
Year FE                            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
Entry Year FE                      Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
Region FE                          No            Yes          No            Yes           No            Yes           No               Yes




                                                                     54
     Table 11: Listing Characteristics in New Second-Tier Exchanges.

     This table explores the association between the characteristics of newly listed firms on new second-tier stock
     exchanges at the time of the IPO and investor protection. Each IPO in a new second-tier exchange between 1990 and
     2017 is an observation. In column (1), the dependent variable is the log of firm age at the time of the IPO. In column
     (2), the dependent variable is the log of total assets (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) at the time of the IPO. In column
     (3), the dependent variable is the ratio of EBITDA to assets at the time of the IPO. In column (4), the dependent
     variable is a dummy that equals one if the firm has positive profitability at the time of the IPO. In column (5), the
     dependent variable is the ratio of total IPO proceeds divided by the firm assets at the time of the IPO. In column (6),
     the dependent variable is the annualized growth of firm assets in the 7 years around the IPO event (starting 3 years
     before and ending 3 years after the IPO). Finally, column (7) uses the annualized revenue growth of firms in the 7
     years around the IPO. High Shareholder Protection equals one if the country index of protecting minority investor is
     above the median among all countries in the sample. The protecting minority investor index ranges from a score of 0
     to 100, representing the lowest performing economy and highest score respectively. The variables Log(GDP) and
     Log(Population) are the log of the PPP-adjusted GDP (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) and population respectively
     in a given year. More information on the variables is available in the Appendix. The coefficients are estimated using
     Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the exchange level. *** denotes
     significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

                                      (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)            (7)
                                                                                                  IPO        Annualized     Annualized
                                                 Log Total      EBITDA /       Profitable at
                                   Log Age                                                     Proceeds /      Assets        Revenue
                                                  Assets         Assets            IPO
                                                                                                 Assets       Growth         Growth

High Shareholder Protection       -1.021***      -2.442***      -0.379***       -0.561***      0.662***       0.045***       0.052***
                                   (0.228)        (0.364)        (0.063)          (0.084)       (0.102)        (0.017)        (0.012)
Log GDP                             -0.092        1.906**         0.080            -0.032        0.365          0.069          0.016
                                   (0.129)        (0.846)        (0.099)          (0.178)       (0.305)        (0.043)        (0.033)
Log Population                      0.321          -0.133         0.089           0.295*        -0.482*        -0.070*         -0.037
                                   (0.110)        (0.544)        (0.090)          (0.158)       (0.257)        (0.034)        (0.026)

Observations                         3,692         3,410           2,127          2,106          3,401          3,451          2,141
R-squared                            0.300         0.506           0.277          0.389          0.018          0.089          0.112
Issuance Year FE                      Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Exchange Entry Year FE                Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes




                                                                55
Table 12: Listing Requirements in New Second-Tier Exchanges.

This table explores the association between the listing requirements of new second-tier stock exchanges and investor
protection. Each second-tier exchange introduced between 1990 and 2013 is an observation. The dependent variables
in columns (1)-(7) are the log of one plus the count of the total number of requirements for the companies to list in the
exchange (out of a total of 16), the minimum amount of market capitalization, the minimum number of profitable
years, the minimum amount of paid-up capital, the minimum free-float percent, the minimum number of shareholders,
and the minimum amount of equity owned by shareholders. As discussed in the Data Section, if a requirement was
not mentioned, we assumed that the requirement had a value of zero. All currency-based units are in millions of 2010
U.S. dollars. High Shareholder Protection equals one if the country index of protecting minority investor is above the
median among all 113 countries that have an exchange. The protecting minority investor index ranges from a score of
0 to 100, representing the lowest performing economy and highest score respectively. The variables Log(GDP) and
Log(Population) are the log of the PPP-adjusted GDP (in millions of 2010 U.S. dollars) and population respectively
in a given year. More information on the variables is available in the Appendix and Table A2 of the Internet Appendix.
The coefficients are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the
exchange level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5%, and * at the 10%.

                                      (1)              (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)                (7)
                                   Number of                                                              Minimum           Min. amount
                                    Listing          Market       Profitable    Paid up       Free        Number of          of equity
                                  Requirements        Cap           Years       Capital       Float      Shareholders         owned

 High Shareholder Protection           0.172          -0.108        0.096       2.784**       0.327          0.765             0.866
                                      (0.291)        (2.814)       (0.128)      (1.131)      (0.482)        (1.086)           (1.540)

 Log(Population)                       -0.020         -0.996        -0.002       0.797        0.321         -0.737             0.733
                                      (0.180)        (1.822)       (0.086)      (0.828)      (0.324)        (0.823)           (1.061)
 Log(GDP)                              0.145          1.114          0.049       -0.486      -0.307          0.526             0.531
                                      (0.145)        (1.331)       (0.073)      (0.553)      (0.270)        (0.554)           (0.810)

 Entry year FE                         Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes
 Region FE                             Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes
 Observations                          75              75            75           75           75             75                75
 R-squared                            0.352           0.374         0.433        0.555        0.418          0.420             0.422




                                                             56
Appendix: Definition of Variables

 Variable         Units      Level      Description                                          Source
 Country data
                                        The total of all economic activity in one
                  USD
                             Country-   country, regardless of who owns the                  Economist
 GDP              2010
                             Year       productive assets, Purchasing Power Parity-          Intelligence Unit
                  millions
                                        adjusted.
                             Country-                                                        Economist
 Population       Millions              Total population of a country
                             Year                                                            Intelligence Unit
                                                                                             World Intellectual
                                        The total number of patent applications filed        Property
 Patent                      Country-
                  Count                 annually by the country of residence of the          Organization's
 applications                Year
                                        applicant.                                           Intellectual Property
                                                                                             Statistics database
                                        Venture capital investment in a country by
                                        both domestic and foreign VC firms across all        National and
                  USD
                             Country-   industries. Excludes Buyout, Fund of Funds,          regional associations
 VC funding       2010
                             Year       Generalist Private Equity, Mezzanine, Other          & SDC Platinum’s
                  Millions
                                        Investor (Non-Private Equity), Other Private         VentureXpert
                                        Equity, and Real Estate investments
                                        This measures non-equity securities provided
                                        to the private sector by financial institutions as
 Domestic                                                                                    World Bank
                             Country-   a percent of GDP. The data are taken from the
 credit to        Percent                                                                    Financial Sector
                             Year       survey of financial corporations’ included in
 private sector                                                                              database
                                        the International Monetary Fund's
                                        International Financial Statistics.
                                                                                             World Bank Global
 Market                      Country-   Total value of all listed shares in a stock          Financial
                  Percent
 capitalization              Year       market as a percentage of GDP.                       Development
                                                                                             Database June 2017
                             Country-                                                        World Federation of
 Stock Value      Percent               Total value of stocks traded as percent of GDP
                             Year                                                            Exchanges database
                                        The index measures minority shareholder
                                        protections against directors’ misuse of
                                        corporate assets for personal gain. The data are
                                        based on a questionnaire administered to
                                        corporate and securities lawyers and explore         World Bank Doing
 Minority
                                        the extent to which shareholders may be              Business - Protecting
 shareholder      Index      Country
                                        protected against misuse of corporate assets,        Minority Investors
 protection
                                        based on their shareholder rights, governance        database
                                        safeguards, and corporate transparency
                                        requirements. The index is on a scale from 0 to
                                        100, where 0 represents the lowest
                                        performance and 100 represents the frontier.
                                        The “common law” dummy variable takes the
 Legal origin     Dummy      Country    value 1 if the country has a common law and 0        LLSV 1999
                                        otherwise, and so forth.


 Exchange data




                                                      57
                                                                                           International
                                       The year of creation of the exchange. We
                                                                                           Encyclopedia of the
                                       considered the one year before the first IPO on
Entry Year       Year       Exchange                                                       Stock Market, World
                                       the exchange as the entry year when we could
                                                                                           Stock Exchange
                                       not find the exact entry year of the exchange.
                                                                                           Factbook, and others
                                                                                           International
                                       The year in which the exchange closed. We
                                                                                           Encyclopedia of the
                                       considered two years after the year of the last
Exit Year        Year       Exchange                                                       Stock Market, World
                                       IPO as the exit year if we did not have explicit
                                                                                           Stock Exchange
                                       exit year for an exchange.
                                                                                           Factbook, and others
Survival time    No. of                Difference between exit and entry year of an        Computed by
                            Exchange
of exchange      years                 exchange that exited                                authors

Years in         No. of                Difference between exit year and entry year or      Computed by
                            Exchange
operation        years                 year 2017 if the exchange is still operational      authors
                                       An index of 16 listing requirement described
                                       below. Each requirement was weighted
                                       equally and the index ranges from 0 (not
                                       having any requirement across all the               International
Number of                              categories) to 16 (having an explicit               Encyclopedia of the
listing          Count      Exchange   requirement for all categories). If a               Stock Market, World
requirements                           requirement is not specified, we assumed that       Stock Exchange
                                       the exchange did not have that requirement          Factbook and others
                                       and assign it a value of zero. Definitions of
                                       specific listing requirements are listed in Table
                                       A2 of the Internet Appendix.
Company data
                                       Initial public offerings with non-zero global
                                       proceeds across all markets. Excludes IPOs          SDC Platinum's
                                       that were withdrawn, rejected, or postponed.        Platinum Global
Number of
                 Count      Company    Also excludes ADRs, unit offerings, offers          New Issues database,
IPOs
                                       with warrants, closed end funds, and REITs,         Bloomberg, and
                                       spin-offs, investment trusts, private               S&P Capital IQ
                                       placements, and financial firms.
                                       Global proceeds raised in initial public
                                       offerings across all markets. Excludes IPOs
                                       that were withdrawn, rejected, or postponed.        SDC Platinum's
                 USD                   Also excludes ADRs, unit offerings, offers          Platinum Global
Total proceeds   2010       Company    with warrants, closed end funds, and REITs,         New Issues database,
                 Millions              spin-offs, investment trusts, private               Bloomberg, and
                                       placements, and financial firms. Also excludes      S&P Capital IQ
                                       offerings with zero or missing proceeds.
                                       Proceeds are in constant 2010 U.S. dollars




                                                    58
