                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE RACE BETWEEN DEMAND AND SUPPLY:
          TINBERGEN'S PIONEERING STUDIES OF EARNINGS INEQUALITY

                                      James J. Heckman

                                     Working Paper 25415
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25415


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2018




This research was supported in part by the American Bar Foundation and by NIH grants NICHD
R37HD065072 and NICHD R01HD054702. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of
the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the funders or the official views of the
National Institutes of Health. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2018 by James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Race Between Demand and Supply: Tinbergen's Pioneering Studies of Earnings Inequality
James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 25415
December 2018
JEL No. B31,D31,D33,D63,I24,J20,P21

                                         ABSTRACT

Understanding inequality and devising policies to alleviate it was a central focus of Jan
Tinbergen's lifetime research. He was far ahead of his time in many aspects of his work. This
essay places his work in the perspective of research on inequality in his time and now, focusing
on his studies on the pricing of skills and the evolution of skill prices. In his most fundamental
contribution, Tinbergen developed the modern framework for hedonic models as part of his
agenda for integrating demand and supply for skills to study determination of earnings and its
distribution and the design of effective policy. His lifetime emphasis on social planning caused
some economists to ignore his fundamental work.


James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25415
Tinbergen’s Race                                                          December 12, 2018



         1       Introduction
         Jan Tinbergen was – and remains – a towering figure in economics. Educated
         as a physicist, he applied his training in rigorous empirical science to study the
         economy. He developed and applied formal economic theories to explain and
         interpret a variety of economic data. He tested his theories against competing
         models. He used evidence-based science to design effective economic policies.
         Underlying his research was an abiding interest in trying to make the world a
         better place.
             The Great Depression spurred his interest in aggregate business cycle the-
         ory.1 This led him to conduct his pioneering work on macro models of the
         economy which is well-known and widely respected. He sought to understand
         the aggregate forces that shape earnings and income. His work on economic
         planning was an adjunct of this research. Throughout his career, he insisted
         that effective policy was possible and the design of policy required a deep un-
         derstanding of the mechanisms that produced economic outcomes. In modern
         jargon, Tinbergen went beyond “treatment effects” to investigate models that
         explain the mechanisms generating treatment effects and how they might be
         used to design effective policies.
             Tinbergen also examined the micro determinants of inequality. In doing
         so, he pioneered the study of the equilibrium effects of demand and supply of
         vectors of attributes in determining earnings inequality.
             His research emphasized the multiplicity of the attributes that determine
         labor income. He focused mainly on education as a determinant of earnings
         because he viewed it as a primary and useful policy lever. However, he also
         considered the role of both cognitive and noncognitive abilities as determinants
         of earnings, although he largely regarded them as God-given traits that were
         suitable targets for lump-sum taxation. He partially retreated from this stance
  1
      See Kol and Wolff (1993).



                                                 3
Tinbergen’s Race                                                            December 12, 2018


         when he revisited his earlier studies.2
             His work went far beyond the approach of his day that assumed earnings
         were determined as the payments to individual productive components with
         prices determined by unspecified background market forces (e.g., Staehle, 1943
         and the formal statement of this approach in Welch, 1969). He developed
         equilibrium models of demand and supply showing how vectors of continuous
         attributes are priced. In doing so, he developed the microfoundations of he-
         donic pricing. In previous research, Andrew Court (1939) developed the first
         empirical hedonic model and priced automobiles in terms of their attributes.
         Louis Court (1941) developed a model of the demand for a continuum of quali-
         ties but did not develop the supply side of his model and hence, the equilibrium
         determination of prices. Tinbergen’s pioneering research on the economics of
         quality and variety (hedonics) was an important conceptual breakthrough that
         is not adequately recognized.
             Tinbergen (1975) synthesized his ideas up to that date and used his analyti-
         cal framework to unify two then disparate literatures: (a) the demand-oriented
         educational planning literature (Bowles, 1970; Dougherty, 1972; Dresch, 1975;
         Fallon and Layard, 1975) and (b) the supply-oriented human capital litera-
         ture (Becker, 1964; Mincer, 1974).3 Uniting these literatures, he developed
         and estimated tractable economic models of the market equilibrium pricing of
         education and other skills and a framework for discussing the roles of technol-
         ogy and supply-side policies in determining the prices of skills with associated
         nonlinear pricing schedules. His framework is at the core of later work by
         Katz and Murphy (1992), Goldin and Katz (2009), and Acemoglu and Autor
         (2011), among others. He moved well beyond standard efficiency unit models
         to consider a continuum of skills. His research anticipates the work of Rosen
         (1974) on hedonic models by two decades.
             He went well beyond the then nascent human capital literature that used an
  2
      Tinbergen (1977).
  3
      For a contemporary assessment of the 1975 book, see Haveman (1977).


                                                    4
Tinbergen’s Race                                                                 December 12, 2018


        amorphous notion of “human capital” that was sometimes equated with cog-
        nitive ability (see, e.g., Spence, 1974). He considered vectors of attributes that
        determine market productivity, including education, work experience, ability,
        personality traits, and the like. His work provided, and continues to provide, a
        framework for the study of the sorting of heterogenous workers and firms (see,
        e.g., Beaudry et al., 2016; Lamadon et al., 2018; Lindenlaub, 2017; Yamaguchi,
        2012). He integrated market responses into the technocratic educational plan-
        ning literature.
            This essay is in four parts. In the next part, I place Tinbergen’s work in
        context. Following that, I discuss Tinbergen’s approach to using supply and
        demand to interpret the pricing of skills – a fundamental conceptual achieve-
        ment. I show how his work is related to the modern literature on hedonics and
        how it was and still is used to integrate the roles of technical change and supply
        side policies into a common equilibrium framework. I then discuss Tinbergen’s
        research on educational planning and his work on optimal inequality. In the
        final section, I assess his contributions and discuss why they are relevant today.
        I speculate about why his work was neglected by many of his contemporaries.




        2       Tinbergen’s Work in Context
        Economists have developed many models of income and earnings inequality.4
        These models coexist but do not always cohere.
            Tinbergen (1956) broke new ground by applying the standard tools of sup-
        ply and demand for productive attributes to characterize the market equilib-
        rium pricing of skills. In retrospect, this looks like a pedestrian achievement.
        In its time, his work was so bold and original that it failed to be widely under-
        stood and appreciated. It didn’t help that his fundamental (1956) paper was
   4
     See, e.g., the essays in Reder (1969), which surveys the older literature. See Atkinson and Bourguignon
(2000) for a more recent survey.




                                                     5
Tinbergen’s Race                                                     December 12, 2018


      published in a relatively obscure German journal,5 albeit in English.
          In the 1950s, economics was largely caught in the grip of Keynesian eco-
      nomics, which emphasized demand-side macro factors and policies. It tended to
      overlook the supply side of the economy. There was also widespread skepticism
      about the value of neoclassical theory for understanding economic phenomena.
      The push for micro foundations of macroeconomics was decades away. Modern
      labor economics was in its infancy. Price theory was only starting to be applied
      to understand the labor market.6
          Although Tinbergen often questioned the efficiency of markets, he thor-
      oughly understood neoclassical economics. He emphasized that for all, except
      centrally planned economies, the market sector was an important part of the
      economy and that understanding the impacts of policies on markets was es-
      sential to making successful evaluations of policies.7 Far ahead of his peers,
      he applied price theory in a equilibrium setting to understand the pricing of
      skills.
          In developing and estimating equilibrium models of demand and supply
      for the continua of productive attributes, he was far ahead of his peers. In
      the early 1970s, human capital theory was regnant. Becker (1964) and Mincer
      (1974) were the most influential works of the period. Instead of assuming
      a homogenous ill-defined substance “human capital,” as those authors did,
      Tinbergen explicitly considered the multiplicity of factors producing earnings
      and how they are priced.
          The human capital theory of the era was vague about the pricing of human
      capital. It emphasized “rates of return” which were, in certain specifications,
      prices.8 . Demand considerations were in the background. He brought the full
      weight of economics to understand the pricing of heterogenous productive at-
      tributes. By examining both demand and supply, he was able to integrate and
  5
    Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv.
  6
    See Heckman (2014).
  7
    See, e.g., Tinbergen (1954) and Tinbergen (1956).
  8
    See Heckman et al. (2006) and Heckman et al. (2017)


                                                  6
Tinbergen’s Race                                                              December 12, 2018


         assess the impact of both demand-side and supply-side policies on inequality
         in earnings. Thus, he could assess within a common framework the impact of
         taxation, policies to promote educational attainment and policies to encourage
         R and D. By considering the multiplicity of attributes possessed by workers,
         he emphasized that earnings can be equalized in different ways by changing
         the composition of the skill bundles that workers brought to the market or by
         changing the prices of components of these bundles or by some combination of
         these approaches. He also explicitly accounted for institutional factors, such
         as trade unions and corporatist bargaining over wages at the national level.
             His emphasis on the sorting of heterogenous workers to heterogenous firms
         was revolutionary in its day. His framework is still used in this context (see,
         e.g., Lindenlaub, 2017; Lindenlaub and Postel-Vinay, 2017) because of its
         tractability and insight. His hedonic model advanced the mechanical educa-
         tional planning literature by making the skill requirements of jobs endogenous
         instead of fixed, as is still common in the literature (see Autor and Dorn,
         2013). In his model, the skills used in a labor market task respond to demand
         for the final product for which the task is used and the availability of supplies
         of attributes.
             His analysis of the impact of technical change on labor earnings anticipated
         the later work by Katz and Murphy (1992) and a large literature surveyed in
         Acemoglu and Autor (2011) but was more general because he also considered
         supply. He did not, however, develop fully dynamic models of the supply of
         skills in equilibrium settings. This was done much later in equilibrium settings.9
             He introduced the notion of a race between the demand for and supply of
         education with technology as a prime determinant of demand. This notion has
         been popularized by Goldin and Katz (2009). He estimated these models on
         Dutch data and used the fitted models to investigate the impacts of specific
         tax and technology changes. He introduced an explicit social welfare function
  9
      See Heckman et al. (1998) and later work by Johnson and Keane (2013).



                                                    7
Tinbergen’s Race                                                     December 12, 2018


      which he justified using ethical considerations. He considered what policies
      produce equal utility among persons and distinguished those from policies that
      promote aggregate optimality. He considered the tradeoff between equity and
      social optimality and the information required to implement these policies.
          His 1975 book attempted to integrate his models into a general macroe-
      conomic framework, but this analysis is at best sketchy. He briefly discussed
      Marxist theories, but notes that their emphasis on capital as a source of in-
      equality ignores the central role of skills and the heterogeneity of skills in
      explaining income inequality in modern economies. This point applies with
      full force to the recent influential analysis of Piketty.10
          Tinbergen updated his 1975 analysis in a 1977 paper published in this
      journal.11 He clarified how his models applied to educational planning and
      revised the empirical estimates reported in his 1975 book. He carefully delin-
      eated traits that could be augmented from those that were endowed and could
      be the basis for optimal taxation schemes. He notes that certain personality
      traits are produced in schooling. We have come to learn that many more of
      the personality traits he took as given can, in fact, be enhanced. Modern un-
      derstanding of skill formation suggests in retrospect, that he should have used
      a broader notion of supply.12
          In order to conduct the empirical work in his 1975 book, Tinbergen ignored
      a key idea of his 1956 paper: that “skill requirements” are not only technologi-
      cally determined, but respond to market forces as shaped by skill endowments.
      However, in the 1975 book, he does allow for technological progress to alter
      skill requirements. He talks about “skill requirements” of jobs (as does a large
      recent literature) as if they are solely technologically determined.13 His 1956
      paper developed a framework that endogeneized the skill requirements of jobs,
      although he did not use this insight in his later work.
 10
    Piketty (2014).
 11
    Tinbergen (1977).
 12
    See Heckman (2008) and Heckman and Mosso (2014).
 13
    See, e.g., Autor and Dorn (2013).


                                               8
Tinbergen’s Race                                                                    December 12, 2018



        3       Tinbergen’s Hedonic Model
        The modern hedonic model is one of the crowning achievements of Tinbergen’s
        research on inequality. His contribution to this literature is still not widely
        appreciated.14 For this reason, I devote an entire section to his breakthrough
        analysis. While Tinbergen focused on the labor market, his model can also be
        applied to product markets.15
            I first lay out the general hedonic model and then give Tinbergen’s explicit
        model, which is still in wide use because it is so tractable. Consider a general
        hedonic model for a labor market setting. The model is essentially static, as
        was Tinbergen’s. Workers match to single worker firms. Let z be an attribute
        vector characterizing jobs. P (z) is the earnings of workers supplying attribute
        vector z, which is a disamenity. Let R be unearned income.
            Consider the supply of attributes to the market. Define U (c, z, x, ε, A) as
        the preferences of workers where x and ε represent observed (by the econome-
        trician) and unobserved characteristics of workers that vary across persons, A
        represents preference parameters common across persons and c is consumption
        where c = P (z) + R. Higher values of z lead to lower values of U . For ease
        of exposition, assume R = 0. Given P (z), a twice continuously differentiable
        price function, and assuming the utility function is twice differentiable16 , one
        obtains the following first and second order conditions for a maximum


                             Uc (c, z, x, ε, A) Pz (z) + Uz (c, z, x, ε, A) = 0                     (1)


                     Uzz0 + Uc Pzz0 + 2Pz Ucz0 + Pz Ucc (Pz )0 is negative definite.                (2)
  14
      This section draws on some of the material in Ekeland et al. (2004).
  15
      See Rosen (1974).
   16
      For expositional convenience, I restrict the analysis to economies in which the equilibrium price function
is smooth. Similar analyses can be done for economies in which the equilibrium price function is not
smooth. For an example of an economy with smooth technologies and absolutely continuous distributions of
consumer heterogeneity in which the equilibrium price function is piecewise twice continuously differentiable
see Nesheim (2001).



                                                       9
Tinbergen’s Race                                                                December 12, 2018


          These conditions characterize optimal job attribute choices for each worker.
          For each location z in attribute space, they characterize the set of workers who
          choose that location. Workers are heterogenous and differ in their willingness
          to supply attribute z to the market.
               Tinbergen also analyzed the demand side. Firms demand attribute z and
          maximize profits which equal output Γ(z, y, η, B) minus production costs P (z)
          where y and η are observable and unobservable vectors of technology param-
          eters that vary across firms and B is a common technology parameter shared
          by all firms. Observable and unobservables are defined with respect to what
          the econometrician observes. Assume that the production function is twice
          differentiable. Profits are


                                Π (z, y, η, B, P (z)) = Γ(z, y, η, B) − P (z)


          and the first and second order conditions for a maximum are


                                        Γz (z, y, η, B) − Pz (z) = 0                        (3)


                                     Γzz0 − Pzz0 is negative definite.                      (4)

          Throughout I follow the classical hedonic literature and assume the regular case
          in which the second order conditions hold as strict inequalities, Γzη0 is positive
          definite, and Pz Ucε0 + Uzε0 is positive definite. These conditions guarantee
                                                                                   ∂η
          positive sorting on unobservables in the sense that in equilibrium       ∂z
                                                                                        > 0 and
          ∂ε
          dz
               > 0. Firms are heterogeneous. Tinbergen anticipated modern developments
          on sorting in the labor market.17
               Heterogeneous workers differ in their preference attributes vectors x and
          ε. Heterogeneous firms differ in their productivity vectors y and η. Let the
          densities of x and ε be fx and fε and let x be independent of ε. x and ε have
 17
      See, e.g., Lindenlaub, 2017.




                                                    10
Tinbergen’s Race                                                             December 12, 2018


     supports X and E respectively. The densities of y and η are fy and fη . y is
     assumed independent of η and y and η have supports Y and H respectively.
     Assume that x, ε, y, and η are absolutely continuous random variables. In
     this paper, we focus on the case in which dim (ε) = dim (η) = dim (z), which
     was also invoked by Tinbergen (1956). For this case, there is no bunching
     in equilibrium. That is, in equilibrium every bundle of characteristics has
     population measure zero of demanders or suppliers. This is also the classical
     case analyzed in Rosen (1974) and the subsequent literature. For an analysis
     of equilibria with bunching see Heckman et al. (2010).
        Given the previous assumptions, a local implicit function theorem applies
     and one can invert the first order conditions (FOC) (1) and (3) to obtain ε
     and η as functions of z and x and y, respectively. Inverting the FOC (1) for
     the worker one obtains


                                    ε = ε (z, Pz , P (z), x, A) .


     Similarly, inverting the FOC (3) for the firm one obtains


                                       η = η (z, Pz , y, B) .


     Using these relationships, use fx and fε to find the density of z supplied given
     P (z), and use fy and fη to find the density of z demanded given P (z).
        The Supply Density is:

             ˆ                                                            
                                                  dε (z, Pz , P (z), x, A)
                 fε (ε (z, Pz , P (z), x, A)) det                            fx (x) dx.
                                                             dz
             X


     where the term in square brackets is the Jacobian matrix with respect to vector
     z (i.e., its effect on all arguments of ε that depend on z). This is the density of
     the amenity supplied as a function of the price function, preference parameters
     A, and the densities of x and ε.


                                                11
Tinbergen’s Race                                                                       December 12, 2018


         The Demand Density is:

                        ˆ                                               
                                                       dη (z, Pz , y, B)
                             fη (η (z, Pz , y, B)) det                     fy (y) dy.
                                                              dz
                        Y


     Again, the term in square brackets is the Jacobian matrix with respect to
     vector z. This is the density of demand for a given price function, vector of
     technology parameters B, and pair of densities of y and η. From the second
     order conditions (2) and (4), respectively, the Jacobian terms are both positive.
         It was Tinbergen’s great insight that equilibrium in hedonic mar-
     kets requires that supply and demand be equated at each point of
     the support of z. Equilibrium prices P (z) must satisfy the following second
     order partial differential equation

               ˆ                                                           
                                                   dε (z, Pz , P (z), x, A)
                 fε (ε (z, Pz , P (z), x, A)) det                             fx (x) dx =          (5)
                                                              dz
               X
               ˆ                                              
                                             dη (z, Pz , y, B)
                 fη (η (z, Pz , y, B)) det                       fy (y) dy.
                                                    dz
               Y


     The solution depends on U, the utility function of the workers and, Γ, the
     technology of firms, and the pairs of density functions (fx , fε ) and (fy , fη )
     characterizing the population distributions of workers and firms respectively.
     Additionally, workers and firms must receive wages and profits above reserva-
     tion levels in order to participate in the market. This generates the boundary
     conditions that determine the solution of the partial differential equation. This
     entry condition also plays a role in the identification of the model (see Ekeland
     et al., 2004).
         When z is scalar and utility is quasi-linear so that U (c, z, x, ε, A) = c −
                        dε       Pzz −Vzz         dη       Pzz −Γzz
     V (z, x, ε, A) ,   dz
                             =     Vzε
                                            and   dz
                                                       =     Γzη
                                                                    .   Since Vzε < 0 and Γzη > 0, one
     can substitute these expressions into (5) to obtain an explicit expression for




                                                           12
Tinbergen’s Race                                                                                             December 12, 2018


          Pzz , the second derivative of the pricing functional:

                                            ´           
                                                            Vzz
                                                                             ´           
                                                                                              Γzz
                                                                                                    
                                                fε fx       −Vzε
                                                                       dx +       fη fy       Γzη
                                                                                                        dy
                                            X                                 Y
                                    Pzz =               ´    fη fy           ´    fε fx
                                                                                                                      (6)
                                                             Γzη
                                                                   dy   +         −Vzε
                                                                                        dx
                                                        Y                    X


          where the arguments of the functions have been suppressed for ease of exposi-
          tion. In equilibrium, the curvature of the pricing function is a weighted average
          of the average curvature of the workers’ utility and the average curvature of
          the firms’ technology. The weights at any particular point in z space depend
          on the ratio of the densities of worker and firm heterogeneity.
                 Hedonic equilibrium is illustrated in Figure 1.

                         Figure 1: Optimal job choice for three worker-firm pairs
               Dollars




                                                                         Equilibrium price function
                                                                         Firm profit
                                                                         Worker disutility




                                                                         z

Source: Ekeland et al. (2004)




                 The figure shows the optimal job sorting choices of 3 firm-worker pairs. The
          solid line depicts the equilibrium price function. The dotted lines depict firm



                                                                   13
Tinbergen’s Race                                                                    December 12, 2018


        output as a function of job type for three different firms.18 Each firm chooses
        the job type z where the output function is tangent to the price function.
        The dashed lines depict worker disutility as a function of z for three different
        workers.19 Each worker chooses the job type where disutility is tangent to the
        price function. Each worker matches with a firm so that the worker disutility
        function is tangent to the output function of his matched firm. In each case
        the curvature of firm output is less than the curvature of the price function
        which is less than the curvature of worker disutility. The curvature of the
        pricing function is a weighted average of the curvature of firm profits and the
        curvature of worker disutility. If this were not the case, then the firms and
        workers would not both be choosing optimal job types.
            Tinbergen (1956) pioneered the analysis of nonlinear pricing, which became
        a hot topic in the 1970s.20 The later literature featured nonlinear pricing
        as a form of price discrimination. Tinbergen’s analysis applied to perfectly
        competitive markets. He extended manpower training models by considering
        that the “skill requirements” of a firm are not fixed solely by technological
        criteria , but also respond to aggregate skill endowments. Thus, the skill
        content of tasks is endogenous, as modeled in later work by Acemoglu and
        Autor (2011).
            As discussed by Tinbergen (1956) and Rosen (1974), in the special cases
        where all firms are alike or all consumers are alike the hedonic pricing func-
        tion corresponds, respectively, to the firm profit or worker disutility functions.
        Otherwise, the curvature of the hedonic function differs from the curvature
        of technology or preference functions. This point is still not appreciated in
        much of the applied hedonic literature.21 These differences in curvature are
        a fundamental feature of equilibrium and provide a basis for the econometric
  18
      For each firm, this output function has been shifted vertically by subtracting off each firm’s equilibrium
profits so that all three plots fit in the same figure.
   19
      Each worker’s disutility curve has been shifted vertically by subtracting off equilibrium utility so that
all three plots fit in the same figure.
   20
      See, e.g., Armstrong (2016).
   21
      See, e.g., Ashenfelter and Greenstone (2004).


                                                      14
Tinbergen’s Race                                                                 December 12, 2018


        identification results (see Ekeland et al., 2004).



        3.1       Tinbergen’s Specific Version of The Hedo-

        nic Model
        Tinbergen specifically analyzed a linear-quadratic model with normal hetero-
        geneity, which produces a closed form expression for the hedonic pricing func-
        tion. This is the model that justifies widely used empirical approximations
        as exact descriptions. It is still in wide use because it is so mathematically
        tractable.
            Assume that preferences are quadratic in z and linear in c, unearned income
        R = 0, and that individual heterogeneity (x, ε) only affects utility through the
        single index θ = µθ (x) + ε where dim (θ) = dim (z).22 Workers maximize

                                                               1
                                U (c, z, θ, A) = P (z) + θ0 z − z 0 Az.23
                                                               2

         The conditions determining a worker’s maximum are


                                            Pz + θ − Az = 0


        where Pzz0 − A is negative definite. On the firm side, assume that the produc-
        tion function is quadratic in z and that firm heterogeneity only affects profits
        through the single index ν = µν (y) + η where dim (ν) = dim (z). Profits are

                                                          1
                              Π (z, ν, B, P (z)) = ν 0 z − z 0 Bz − P (z)
                                                          2
  22
     The model in this example was first analyzed by Tinbergen (1956) and has been used by Epple (1987),
Tauchen and Witte (2001) and Lindenlaub (2017).
  23
     Tinbergen (1956) used the language of a “tension” between the attributes and attribute requirements.
In Tinbergen (1977), he correctly notes that this is not an essential feature of his approach. “Tension” was
a residual from his reliance on conventions from the manpower planning literature that conceptualized skill
requirements of jobs as being solely technologically determined.




                                                    15
Tinbergen’s Race                                                        December 12, 2018


     and the conditions determining a firm’s optimum are


                                      ν − Bz − Pz = 0


     where −(B +Pzz0 ) is negative definite. The distributions of θ and ν in the pop-
     ulation are normal. The distribution of θ is θ ∼ N (µθ , Σθ ), and the distribution
     of ν is ν ∼ N (µν , Σν ).
        An arbitrary price function induces a density of demand and a density of
     supply at every location z. The equilibrium price function can be found by
     equating these densities at every point z and thereby solving the differential
     equation (5) . However, in the linear-quadratic-normal case one can correctly
     guess that the price function that solves 5 is quadratic in z

                                                     1
                                 P (z) = π0 + π10 z + z 0 π2 z
                                                     2

     and then find the coefficients (π0 , π1 , π2 ) that satisfy the equilibrium equation.
     Assuming that the price function is quadratic, the first order condition for a
     worker is
                                  π1 + π2 z + θ − Az = 0.                             (7)

     For a firm, it is
                                  ν − Bz − π1 − π2 z = 0.                             (8)

     The second order conditions require that both A − π2 and B + π2 are positive
     definite. Thus we may solve for z from (7) to obtain


                                  z = (A − π2 )−1 (θ + π1 )                           (9)


     and from (8) to obtain


                                  z = (B + π2 )−1 (ν − π1 ).                         (10)



                                              16
Tinbergen’s Race                                                      December 12, 2018


     These equations define mappings from workers θ and firms ν to job types z.
     These mappings determine the density of supply and demand at every bundle
     of characteristics that appears in the market or attributes and the types of
     workers and firms at every location. Equilibrium is characterized by a vector
     π1 and a matrix π2 that equate demand and supply at all z. However, since
     both θ and ν are normally distributed, this only requires equating the mean
     and variance of supply and demand.
        The mean supply E S (z) is obtained from (9):


                (Average Supply)          E S (z) = (A − π2 )−1 E (θ + π1 ) .


     The mean demand is obtained from (10):


                (Average Demand)           E D (z) = (B + π2 )−1 E (ν − π1 ) .


     Since µθ = E(θ) and µν = E(ν), the condition E S (z) = E D (z) implies that


        (Equality of means)         (A − π2 )−1 (µθ + π1 ) = (B + π2 )−1 (µν − π1 ) .


     Rearranging terms, we obtain an explicit expression for π1 in terms of A, B, µθ , µν
     and π2 :


          π1 = [(A − π2 )−1 + (B + π2 )−1 ]−1 [−(A − π2 )−1 µθ + (B + π2 )−1 µν ].


        To determine π2 , compute the variances of supply and demand from (9)
     and (10) respectively to obtain:

                                                             0
                            ΣSz = (A − π2 )−1 Σθ (A − π2 )−1
                                                



                                          −1           −1 0
                            ΣD
                                             
                             z = (B + π2 ) Σν (B + π2 )




                                            17
Tinbergen’s Race                                                        December 12, 2018


     where ΣSz is the variance of supply and ΣD
                                              z is the variance of demand. From

     equality of variances of the demand and supply distributions we obtain an
     implicit equation for π2 :


                                                          0                               0
      (Equality of variances)(A − π2 )−1 Σθ [(A − π2 )−1 ] = (B + π2 )−1 Σν [(B + π2 )−1 ] .


     One can pin down initial conditions using the restrictions that U ≥ Ū , a
     reservation value, and profits are positive (Π ≥ 0). After taking into account
     the equilibrium relationship between ν and z, equilibrium profits as a function
             1
     of z are z 0 (B +π2 )z−π0 . Since (B +π2 ) is positive definite by the second order
             2
     conditions and we have to allow for the possibility that z = 0, nonnegativity
     of profits implies −π0 ≥ 0. Setting reservation utility equal to zero, a similar
     argument on the worker side implies π0 ≥ 0. Hence π0 = 0.
        Once one has have solved for π1 and π2 , (9) and (10) also define the equi-
     librium matching function linking the characteristics of suppliers (θ) to those
     of demanders (ν). Substituting out for z, this function is


                        (A − π2 )−1 (θ + π1 ) = (B + π2 )−1 (ν − π1 )


     so the equilibrium relationship between θ and ν is


                          θ = (A − π2 ) (B + π2 )−1 (ν − π1 ) − π1 .               (11)


     Because of sorting, equilibrium worker and firm characteristics are related.
        In the special case where Σθ , Σν , A, and B are diagonal, π2 is diagonal.
     Effectively, this is a scalar case where each attribute is priced separately. In
     the scalar case, equality of variances implies that (A − π2 )2 Σν = (B + π2 )2 Σθ .
     The second order conditions imply that A − π2 > 0 and B + π2 > 0. Defining




                                             18
Tinbergen’s Race                                                         December 12, 2018

                     1                  1
         σθ = (Σθ ) 2 and σν = (Σν ) 2 , this implies that24

                                                    Aσν − Bσθ
                                             π2 =             .
                                                     σθ + σν

                                                   −µθ σν + µν σθ
                                            π1 =                  .
                                                     σθ + σν

         π2 , the curvature of the price function, is a weighted average of the curvatures
         of workers’ and firms’ preference and technology functions. π1 is a weighted
         average of the means of worker and firm distributions of heterogeneity. In both
         expressions, the weights depend on the relative variances of worker and firm
         heterogeneity. If workers are much more heterogeneous than firms σθ >> σν ,
         π2 will approximately equal B, the curvature of firms’ technology. If σθ = σν
         and A = B, π2 = 0 is a solution and the equilibrium price function is linear
                                                     A−B
         in z. If σθ = σν , but A 6= B, then π2 =          . In the polar cases when
                                                        2
         σθ = 0 or σν = 0 there is effectively only one type of consumer or one type
         of firm respectively. If σθ = 0 and σν > 0, then π2 = A and π1 = −µθ . Then
         prices reveal the parameters of consumer preferences. If σν = 0 and σθ > 0,
         π2 = B and π1 = µν . These two polar cases are discussed in Tinbergen (1956)
         and Rosen (1974) and are the ones that dominate discussions in the empirical
         literature on hedonic models. Only in these two polar cases do prices directly
         reveal consumer preferences or firm productivities respectively. Similar results
         hold when z, θ, and ν are vectors. As previously noted, much of the applied
         literature still ignores these fundamental properties of hedonic equilibria.
 24
      The other root of the equation violates second order conditions.




                                                      19
Tinbergen’s Race                                                            December 12, 2018



      4       Tinbergen’s Research in Modern Per-

      spective
      Tinbergen’s research on earnings inequality has many modern elements. He
      brought both demand and supply considerations to the study of the pricing of
      skills. He recognized the multiplicity of market-relevant skills, the heterogene-
      ity of the skills within a single skill type (e.g., education, personality), and the
      nonlinearity of prices as functions of skills, even in competitive markets. He
      also recognized that labor markets sort heterogeneous workers and firms and
      developed models that characterize the pricing of vectors that arise from the
      sorting of skills in markets. He accounted for technological change in shifting
      the demand for skills and reallocating workers across tasks. Equating firms to
      tasks, he modeled how the skill content of tasks would change in response to
      shifts in final product demand, advances in technology, and endowments of the
      economy.
          A major weakness of his approach was that he did not model the dynamics
      of skill formation.25 The profession has advanced mightily on this topic and
      Tinbergen did not live to see this work.26
          The recent empirical literature uses dynamic recursive methods which chal-
      lenge the standards of simplicity and tractability emphasized by Tinbergen in
      his empirical work. The long-lived nature of human capital investments induces
      aggregate cycles well outside the domain of any of Tinbergen’s models.27
          Tinbergen (1975) also did not have access to a generation of subsequent
      research that refined the measurement of noncognitive skills and showed how
      they can be fostered.28 Psychological “traits” like IQ and conscientiousness
      that he took as genetically-determined endowments turn out to be malleable
 25
    He briefly discusses this in Tinbergen (1977).
 26
    See, e.g., Heckman et al. (1998); Keane and Wolpin (1997) and Johnson and Keane (2013).
 27
    See Heckman et al. (1998).
 28
    See, e.g., the survey in Almlund et al. (2011); Heckman and Mosso (2014).


                                                 20
Tinbergen’s Race                                                     December 12, 2018


     and therefore, are not a proper basis for lump sum taxation. The recent
     literature reinforces Tinbergen’s fundamental point that income and earnings
     equalization can be made at multiple margins.
         By his own admission, Tinbgergen did not look at all determinants of in-
     come inequality, which still remains a challenging problem. Capital was more
     or less ignored and the welfare state was not comprehensively analyzed, al-
     though he allowed for disincentive effects of taxes and transfers. He did not
     aim for an exhaustive study of income inequality, which still remains a challeng-
     ing problem. He focused on the main source of inequality in modern economies
     – labor market earnings.
         Tinbergen’s framework endures even if important details of it needs revi-
     sion. His emphasis on understanding the mechanisms producing inequality
     serves as a beacon for rigorous empirical research, which requires much more
     than having “good instruments,” or “big data” to understand the origins of
     inequality and effective approaches to alleviating it. He set and continues to
     set a high standard for investigating inequality in earnings.




     5      Conclusion
     Tinbergen made fundamental contributions. He invented the modern theory of
     hedonics, which has applications well beyond the labor market. His emphasis
     on using economics to understand outcomes in the labor market and to devise
     effective policies provides an inspiring example relevant for today.
         Why did his pioneering research not have a greater contemporary impact on
     research on earnings and inequality in earnings? Several factors were in play.
     First, the work was mathematically sophisticated for its day. The hedonic
     model stretched the technical skills of most contemporary economists. Second,
     applying micro theory to the analysis of the labor market was unusual in an
     era dominated by Keynesian demand management analyses. Third, Tinbergen


                                            21
Tinbergen’s Race                                                                 December 12, 2018


         viewed his research as an input to designing effective planning policies. His
         1975 book appeared in an era when human capital theory was beginning to
         sweep the profession. Planning was anathema to the leading scholars of human
         capital. Their analyses stopped with analyses of labor market phenomena and
         not abstract notions like optimal social welfare. In his day, the reception
         to his work was guarded. Tinbergen was caught between a Keynesian devil
         and a positivist deep blue sea and as a result, key insights of his work were
         overlooked.29




 29
      The innovative work of Bowles and Gintis (1976) suffered a similar fate in mainstream economics.


                                                    22
Tinbergen’s Race                                                     December 12, 2018


     References
     Acemoglu, D. and D. H. Autor (2011). Skills, tasks and technologies: Impli-
       cations for employment and earnings. In O. C. Ashenfelter and D. Card
       (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4B, Chapter 12, pp. 1043–
       1171. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

     Almlund, M., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and T. Kautz (2011). Per-
       sonality psychology and economics. In E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and
       L. Wößmann (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 4,
       Chapter 1, pp. 1–181. Amsterdam: Elsevier B. V.

     Armstrong, M. (2016). Nonlinear pricing. Annual Review of Economics 8,
       583–614.

     Ashenfelter, O. and M. Greenstone (2004). Using mandated speed limits to
       measure the value of a statistical life. Journal of Political Economy 112 (S1),
       S226–S267.

     Atkinson, A. B. and F. Bourguignon (2000). Introduction: Income distribution
       and economics. In A. B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon (Eds.), Handbook of
       Income Distribution, Volume 1, pp. 1–58. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

     Autor, D. H. and D. Dorn (2013). The growth of low skill service jobs and the
       polarization of the us labor market. American Economic Review 103 (5),
       1553–1597.

     Beaudry, P., D. A. Green, and B. M. Sand (2016). The great reversal in the
       demand for skill and cognitive tasks. Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1),
       S199–S247.

     Becker, G. S. (1964). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis,
       with Special Reference to Education (1 ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.

     Bowles, S. (1970). Aggregation of labor inputs in the economics of growth and
       planning: Experiments with a two-level CES function. Journal of Political
       Economy 78 (1), 68–81.

     Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (1976). Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational
       Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life. New York: Basic Books.

     Court, A. T. (1939). Hedonic price indexes with automotive examples. In The
       Dynamics of Automobile Demand, pp. 99–117. New York: General Motors
       Corporation.

     Court, L. M. (1941). Entrepreneurial and consumer demand theories for com-
       modity spectra: Part i. Econometrica 9 (2), 135–162.

     Dougherty, C. R. (1972). Estimates of labor aggregation functions. Journal of
       Political Economy 80 (6), 1101–1119.

                                            23
Tinbergen’s Race                                                   December 12, 2018


     Dresch, S. P. (1975). Demography, technology, and higher education: To-
       ward a formal model of educational adaptation. Journal of Political Econ-
       omy 83 (3), 535–569.

     Ekeland, I., J. J. Heckman, and L. Nesheim (2004, February). Identification
       and estimation of hedonic models. Journal of Political Economy 112 (S1),
       S60–S109. Paper in Honor of Sherwin Rosen: A Supplement to Volume 112.

     Epple, D. (1987, February). Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Estimating
       demand and supply functions for differentiated products. Journal of Political
       Economy 95 (1), 59–80.

     Fallon, P. R. and P. R. G. Layard (1975). Capital-skill complementarity, income
       distribution, and output accounting. Journal of Political Economy 83 (2),
       279–302.

     Goldin, C. D. and L. F. Katz (2009). The Race Between Education and Tech-
       nology. Harvard University Press.

     Haveman, R. H. (1977). Tinbergen’s income distribution: Analysis and poli-
       cies: A review article. Journal of Human Resources 12 (1), 103–114.

     Heckman, J. J. (2008, July). Schools, skills, and synapses. Economic In-
       quiry 46 (3), 289–324.

     Heckman, J. J. (2014). Private notes on Gary Becker. Technical report, IZA
       Discussion Paper. No. 8200.

     Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and G. Veramendi (2017). Returns to ed-
       ucation: The causal effects of education on earnings, health and smoking.
       Forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.

     Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and C. Taber (1998, January). Explaining
       rising wage inequality: Explorations with a dynamic general equilibrium
       model of labor earnings with heterogeneous agents. Review of Economic
       Dynamics 1 (1), 1–58.

     Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd (2006). Earnings functions, rates
       of return and treatment effects: The Mincer equation and beyond. In E. A.
       Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education,
       Volume 1, Chapter 7, pp. 307–458. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

     Heckman, J. J., R. L. Matzkin, and L. Nesheim (2010, September). Nonpara-
       metric identification and estimation of nonadditive hedonic models. Econo-
       metrica 78 (5), 1569–1591.

     Heckman, J. J. and S. Mosso (2014, August). The economics of human devel-
       opment and social mobility. Annual Review of Economics 6 (1), 689–733.

     Johnson, M. and M. P. Keane (2013). A dynamic equilibrium model of the US
       wage structure, 1968–1996. Journal of Labor Economics 31 (1), 1–49.

                                           24
Tinbergen’s Race                                                   December 12, 2018


     Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992, February). Changes in relative
       wages, 1963–1987: Supply and demand factors. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
       nomics 107 (1), 35–78.

     Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (1997, June). The career decisions of young
       men. Journal of Political Economy 105 (3), 473–522.

     Kol, J. and P. d. Wolff (1993). Tinbergen’s work: Change and continuity. In
       A. Knoester and A. Wellink (Eds.), Tinbergen Lectures on Economic Policy,
       pp. 27–54. North-Holland.

     Lamadon, T., M. Mogstad, and B. Setzler (2018). Earnings dynamics, mo-
       bility costs, and transmission of market-level shocks. Society for Economic
       Dynamics (1483). 2017 Meeting Papers.

     Lindenlaub, I. (2017). Sorting multidimensional types: Theory and application.
        The Review of Economic Studies 84 (2), 718–789.

     Lindenlaub, I. and F. Postel-Vinay (2017). Multidimensional sorting under
        random search. Unpublished.

     Mincer, J. (1974). Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: Columbia
       University Press for National Bureau of Economic Research.

     Nesheim, L. (2001). Equilibrium Sorting of Heterogeneous Consumers Across
       Locations: Theory and Empirical Implications. Ph. D. thesis, University of
       Chicago.

     Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the twenty-first century. Cambridge Ma: The
       Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. Translated by Arthur Goldham-
       mer.

     Reder, M. W. (1969). A partial survey of the theory of income size distribu-
       tion. In L. Soltow (Ed.), Six Papers on the Size Distribution of Wealth and
       Income, pp. 205–250. NBER.

     Rosen, S. (1974, January-February). Hedonic prices and implicit markets:
       Product differentiation in pure competition. Journal of Political Econ-
       omy 82 (1), 34–55.

     Spence, A. M. (1974). Market signaling: Informational transfer in hiring and
       related screening processes, Volume 143. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
       versity Press.

     Staehle, H. (1943). Ability, wages, and income. The Review of Economics and
        Statistics 25 (1), 77–87.

     Tauchen, H. and A. D. Witte (2001). Estimating hedonic models: Implications
       of the theory. NBER Working Paper Series, Technical Working Paper 271.



                                          25
Tinbergen’s Race                                                    December 12, 2018


     Tinbergen, J. (1954). Centralization and Decentralization in Economic Policy.
       Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.

     Tinbergen, J. (1956).         On the theory          of   income   distribution.
       Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 77, 155–173.

     Tinbergen, J. (1975). Income Distribution: Analysis and Policies. New York:
       North-Holland Publishing Company.

     Tinbergen, J. (1977).     Income distribution:        Second thoughts.       De
       Economist 125 (3), 315–339.

     Welch, F. (1969, June). Linear synthesis of skill distribution. Journal of Human
       Resources 4 (3), 311–327.

     Yamaguchi, S. (2012). Tasks and heterogeneous human capital. Journal of
       Labor Economics 30 (1), 1–53.




                                           26
