NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE R.ATE PASS-THROUGH

WHEN MARKET SHARE MATTERS

Kenneth A. Froot
Paul Klemperer

Working Paper No. 2542

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1988

We thank Dick Baldwin, Geoff Carliner, Sue Collins, Martin Feldstein, Alberto
Giovannini, Meg Meyer, and Dani Rodrik for helpful comments, and Lant Pritchett
for help in obtaining data. All errors are our own. The research reported here
is part of the NBERs research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #2542
March 1988

Exchange Rate Pass-Through
When Market Share Matters

ABSTRACT

investigatepricing to market when the exchange rate changes in cases where
firms' future demands depend on their current market shares. We show that i)
We

profit maximizing foreign firms may either raise or lower their domestic currency
export prices when the domestic exchange rate appreciates temporarily (i.e. the

"passthrough'from

exchange

rate changesto import prices may be perverse); ii)

current import prices may be more sensitive to the expected future exchange rate
than to the current exchange rate; iii) current import prices fall in response to
an increase in uncertainty about the future exchange rate. We present evidence

that suggests the behavior of expected future exchange rates may provide a clue
to the puzzling behavior of U.S. import prices during the 1980s.

Kenneth A. Froot
Sloan School of Management

Paul Kiemperer
Institute of Economics

E52-436
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139

London, ENGLAND

Oxford University

and Statistics

Exchange Rate Pass-Through
When Market Share Matters
Kenneth A. Froot
Sloan School of Management,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

and
NBER

Paul Kiemperer
St. Catherine's College
and
Institute of Economics and Statistics,
Oxford University

With the dramatic swings in the value of the dollar over the past six years has come
the observation that foreign producers charge different prices in U.S. markets than in other
markets, that is, they "price to market." Furthermore, these price differentials appear to
be sensitive to the level of the exchange rate.

It

is well known, for example,

that pricy

German cars became far more expensive in the U.S. than in Europe during the 1980-84
appreciation of the dollar. Since then, as the dollar has declined substantially,U.S. prices
of these cars havefallen dramaticallyrelative to the prices of thosesold in foreign markets.1
Most of this unprecedented fluctuation in relative prices is reflected in the recent failnre

of foreign exporters to pass through exchange rate changes into dollar prices. Based on
historical relationships, the dollar prices of U.S. imports did not fall fast enough as the
dollar first appreciated, and those prices have subsequently risen by only a small fraction
of what we might predict based on the decline in the dollar's value. This recent drop
in the degree of pass-through has become critically important because it has halted the
o While
luxury automobiles are perhaps the most conspicuousand exaggeratedexample of pricing to market, they are not
unique. Giovannini (19871 presents evidence of pricing to market among more loomogeneous goodo, stick oo ball bearings.

1

long-awaited improvement in

the U.S. trade deficit.2 The efficacy of further attempts to

push down the value of the dollar will hinge on whether the magnitude of the pass-through
remains smalL
Why would we expect foreign exporters to sell their goods at a higher price in the U.S.

than abroad when the dollar appreciates? One obvious answer is that foreign producers
may not be thoroughly foreign, in that some of their costs of selling in the U.S. market
are denominated in dollars. Foreign firms must advertise, sell and distribute their goods

in their overseas markets, incurring associated costs abroad.3 A second answer is that an
appreciation of the dollar may reduce foreign producers' elasticity of demand. A foreign
monopolist with fiat marginal costs will keep its foreign currencyprice constant if demand
has constant elasticity, but will reduce its dollar price by a percentagethat is less than half

that of the exchange rate change if demand is linear. In standard oligopolistic models in
which foreign firms face U.S. competition, the dollar price falls proportionately less than
the dollar appreciation even with constant elasticity demand.4 A third explanation for
pricing to market, offered originally by Krugman (1986), emphasizes dynamic supply-side
effects. When foreign firms gain competitive advantage through an appreciation of the
dollar, it may be costly for them to step up sales quickly. Marginal costs of exports to
the U.S. must rise, and, consequently, prices become higher than abroad, Baldwin and
Krugman (1986) and Dixit (1987), consider adjustment behaviorwhen foreign firms face
fixed costs of enteringa market that are larger than the fixed costs of remaining. In these
models,

a large enough exchange rate shock, even if it is temporary, results in a permanent

change in the level of imports — an effect now best known as hysteresis

—

as well

as a

permanent reductionin the degree of pass-through.
'Rece empirical work by Mann (1987) and Mann and Ilooper (1987) demonstrates that during the period of doCor
appreciation 1980'84, dollar pnces of male' 0.5. imports did not fall by as much as past experiencewonl,l sstggest they should,
nor have they risen as rapidly as history would predict duringthe subseepseri depreciation. In addition, foreign profit margins
on eoports to the U.S. seem to have absorbed an smusually large portion ef the changes in the dollar's value. See Mann and
liooper (1987) for a thorough discussion of the behavior of these profit margins, and for the import an forecasts of the trode
halance deficit.
Sanyal and Jones (1982) model tradeflows when foreigngood! ron ide pucchasedby domeetic residentsos,Iy otter value has
been added by domestic factors.
4See Dornbnoch (1987) and lCrssgnoan (1986) for an expositionof the standard Oo'snsot oligopolycase.
2

None of these explanations,however, offers a convincing reason for the abrupt fall in

the pass-through that occurred as the dollar began to appreciate in 1981.

It

is hard to

argue that the "domestic content" of foreign firms' production costs rose suddenly or that
the elasticity of demand jumped upward, due to a change in the number of foreign and
domesticfirmsin import-competingindustries. Indeed, the "beachhead" model of Baldwin
(1986), and Baldwinand Krugman (1986) predicts that competition increases in the U.S.
market when the dollar appreciates, driving prices down. This effect tends to magnify,

rather than reduce, the exchange rate pass-through during that period.
This paper takes a different approach by focusing on dynamic demand-side effects
in an oligopolistic market. These effects can both induce hysteresis and explain why

the degree of pricing to market may change substantially through time. In our model,
the future demand for each firm's product depends in part on its current market share.
a sense "sticky," firms' current strategic choices will affect future
as well as current profits. The future exchange rate then becomes important because it
Because demand is in

determinesthe value of future profits. Thus our approach emphasizes not only the extent
to which foreign firms will pass through current exchange rate changes, but also how the
pass-throughis affected by expected future exchange rates. Indeed,we show how the passthrough can be different in magnitude and even

in sign

depending on whether exchange

rate changes are thought to be temporary or permanent.
In responseto a temporary appreciation of the dollar, for example, foreign exporters
to the U.S. will reduce their dollar prices by less in our model than in the standard static
oligopoly framework. This occurs because the appreciation increases the value of current

relative to future dollar profits, expressed in foreign currency. When the value of the dollar
is temporarily high, foreign firms will find investmentsin market share less attractive, and
will preferinstead to let their current profit margins grow. In fact, the expectationthat the

dollar will depreciate over time may erode the value of future profits so much that foreign
firms will actually rai3e their dollar prices when the exchange rate appreciates. In other

3

circumstances,perfectly flexible dollar prices

will

appear completely rigid in response to

current exchange rate fluctuations.
Permanent dollar appreciations,on the other hand, do not create such incentives to
shift profits from tomorrow to today. Instead, foreign firms' relative costs fall in both
periods in response to a permanent appreciation. Foreign exporters will compete more
intensely and unambiguously drive prices down. Indeed, permanent appreciations may
lower prices by more in our models than in a static oligopoly model. Our results suggest
that, once the temporary appreciation of the dollar has been fully unwound, further dollar
depreciation that is perceived as permanent will lead to a much greater degree of passthrough and a much more rapid rate of improvement in the U.S. trade balance.
The uncertaintysurroundingfuture exchange rates also has an effect on current prices
in our model. Foreign firms' future profits are typically convex in the exchange rate since

a dollar appreciation is associated with both a reduction in dollar costs and an increase
in the foreign currency value of dollar profits. A more variable exchange rate therefore

adds to the expected return on a (risk-neutral)foreign firm's investment in market share,
and so prompts more vigorouscompetitionfor market share today. Prices in the domestic
market therefore fall.
The plan of this paper is as follows, Section 1 presents a general two-period model
in which market shares matter, There we emphasize that our basic results are sensitive
neither to assumptions about the nature of competition (Cournot or Bertrand), nor to
the precise form of demand. In section 2, we specialize the model to a simple 'switching
costs" model that follows Klemperer (1987a) in order to get a sense for the magnitude
of the effects on the pass-through of exchange rate changes. Section 3 then turns to
disaggregatedbilateral export price data to investigatethe sensitivity of pricing to market
to the expected degree of permanence in exchange rate changes. Section 4 concludes.

4

1. A General Market Share Model
In this section we present a simple two-period model in which firms' second-period
demands,and hence their second-period profits, depend on their first-period market shares.
This dependence can arise from a number of factors.
First, consumers may face substantial costs of switching between brands of a product
even if the brands are ex ante undifferentiated.5 For example,consumerswho havelearned
to use one type of computer system find it costly to learn a new one, even though the systems may be functionally identical. When they purchase more computer equipment, these
consumers have

a clear incentive to buy only hardware and software that are compatible

with their current system. In addition to such learning costs, there may be transactions
costs of switching suppliers. An examplewould be the costs of returning rented equipment
to one firm and then renting identical equipment from a competitor. Okun (1975) emphasizes the costs of breakingpersonalsales relationshipsin industrial transactions. More
recently, Krugman and Baldwin (1987) have built a "book-of-the-month-club model" in
which long-term contracts between buyers and sellers are costly to abrogate in the short

run. Firms themselvesencourage these attachments using such devices as repeat purchase
discounts.
Second,

a consumer may be unwilling to switch from a brand that he has tried and

liked to an untested rival brand (if brands are "experience" goods in the terminologyof
Nelson, 1970). Indeed, consumers incur search costs even in finding out about the existence

or price of a competing product.6 Past sales also serve to advertise a firm's product to
those consumers who have not previously purchased its product.
Another reason why past market share matters is provided by networkexternalities,
which give consumers incentives to purchase products that other consumers have purchased

previously! For example, as more compact-disk players were sold, the disks themselves
'See Kiemperer (198Th) and the references therein.
6See, for example, Phelps nd Winter (1970).
°SeeKatz and Shapiro, (1905).
5

became cheaper and more abundant, raising the value of a CD player to new and old users
alike.

That these or other effects

—

including perhaps 'irrational" brand loyalty

—

make

market share important is attested to by the emphasisplaced by many businessexecutives

and corporate strategy educators on market share as a goal and a measure of corporate
success. Corporate planning models often rest heavily on the assumption that the future
demand for a product will be positively correlated with its present sales.

Considertwo firms, a domestic firm D and foreign firm F, each maximizing its profits
over two periods of competition in the domestic (say U.S.) market. In period one, firm
D chooses its first-period strategic variable, vF, to maximize its total discounted future
profits:

=

vfl+Air(cf(v?,iifl,e2)

(liz)

taking F's first-period strategic variable, vf, as given. Total profits, irD, are the sum
of the firm's first- and second-period profits, irf and irf, respectively. Second-period
profits can be written in reduced form as a function of the firm's first-period market share,

f, and the

second-period exchange rate,

e, expressed here in units of foreign currency

per dollar. Future profits are discounted by the factor AD into first-period terms.

It is

convenient to assume that a higher value of i4 represents more aggressive play, so

that

the firm's market share
we write

= q,

an increasing function of iij. Thus for quantity competition
are i's
and for price competitionwe have = _pl' where and
is

q

first-period quantity and dollar price, respectively,

i=

fl F.

In

what follows, we remain

within a partial equilibrium framework, assuming that the exchange rate, as well

as

the

aggregateprice level, is exogenous to the firms.
Firm F chooses

vf analogously

to maximize the present discounted value of its own-

currencyprofits:

= e1irf(vf,vf,ej)+A'e2i4(af(v,vf),ez).
6

(ib)

irf and

ir are the firm's first- and second-period profits in dollars, e1 and e2

are the

first- and second-period price of dollars in terms of the foreign firm's currency, and
is

)f

the discount factor used by the foreign firm to value second-period profits in terms of

first-period profits in its own currency. Each firm's costs of production are denominated
in its own currency, and its cost curve is the same in both periods.

In non-cooperative equilibrium, given

e1

and 2, we have the first-order conditions:

a1Daf + AD((8f\_Q
—n.j
—

—

F

aIT.F

avf

\auf'\avf 1

avf

=0.

(2a)

(2b)

Provided that a larger first-periodmarket share increases a firm's second-period profThr'
.
.
Thr'
> 0, equation (2) implies that —f < 0, i = D, F.s Thus firms choose higher
its, i.e.,
.

UI

values of i4, that is, they compete more aggressively in the first period than they would

= 0). How much more aggressively they
if market share had no value (in which case
compete, however, dependson how much they value future market share, and this depends
in part on the exchange rate.
Notice that firm i's discount factor is inversely proportional to the interest rate in i's
home market, A' = j3/(i

where

measuresthe duration of the second period relative

to the first. More generally, we could think of /3 as indexing the importance of current
market share for future profits. If capital is perfectly mobile internationally, the domestic
and foreign interest rates will be related to expected depreciation according to Covered
Interest Parity:
AD

= AFe/e

(3)

In what follows we hold constant AF, that is, we hold constant the interest rate in the
foreign firm's home market, since our main focus is on how the foreign firm's prices will
'lCiemperer (1987a, c) explains why
period.

'We assume

a larger market share in the first period may sometime, reduce profits in the second

4fr <0.
7

differ in different markets.10
We wish to determinethe effect on firm behaviorof exchange rate changes. To do this,
we totally differentiateequation (2), and use equation (3) and the first-order conditions to
obtain:11

Adv? + Bdvf = Edej

—

Gde2

(4a)

CdvF + Dd4 = —Fde1 — Hde2,
where
—
A—

—
B—

82ND
(avD)2

ö2D

8484

(aD)2JdD)

+ AD _82D_ (8cYf\ iacni'

= 8irF +
—

+ AD( 82D_(8aD2

82.F

( ______

(f

84 '

V'a48v[

'\(ôaF)2RôvDJ'81FJ

e1

+ AFe2( 824

+

32F

e \aafJ848v1

32F
\(8f\2 + AFe2(8irl\(
_7O)

T)

(8F)2)
E— AD(8ir(0D

(avF)2

e

—

-r?r

82F

A'e2 (04'\ (8cf\

'a4aei
824 '(84
—
G_A(B2V81+AD(
e 'ôoR84)
l\8o8e2)\8v?

7)

18,r2''81 + .XFe( 32.F_\(8Q
—
H_A
_7°)
Now let firm

F's total costs measured

F produces:

c

= c(qf).

Profits are therefore irf'

which is just

Cournot competition

in foreign currency be

=

4qf

—

a function of the quantity
c(qf)/ei, so ej00J° =

F's first-period marginal cost in dollars in the case of

(4 = qf).

'°The foreignfirm's prices in its own market will differ from Those in the U.S. market as a function ofthe interest differential.
In order to avoid explicit analysis of the foreign market, however, we make the simp1iing assumptionthat foreign interest
rates remain fixed. See the discussion below for more detail.
''In equations (Ia) and )4h) we assume that firm, flrst.periodprofits do not depend directly on See footnote2.be1ow.

,.

8

To see how current and future exchange rate changes affect the equilibrium, we use

equation (4) to examinechanges in firms' strategic choices:

dD =

cc?

el

e1

- Jf')/A

(5b)

de1

dD =

(Cf +

If)/

(5c)

= (C +

I)/

(Sd)

e

e2a-i_
de2
where

cf - PDCFI
—

C[=-e1 ( _______
)
ÔL/f

i

=

+

=

+

FD

=

if =

+

if =

=

+

prD

32D

,D_——AD e2(D)\__)

=—ADez(

r'=

(Sa)

2F

3o3e2
- AD airf

)()A

()()D
()A

The term pD is the slope of D's reaction function:

B
9

and similarly,

p' is the slope of F's reaction function:
P

F

dvf

C

==-j.

The second-order conditions imply that A and D are negative. In a stable equilibrium,

DF < 1, so that

= AD(1

pDpF)

> 0.12

Equations (5a)-(&d) tell us the effect of changes in exchange rates on firms' first-period
choices

vf and uf.

a cost effect,

In each case we have separated the overall effect into two components:

C, and a real interest rate effect, I.

The first-period cost effects, Cf and

Cf are familiarfrom the standard static duopoly

model. A temporary appreciationof the dollar exchange rate — an increase in e1 — results in
a proportionate decreasein the foreign firm's first-periodcosts measured in dollars. (Note

that from the second-order conditions, 6°f is unambiguously positive and proportional to
F's marginal costs). Even if market share did not matter, the foreign firm would translate
this competitive advantage into more aggressive play. The term Cf measures D's response
to F's more aggressive behavior: with a positively (negatively) sloped reaction curve D
behaves more (less) aggressively. With price competition these effects unambiguously
lower F's dollar price (raise vf) and with quantity competitionthey usually do so. (With

quantity competitionand homogeneous products, they do so if pD

>

i,

which is true for

any stable symmetric equilibrium.)

that the cost effect is the only effect present when future profitabilityis inde=
= 0 and therefore if = if = If = if
pendent of market share, since then
Note

= Cf = Cf = 0. Indeed, the first-period cost effects are the only effects present in
''Note that if firmsset prices,the effect of a proportional exchange rate change in period j on P first-period dollar price is
= _e1i_, since

= —pf. In qssantitp

competition,e' = q, so that

opt

—

ap h'f + pt

Withhomogeneousproducts this last expressioncon he written as
inverse demand curve.

10

j' (e

,n,f

+ ej

in which, f' < 0 is the slope of the

the standard models of exchange rate pass-through in oligopoly by Dornbusch (1987) and
Krugman (1986).'
The terms

C and C are the second-period cost effects. They measure the impact

on firms' first-period behavior of the reduction in
by

F's second-period costs brought about

a future appreciation of the dollar. Such a change in costs affects the intensity of

second-period competition,changing the marginal value of market share to both firms and,
therefore, the aggressiveness with which firms compete for market share in the first period.
In F , the term e2 _____ .is precisely the change in the marginal value of market share to

F caused by its dollar cost reduction resulting from a change in e.

While we cannot be

definite about its sign (for example, market share might be an important determinant of

the second-period outcome only when firms' costs are similar) we expect it to be positive,
that is. we expect market share to be more valuable to a firm when its costs are lower.14
Assuming this term is positive,
first-period market
is the sign of

is positive and also proportional to the sensitivity of

sh::eto F's first-period strategic variable,

Similarly,

the sign of

e20D, which measures the change in the marginal value of market

share to D caused by a change in F's costs resulting from the exchange rate change. We
expect this term to be smaller in magnitude than the corresponding term for F (since
customer loyalty and other market-shareeffects tend to insulate D from effects resulting
from changes in F's costs) and negative. Thus we expect yD < 0 and jy0 < Fj, at
least around the symmetric equilibrium. Hence we also expect C' to be positive,15 and
to be smaller in absolute value than

c(. It follows that with either price or quantity

competition, this cost effect acts to lower prices in the first period. The intuition for this
fall in prices is that a future appreciation of the dollar lowers F's second-period costs and
"When market share matters, however, the magnitude of this standard cost, effect is somewhat aitered l,ecau,e a changein
current costs alters firms' costs of investing in market share, and beca,nse tine siopr, of firms reaction functions are different.
in the esampie of the nest section, the first•period cost effort is slightly smaller inn our model thaninn tine standard modei.
'Tinis will always be true in the iimiting case when market shares are so important that in tine second period each firm is a
monopolist in its first-period share of the market, and in general the term will be larger (more positive) tine more market ohare
matters.
This foiiows from _1D < < 7F, if reaction cnn-es are downwar,i sioping a, is usual inn qsnantity competition, and using
< 1 as must he the case at ieast
j-i°J < 0F I ifreaction curves ore ,,pward sioping as is usual in price competition,1,rovided
in symmetric, stable equilibrium.

p

11

thereforeraises the value to F of market share today. This effect does not arise in standard
static models.
Observe

that the effects of a permanent percentage change in the exchange rate (i.e.,

dej/eg = de2/e2) are simply the sums of the cost effects:

dD

dD

de1

de2

d1'
de1

=(Cf+Cf)/a.

(Se)

dF

+ e2—- = (Cf + Gf)/Es

(Sf)

de2

Thus the effects of a permanent exchange rate change exceed the cost effects of a temporary
exchange

rate change.16

In addition to cost effects, this model gives rise to what we call real interest rate
effects. A temporary appreciationof the dollar makes future dollar profits relatively less
valuable than current dollar profits. Firms therefore place less emphasis on market share
and instead let their current profit margins grow. This effect not only tends to raise the
price of exports to the U.S. relative to other markets, but also raises the absolute dollar
price of exports to the U.S. when the dollar appreciates. Note that from equation (4), a
temporary appreciationof the dollar is associated with a rise in the U.S. interest differential.
The impact on domestic firms is exactly the same

as

on foreign firms; more precisely, in

a symmetricequilibrium if = If. Provided that the firms are nut too asymmetric (and
always if reaction curves are upward sloping) these terms are positive.17

While the real interest effect leads to very substantial pricing to market by a foreign
exporter, it also implies that the same price changes will occur even in thoroughlydomestic
industries. Such an outcome is general to any model of intertemporalprofit maximization
This suggests a presumption that t.he effect.! of a permanent exchange rate changeare greater here than in a standard model
in which market share is amimpartant, and in which the only effects present are C' and Cf. There are reasonsfar caution on
this point, howerer. First, incorporating the market-share effects changes firms' s'al,,e functions in the special model of the
nextsection, it is as if we includedan additionalsegment of demand of constant elastici' -I hence directly changeshehacior
and the magnitudes of cf,
pD pF, and a. (It may also affect first-period demand.( Second, the etfcctsof an exchange
rate changeon the second period of a market share model are likely to he smaller than in a standard oligopoly model, so with
overlapping generations(so that every period has some of the characteristicsof l,sth the first and the last period of our msdcl)
—

—

c,

the sire of the effect is nnclear.
'TSinee -4. >0, !f4. >0, A < e and D <0, we have

r° > e and r" >0.
12

in which firms have some ability to shift profits over time. Keynes refers to a similar effect,
which posits positive correlationbetween the level of prices and the nominal interest rate,

as Gibson's paradox18 Phelps and Winter (1970), Phelps (1986) and Fitoussi and Phelps
(1986) discuss the tendencyfor high real interest rates to raise markups in a single-economy
model. Indeed, Fitoussi and Phelps (1986) place much of the blame for the persistently
high rates of unemployment in Europe on this kind of mechanism.
Of course, if we had fixed the U.S. interest rate instead,then the effect of a temporary
exchange rate change would

be absent in the absolute level of dollar prices in the U.S.

market. The required fall in the foreign interest rate, however, would raise the return on
investments in foreign market share, and the relative dollar price of the identical good
in the foreign market would neverthelessfall. Thus, regardless of the change in either

country's interest rate, as long as the interest differential increases with the temporary
dollar appreciation,the differential between U.S. and foreign prices increases as well.
In fact, in a model more general than this one, we would see interest rate effects in
the U.S. market even if only the foreign interest rate moved in response to the increase
in expected dollar depreciation. Assume firms produce for both the U.S. market and the
foreign market and are capacity constrained, or, more generally, have increasingmarginal

costs in the short run. Then a temporary dollar appreciationwhich leaves the U.S. interest
rate unchanged but reduces foreign interest rates makes foreign market share relatively
more valuable than U.S. market share. It follows that firms will reallocateoutput toward
the foreign market and away from the U.S. market, thereby raising U.S. prices.
In the current model, the total effect of a temporary exchange rate appreciation on
prices is ambiguous, since the real interest rate and cost effects are opposed. It is quite
plausible that the two effects are

so that import prices will appear
to be sticky in response to changes in the value of the dollar that are perceived to be
of similar magnitudes,

'°See lCeyne (1930). See also Baroky and Summer, (1905) for empirical evidenceof Gibson', paradox. Lowerreal interest
rate, may also lower prices by encouragingcapital investment that lowers current marginal costs (althoughinvestmentsindurable
advertisingwould probably rai,e current prices). See Stiglitz (1904) for other possible explanations of mlii, phenomenon.
13

temporary. This stickiness arises despite the fact that prices are perfectly flexible. In the
example of the next section, the real interest rate effect can easily dominate, leading to
a perverse response of import prices to exchange rate changes: dollar import prices may
rise when the dollar appreciates. In general, the real interest rate effect must dominate if
firms' costs are sufficiently low.

rate change gives rise to an interest rate effect that
is equal and opposite to a temporary change. To see this, observe that a permanent
appreciationis equivalent to the sum of a temporary appreciation and an expected future
An expected future exchange

appreciationof equal amounts. The relative values of future profits do not change in this
case. Since, therefore, for future exchange rate changes the cost effect and real interest rate
effect are in the same direction, current prices may be more sensitive to expected future
exchange rate changes than they are to contemporaneouschanges.
Finally, we consider an implication of uncertainty about future exchange rates in our
model. If firms are risk neutral, then D chooses

v to maximize:

E() = (v,vf') +
Similarly,

F chooses uf' to maximize:

E() = ei(v, vf, ei) + E(e2(f (i/f, vf'), e2)).
We assume

that Uncovered Interest Parity holds, so that equation (3) becomes:

=
Proceedingas before, we can derive

the effect of a small increase in the variance of

e, fb with variance 5 and constant mean;

e2 by consideringa family of distributions of

members of the family are derived from one another by mean-preserving spreads. We then
have:

= (VF +
14

(Sg)

(Sh),
VD

_AD

11F_
— —,

auf as
a2

\ JJJf
ej \3of°38 ,e2ir2

where

=-/A and 5' = —/ñ, i = A(1 D p_F), and A,
—

,

Ô, and D are the

expectations taken with respect to ez of A, B, C, and D, respectively.
At this level of generality, we cannot unambiguously sign V°" and VD. However, in
the limiting case in which switching costs, customer loyalty, etc., are so strong that in
the second period each firm acts as a monopolist in its first-period share of the market,

ir' is a convex function of e1 (since a monopolist's profits are a convex function of its
costs). It follows that e21r' is

jJ2E(e2ir') > 0.

a convex function of

Also in this case,

e2,

and this is sufficient to show that

ir is independent of the future exchange rate, so

that VD = 0 and yE' > 0. Hence in either pricecompetitionor quantity competitionin the
limiting case, adding a mean-preserving spread to the distribution of the future exchange
rate lowers first-periodprices.19
The intuition for this result is that the future profitability of an overseas market is
typically a convex function of the exchange rate: dollar costs are lower and so dollar
profits are higher exactly when dollars are more valuable. Therefore greater exchange rate
uncertainty increases the value of overseas market shares, hence lowers current prices in
these markets.20

It is important to note that this result may be reversed if firms are sufficiently riskaverse. Even though an increasein the varianceof the future exchange rate raises foreign
0An exception is quantity competition with extreme negative values of ji1 hut this could not arise in stable, symmetric
equilibrium.
'°To see one aspect of this convexity, consider the marginal consumer in the second period when the exchangerate takes its
expected value. With a variable exchange rate, the foreign firm will sell to this consumer only if ouch a sale turns out to be
profitable. As the variability increases, this option to odi l,ecome, more valuable and so on investment in market share yields a
higher expectedreturn. (This intuition is only partial since it ignores infrarnarginalconsumers.)Similarly,Dint (i98) studies
how the option value of remaining i,a a market depends on the variability of the exchangerate. In our model,however,unlike
Dixit's, participation in the market is not an either/or proposition. Is, our model, foreignfirms increase their participation in a
continuousway by competing more aggressively as variatsilityofthe exchangerote, and hence th. option value of market share,
increase,.

'S

firms' expected returns on investments in market share, it also makes these returns more
risky. For firms that are highly risk-averse, the increasein expected return will be insufficient to offset the added variability. They will thereforebe less willing to sacrifice certain
first-period profits for a risky investment in market share, and so they will raise prices.

So far, we have discussed the effects of exchange rate changes on only the first period
of our model. The effect of an unanticipated exchange rate change that occurs in the last

a standard oligopoly model.21 (In the last
period there is no future, so that market share is no longer valuable.) If the reason that
market share matters is that each firm has some monopoly power over its previous market
period is just the cost effect that is present in

share, then the second period will in general be less competitivethan a standard oligopoly
model, and the cost effect may be smaller. Thus, exchange rate pass-through in the last
period of a model in which market share matters seems likely to be smaller than in

a

standard oligopoly model, and, indeed, this is the case in the exampleof Section 2.22
In reality, we are rarely in either the first or last period of any market. In a multiperiod
version of this model, each period will havesomecharacteristicsof the first and last periods:

we expect that the effects of exchange rate changes on first-period prices, on which we have
focused, will be present but perhaps diluted.23
2.

An Example Quantity Competition Among Producers of Perfect
Substitutes with Consumer Switching Costs
We illustrate the preceding analysis by consideringa simple example: in the first pe-

riod producers selling a homogeneous product engage in Cournot competition, and in the

e

The second.periodequilibrium may also he affected i,y temporary changes in flrot.periotleachasige rates. A changein
affects first-period market shares, and this may have an effecton second.perio,l competition.
22 This
comparisonis ambiguous for two reason!. First, the last period of a market,I.are ,no,lel is not always less competitive
titan a standard oligopoly model (see iclemperer, tOB7It). Second,eve!,in a monopoly, the cost effect, is not necessarilysmaller
than in a standard Oligopoly.
20 Ia a
multiperiod model, firms will have the (flrst.period) ince,tive we have emphasizedto inivest in capturing market share
that will be valuable in the fut,,re, bs,t the (last.perioel) incentive to price hiixh to exploit market share may keep prices Front
falling too far. In the following mult.iperiodmodel, the effects of exchangerates on average prices in any period will simplybe
the average of the effects on our "first period," and the fairly standar,l effect!! on o,ir "secondperiod? Let there be overlapping
generations of customers who each live two periods, let the conditions of the motiel in the text apply to each generation of
conss,mors,and let firms be able to discriminate on price perfectly between generations. Farrell and Shapiro (1987) provide a
cleverly conotructed multiperiod model of switching co,t.s hut make a nnmi,er of very special assumptions. To our knowledge,
no satiofyingand tractable multiperiod model of market.share competition exists.

16

as a monopolist on its share of the first-period market.
A simple interpretation of this model would be that first-periodconsumers have costs of
second period each firm behaves

switching between firms in the second period.

It is clear that with large enough switching

costs, in the non-cooperative second-period equilibrium, each firm will behave as a monopolist within the segment of the market that bought from it in the first period. Kiemperer
(1987a) shows that the same result can arise with relatively small second-period switching
costs.24
We make the model somewhat more general than that of the previous section by
allowing n° foreign firms and n domestic firms, with N
foreign and domestic firms produce outputs

=

+ a. The representative

q' and q, respectively, in the first period. In

equilibrium all firms of a given type will produce the same output, so that total industry
output is Q = *qF' + qD. For simplicity, we assume linear demand, p = A — Q, in both
periods. We also assume that all firms have constant marginal costs of c units of their own
since

currency. A foreign firm's second-period dollar profits are then just

the term in brackets,

_e2)2), is the profit a monopolist

with costs c/e2 would earn

in the second period.

It is now straightforward to derive the response of the first-period dollar price, Pi
to a change in both the first- and second-period exchange rates around the symmetric
equilibrium:
dp1

=

1

f X

\i

) (_(x

—

1)N(A — c)

—

(X —

''To he consistentwith the model of the previous section, we require that the stnrcture of first-period demand is independent
of the second-period exchange rate. This is not necessarilythe case in a model of switchingcosts since first-period consurmers
wire anticipate p,rrchasing again in the second periosl should consider oecozrii.period prices (winch depend on tire secorrd-period
exchange rate) in making their first-period purchase decisions.This additional linkage between ansi tire first period would
make no difference to the equilibrium of the example of this section under the switchiog.costi,rterpretatiorr - we interpret

s

if

the inverte demand f,rnction f)q) as meaning tire qth consumerhas reservation price 1(q) and ass,rmeconsumers' cesen-otion
prices are identically ordered inn the two periols (s.c lClemperer, 1987a). However, it wo,uld affect tire comparative static,
results. Therefore, the example of market share competition in tin, section ,irourld be iontecpreted as applying strictly to a
model of switchingcosts when either consumer, are nilve or (more reasolraidly) second_periodcon,srmer, face switchingcosts
beca,use they are exposed to first.period consumer,' psrrchases, but tireir prefereircesare trot taken into account by iirst.1,eriod
consumers. An example might be srnis'ersities tir,t busy compurters in tire first period, wInch ace used by students, wire are
themselvesconsumersin the second period.

17

wherefor convenience we have set e1 = e2

= 1, and X = (I/2)(l+(l+A(N2_1)/N2)i2).2S

It follows that the effect of a permanent exchange rate change is:
dp1 + dp1
dej de2

—

Xn*c

N+l

The economic significance of X is that in the unique equilibrium each firm produces

(4)x.

a first-period output

Thus, in the standard model in which market share is

unimportant to firms, X = 1. Note that this is also the case here if either A = 0 (firms
place no value on the future) or if N = 1 (a monopolist always captures the whole firstperiod market and so can ignore market share effects in choosing its first-period output).
With X = 1 we havethe standard Cournot oligopoly results. Future exchange rate changes

(i. = 0) and the effect of a current change,

= _n*c/(N + 1), derives
purely from the impact on foreign firms' costs expressed in dollars and, for a given size
oligopoly N, is proportional to foreign firms' market share, na/N, and the foreign firms'
have no effect

costs, c. With linear demand the price elasticity with respect to the current exchange
is

rate

(N-)j' which is lessthan one, even when all firms are foreign.
More generally,

X is the fraction of the standard single-period Cournot output that

each firm produces, and so can be thought of as a measure of competitiveness in the first

period. Provided that
both
to

A

A>

0 and N >

1,

we have that X> 1, and that

and N. In fact, X is relatively insensitive to N for N

A.27 For reasonable values

2,26 hut

X is increasing in
it is more sensitive

of A, X is approximately linear in A, which is sensible since

the value that firms place on future market share is linear in A.
Note that A need not be less than 1. If the "second period" consists of several subperiods, in all of which first-period market share matters, then

A

may be substantially larger.28

"Notethat with N >2 firm, we have
k II.,

,

h,

"With ) = 1, X = 1.16, 1.19, and 1.21, for N = 2, 3, and respectively.
"With N = 2, X = 1.09, 1.16, 1.29, and 1.50 for .\ = 1/2, 1 2, and 4, respectively.
"This woWd be the case if, for example,consumersdevelop switching costs that lock them into a product for severalrepeat
purchases.

18

More generally, we can simply think of,\ as representingthe importanceof current market

share for future profits.
We can now isolate the different effects discussed in the preceding section, and give
a sense for their relative importance. As we saw in the foregoing section, the effect of
changing either the current or future exchange rate consists of two parts, the cost effect
and the real interest rate effect.
We discuss first the cost effects. The effect on price of a change in the current exchange

,

rate that operates purely through lowering foreign firms' costs in dollars is the last term
which in this examplecan be written —N-f(2-.__)(nc). We note that this term
of
is directly proportional to the number of foreign firms,
costs, c.
firms,

n, for given N, and to first-period

It is not very sensitiveto the number of firms N, given the share held by foreign

n./N, or to the value of future market share, which

mentioned earlier, the effect is solely that of the exchange

is

proportional to

\.

As we

rate on price in any single-period

Cournot model.
The effect on current price of a change in future costs caused by a future exchange
rate change is the second-period cost effect. As the dollar appreciates in the second period,
foreign firms' dollar costsfall, causing F's return on an investment in market share to rise.

(The return to D on an investment in market share does not change with the exchange
rate in this example.) Competitionbecomes more vigorous in the first-period equilibrium.

a result, P1 falls by ---(2-—r)((X — l)2n*c). Like the first-period cost effect, this
cost effect is directly proportional to the fraction of foreign firms (since only foreign firms'
As

costs are affected) and to second-period costs, c, and is not very sensitiveto N. However
this cost effect is very roughly proportionalto .\: the more firms care about market share,
the more a change in its value affects current behavior.

+
The cost effect generated by a permanent change in the exchange rate,
For the demand structure in
is just the sum of the cost effects, here given by
this example, the effect of a permanent exchange rate change is always greater than the
19

analogous effect in the standard Cournot model; for A

= I the effect is about 20 percent

larger than in the standard model, whereas for A = 4 (which could represent the case in
which the "second period" was actually several repeated periods, or a two-period model
in which firms cared even more about market share than in our model) the effect is about
60 percent larger than in the standard model.29 Observe, on the other hand, that the cost
effect of a temporary exchange rate change is always less than the effect of a temporary

change in the standard model (since X/(2X— I) < I). Also note that

if a fraction (1 — a)

of foreign firms' marginal costs are actually incurred in the U.S., the cost effects (but not
the interest rate effects) would be multiplied by a. The model in the previous section and
our example have assumed

a = 1.

The impactson current pricesof the first- and second-period real interest rate effects in
this example are, respectively,

2-j)N(A — e) and —

N(A — c). As noted
in the previous section, they are equal and opposite, and therefore cancel for permanent
exchange rate changes. Because the interest rate effects influence domestic as well as
foreign firms, these effects are independentof the degree of foreign penetration into the

domestic market. In addition, the real interest rate effects grow slightly more important
as the total number of firms, N, increases,30 and are approximately linear in A. Recall

that these effects arise even if firms have zero costs.
The overall effect

of

a temporary exchange rate change is the sum of the cost and

real interest rate effects. As shown earlier, these effects oppose each other, and either can
dominate. Indeed, a temporary appreciation of the dollar would actually be associated
with an increasein the dollar price of U.S. imports, if (X — 1)N(A — c) > nte. If a fraction
(1—a) of foreign firms' marginal costs are incurred in the U.S., then the condition becomes

(X — 1)N(A — c) > antc. To understand when a temporary appreciation will raise prices,

—,

=
aaNote however, that the effectin the second period elan unanticipated changein the exchange rate is
which
is a fraction (N + 1)/2N of that in the rtandard model. Thus in a world in which all periods have some of the characteristic,
of each of our two periods, the effect of a permanent changein the exchange rate wo,,ld he more similar to that in a standard
oligopoly model.
30For A = 1 the magnitudes are .5G(.4 — e), .12k — c), and .18k — e) for N = 2, 3, and , respectively.
20

note that
of

(X —

a monopolist'smarkup with linear demand is (A — c)/2.

1)

A

rough approximation

is A/5, so the condition for a temporary dollar appreciation to have no effect at

all on dollar import prices is approximately:

share of market
of
a monopolist in the market
O(5/2)\percent profit margin
which is not unreasonable.
—
A—

(

foreign

A short appendix summarisesthese results on the sensitivity of dollar import prices
to exchange

rate changes.

To gain

a sense for the magnitude of the pass-through elasticities for the model of

this section,we present in Table I computationsof the percentagechange in dollar import
prices in response to

the values

of

a one percent temporary appreciation of the dollar. Table la shows

the elasticity,

for different values

of A

and different fractions of costs

that are denominated in foreign currency. The top row of the table (A = 0) gives the
standard Cournot pass-through.Tables lb and Ic separate this elasticity into the cost and
real interest rate effects, respectively. In the tables that follow, we assume that 50 percent
of the foreign firm's costs are denominated in dollars. Table Id shows the effect on the
pass-through of different levels of foreign penetration into the domestic market (holding
the total number of firms constant). Table le allows N to increase, holding constant
instead the fraction of the market controlled by foreign firms at one half. Finally, Table
if shows the impact of higher costs on the sensitivity of price changes to the exchange
rate. The tables illustrate the results discussed above. They also show that the degree
of pass-through attributable to both the cost effect and the interest rate effect are larger,
ceteris paribus, when prices are lower, i.e., for larger A, larger N, and larger c.

It is clear from these tables that the pass-through from a temporary exchange rate
change may easily be perverse: a temporary appreciation can reduce the profitabilityof a
marginal investment in market share enough to increase the current dollar price. Notice
that in these cases, pricing to market will be most extreme, since foreign currency prices
of foreign exports will rise proportionately more than the exchange rate.
21

The elasticities reported in Table 2 are for an analogous set of computations, except
that here the dollar appreciation is assumed to be permanent. As we saw above, a permanent dollar appreciation tends to make the dollar price of U.S. imports fall more rapidly
than does a temporary appreciation. Comparing the elasticities reported in Tables 1 and
2 makes clear that expected future exchange rate changes can easily have a much greater
effect than current exchange

rate changes on current prices.

Finally, we consider the effect of increasing the variance of the future exchange rate.

A Taylor series approximationto future expected profits for the foreign firm yields:

(E(e24(e2)) (/)d(e21r2(e2))
where the middle expression is evaluated at the expected future exchange rate,
compute

We can

that around the symmetric equilibriuman increase in the variance, 6, of future

exchange rates lowers dollar import prices:
dp1

dö

— —

1

(

X

N+12X—1)

—

1)c2

A—c

<0

Thus with risk-neutral firms, an increasein uncertainty about future exchange rates lowers
current prices.

3. Data Analysis

It is beyond the scope of this paper to test comprehensively the model above. In this
section, we look instead at aspects of

a simple but important implication of our model:

that the degree of pricing to market depends on the perceived permanence of exchange
rate changes.31 While it is not in itself surprising that permanent appreciations exert
more downward pressure on

p ices than temporary appreciations,

such a distinction might

help explain the puzzling behavior of U.S. import prices during the 1980s. There is now
The permanence of exchange rate changes can also affect the degree of pricingto market in model, where there is a cost
of adjusting oupply. Krugman (1986) discusses an example in which there are increasing marginal costs of expanding sales in
a firm's overseas market. A model of this typemight explain the empiricalresults presented below; note, however, that such
a model would not generate the perverse response, discussedin the foregoing sections. of dollar import prices to temporary
exchange rate changes.

22

a growing consensus that the dollar prices of U.S. imports during this period have moved

too little in response to exchange rate changes to be consistent with historical experience.
To the extent that the unprecedentedrise in the dollar's value was believed to be more

temporary than prior appreciations, profit-maximizing firms in our model would cut prices
to the U.S. market by little, if at alL32
There is, in fact, some evidence that suggeststhe recent appreciation was viewed
a temporary phenomenon by historical standards. Survey data on exchange

as

rate expecta-

tions, for example, show that during the period from 1982 to 1985, respondentsconsistently
believed the dollar would begin to depreciate rapidly within the next twelve months.33 Indeed, nominaldepreciation at an annual rate of 7 to 10 percent was expected on average
by this measure.
A more common measure

of expected depreciation, the nominal interest differential

between U.S. and foreign euro-currencydeposits, yields the same qualitative conclusion.

Figure 1 shows a simple average

of

the differences between twelve-month euro-dollar de-

posits and similar depositsfor the pound, mark, yen and French franc. By this measure,
the dollar was expected to depreciatemost rapidly in the early 1980s, just when the rate
of

appreciation was also the greatest.34
Of course, our model focuses on real and not nominal magnitudes. Calculation of

expected real depreciation,however,
inflation,

is

further hinderedby the inability to observe expected

Nevertheless, expected real depreciation appears to be positively correlated

with our estimates of expected nominal depreciation. Table 3 presents estimates of both
expected nominal depreciation of the dollar and expected inflation in the U.S. relative to
several of

its major trading partners. We have chosen a variety of measures to ensure

To he sure, over the Roxtirog rate period it is difficult, if not impossible,to reject the hypothesis that the real exchange
rate follow, a random walk over relatively short forecast horizons (see, for eoample, ttleeoe aml Rogoff, 1986). Newer evidence
for the longerintervals which are more relevant to o,,r analysis,however. quggesto that as much as 50 percent of real exchange
rate changes axe temporary (See Huioinga,1986).
°'5ee Franisel and Fcoot (1987) and Froot and Frankel (1986) for a description of thos survey data.
04The interest differentialis not a perfect measure of expected depreciation heca,i,e ii is contaminated by the exchange risk
premium. However, the alternative survey meas,xre,whichis free from this kind of contamination,shows expected depreciation
to be greeter duzing this period. Thus the interest differentialmay well ,mderstate expecteddepreciation.

23

that the appearanceof a substantial increase in expected real depreciation is not due to
the peculiarities of any one measure. We report three (out of many possible) ways of
calculatingexpected real depreciation in the bottom portion of Table 3, Regardless of the
precise measures used, the early 1980s were characterized by expectations of unusually
large future real depreciation.
To investigate the role of expected depreciation more closely, we examine the differential effect of exchange rate changes on prices charged by foreign exporters in different
markets. Consider the one-period percentagechange in a British exporter's dollar price
on exports to the U.S. less the percentage change in his dollar price on exports to Japan:
UKUS —

UK,.JA .

(6)

If there is pricing to market, a current appreciation of the dollar relative to the yen will
raise

the relative price of exports to the U.S. market, so that expression (6) will be positive.

a temporary versus permanent appreciation. The model above would
predict that the more the dollar is expected to depreciate in the future, the greater the
Note the effect

of

quantity given in (6) will be. Indeed, prices in our model may often be more sensitiveto
expected future exchange rate changes than to current changes.
A simple way

to capture pricing to market and its sensitivity to exchange rate ex-

pectations is to project a measure of expression (6) onto the change in expected future
depreciationof the real dollar/yen exchange rate and the contemporaneous change in the
real exchange rate:35
Ap1 UKUS — APUKJA = PiAE,(AeY+M) + ,82Ae9M + e.

(7)

where the superscript i represents the ith industry, AeTSJ4 is the change from period
—

I to

period t —

in

the log of the real dollar/yen rate, and AE,(AeJA) is the change from

1

to

in expected depreciation of the real dollar/yen rate over the following

generd, the relationship between discrete percextage changes in price and changes in exchange rates is not linear so
is only a llrst.order approximation.

that equation (7)

24

period. If there were no pricing to market, we would expect all the terms in equation (7)
to be zero. If there were pricing to market but all industries behaved in exactly the same
then (to a first-order approximation)the error term, c, would be zero. Finally, with
pricing to market and diversity across markets, the error terni would appear random over
way,

i. (Notice that any such variation across industries is independent of the exchange rate
terms, so that the Gauss-Markov assumptions are satisfied.) Thus equation (7) represents

a crude but informative test of a basic property of our model.
The coefficient /3i in equation (7) measuresthe degree of pricing to market that occurs
in response to an expected future depreciation in the dollar/yen rate. That is, a 1 percentage point increase in the expected future depreciationof the dollar,
given no change in the current spot rate, (AeSM

of

j

= 1),

= 0), results in a proportional increase

in the relative price of exports sent to the U.S. versus exports sent to Japan.36 Con-

our model predicts j3 > 0, Similarly,
the coefficient P2 measuresthe effect of a permanent depreciationof the dollar on pricing
ventional static models would yield /3j =

0, while

to market. If, for example, changes in the dollar/yen rate are passed through one-for-one
= 0.
into dollar import prices (so that there is no pricing to market) we would expect
If, on the other hand there is no pass-through at all, we would expect P2 = —.01 Finally,

the pass-through from a current depreciation that is expected to be purely temporary is
given by i2 — /3k. If, for example, Pz —

= 0, there is no pricing to market

in response to

= — .01, the dollar prices of U.S. imports are
temporary exchange rate changes. If fl2
insensitive to temporary exchange rate changes. If P2 — Pi < — .01, the pass-through for
temporary exchange rate changes tends to be perverse: in response to a current appreciation of the dollar, foreign exporters raise their dollar prices on exports to the U.S.

the left-hand side of equation (7), we use highly disaggregated bilateral export unit value data from the U.N. Our sample covers annual exports
To measure the price term on

and JA
(198 1-86) of 65 industriesfrom each of the UK, West Germany (WG), France (FR)
The regreameuresuIt are reported in a Inarmer that perinita exactly thi, type of ralc,alation.

25

to each of the US, JA, and the UK.37 The term t.seTS is measured by the change over

the last twelve months of the dollar/yen rate, adjusted by the CPI in the US and Japan.
In the regressions that follow, we used the two relatively standard measures of expected
real depreciation given in lines 7 and S of Table 3. Thus the term AE(aef..;A) is either

the change in the twelve-month forward discount or the survey expected depreciation of
the dollar/yen rate, plus the change in inflation in Japan over the previous twelve months
less the change in inflation in the U.S. over the previous twelve months.

It is well known that the bilateral unit value indexes we use are subject to substantial
measurement errors. Nevertheless in this context, their problems are attenuated. First,

by using bilateral export data we ensure that the exchange rate changes on the right-hand
side of the equation can be measured with precision. When using multilateral data, for
example, it is difficult to know the precise weights that should be applied to measure "the"

the potentially large measurement errors contained in the
price data themselves are less of a problem here because they are on the left-hand side
exchange rate change. Second,

of the equation. Thus by selecting noisier measures of price changes, we are able to use
cleaner measuresof the explanatoryvariableS.
Tables 4a and 4b present estimates of equation (7) using the interest differential and
the survey measuresof expected depreciation,respectively. The estimates were performed
using OLS. We used the averaged data for all variablesover the two-year periods reported
in Table 338 We report the usual OLS standard errors in Tables 4a and 4b, as we discov-

ered that the standard errors calculated using a heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance
estimate were smaller. Each table gives regression results for six sets of relative bilateral export price changes; the last set of regressions combine all the individual bilateral
regressions.
0Tlu some cases these unit value data show oudden, huge jumps in level from one year to the next. We hove eliminated
indu,triee which contained one-year jumps of more than 4011 percent, which were most likelyt,o be data errors.
aainitially we estimated equation (7) on the origInalannual data. The re,ulting parameter estimates were similar ta those
reported in Table 4, hut the standard errors were large. On the oseomption that the imprecisionwas attrihutahle to both
measurementerror in the data and logs in response to exchange rote changes, ac ,,oed two averages of the data over two-yror
nonoverloppingintervals.

26

There is no overwhelming evidence that expected future depreciation influences the
degree of pricing to market. Nevertheless, the magnitude and sign of the estimates of both
coefficients have interesting interpretations in terms of our model, and may shed light on

the recent behaviorof the pass-through relationship.
The estimates of f3 are not always the same sign, but whenever they are statistically
different from zero, they are positive: higher expected future dollar depreciation implies

increasing prices in the U.S. market relative to other export markets. In the combined
regression, the point estimates are statistically positive at the 10 percent level. In addition,
the magnitude of these effecte is impressive. For example, the last point estimate of
in Table 4a implies

that, given the current spot rate, a

dollar depreciation

is

1

percent increase in expected

on average associated with an increase of about 4 percent in

the

price of exports sent to the U.S. relative to similar exports sent to Japan and the U.K. Of
course, if current market share affects firms' profits more than one year into the future,

then a 1 percent increase in expected depreciationover the next twelve months is likely to
be associated with a larger cumulativeexpected depreciationover a longer, more relevant
horizon. The estimated magnitudes of fl in Table 4b are similar to those in Table 4a. lithe
survey data contain measurement error, however, these estimates are biased in magnitude

and statistical significance toward zero.39
The estimates of P2 are usually more than an order of magnitude smaller than the
estimates of

j,

and in only one case in

fourteen regressions is an estimate statistically

different from zero. We therefore cannot reject the hypothesis

that permanent changes in

the value of the dollar have n.o effect on the degree pricing to market. The standard errors
are small enough, however, that we can reject the hypothesis that there is any substantial
degree of pricing to market in response to permanent exchange rate changes. Thus, fully

permanent depreciationsappear to be passed through into import prices one-for-one.
are almost always negative and less than —.01: a
Estimatesof the difference, P2 —

See Froot and Franket (1985) for a discussionof the measuremnt errors in these data.
27

completely temporary appreciationof the dollar is associatedwith a rise in import prices.

The right-most column of Tables 4a and 4b tests the hypothesis that P2 —

P1

= 0.

In

several cases, including the conibined regressions, this difference is statistically negative

at the

5

percent level. In the last regression

of

Table 4a, the estimates imply that a

1

percent temporary appreciation leads on average to an increase of 4.4 — 0.3 = 4.1 percent
in relative prices of exports sent to U.S. markets. The correspondingnumber in Table
4b is 1.4. These results illustrate the case of perverse pass-through we discussed above.

Naturally,one rarely sees such large effects in practice because most exchange rate changes
have a substantial permanent component.

In fact,

our estimates in Table 4a imply that

the combination of a contemporaneous appreciation of 3.5 percent and an increase of 1
percent in expected depreciationover the following 12 months would leave dollar import
prices constant.40 These figures suggest

that the 4 percentagepoint rise in the real interest

differential witnessed during the

would cancel the effect on dollar import prices of

tbe first

lOSOs

percentage points of dollar appreciation.
Our findings suggest that one must know bow much
14

rate change
is expected to be permanent in order to determine the magnitudeand even the sign of the
of a given exchange

effect on dollar import prices. In sum, the estimates reported in Tables 4a and 4b provide
sonic support for the view
explaining

that expected depreciation may have a large role to play in

the pricing behavior of foreign exporters to the U.S. market during the 1980s.

40The last regression in Table 4a implies that an increase of 1 percc,t in expected dollar deprec,atton raises dollar import
prices by 4.37 perce, and that a 3.5 percent current appreciationlowersdollar import prices by 3.5+ 3.5(0.20) = 4.41 perce,t.

28

4. Conclusion
We have constructed a model in which market share matters in order to study the
effects of exchange rate changes on international pricing. We stressed that the return

a

firni expects to earn on its current investment in market share is sensitive to the expected

future exchange rate. Thus we found that foreign firms price more aggressively in the
domestic market, attempting to gain more market share, when the price of the domestic
currency is expected to remain permanently higher. Conversely, when a current exchange
rate appreciation is thought to be temporary, foreign firms will behave less aggressively,
perhaps even raising prices denominated in the domesticcurrency. Finally, we found that
an uncertain future exchange rate is likely to make market share more valuable, and so
drive down current prices.
We also exploredsome tentative empirical evidence

that suggests a possible relation-

ship between the degree of pricing to market and expectedfuture depreciation. If producers
regarded each year's appreciation during 1981-S as more temporary than past appreciations, our modelsuggeststhat the pass-throughof exchange rate changes into dollar import
prices should have been lower than historicalexperience would predict. Indeed,our empirical investigationsuggests that purely temporary dollar appreciations are associated with
an increase in dollar import prices. Expected depreciation may have played a substantial
role in foreign exporters' recent decisions to raise prices in the U.S. market relative to those
in other markets.

29

5. Appendix
The following expressions summarize the results of Section 2.
For

A

= 0 (i.e. in a standard single-period
dp1
de1

'

Cournot model):

n

c

\N+1
de2

For A

= 1, N

2,41

6'
'(N(A—c)
de7N+lJ\
dpj

1

&

dp

6(

de2

dp1

dej
For

A

=

3(), N

(—N(A—C) —2n°c

I

7'N+1)'

2

dpj

5

flC

6(

dp1

de2 5\N+l
N < m, A = 4 for N = 2):

3.2 for 3

(i.e., A

3/

5

1—N(A—c)

1

2

dpi3(
4\N+1)
de2

*

71C

1

2

dp1 +dpt__3 n*c
2'\N+1
de1 de2

" Theoe approximationsuse the result that for \

I, N—I

1j5. (For N = 2, N = 1.1G for 3

30

N

, 1.18 N

1.21.)

6.

Bibliography
Baldwin, Richard, "Hysteresis in Trade," MIT 1986.
Baldwin, Richard, and Paul Krugman, "Persistent Trade Effects of Exchange Rate
Shocks," MIT, 1986.
Barsky, Robert, and Lawrence Summers, "Gibson's Paradox and the Gold Standard,"
NBER Working Paper, no. 1680, 1985.

Dixit, Avinash, "Entry and Exit Decisions of Firms Under Fluctuating Real Exchange
Rates," Princeton University, September 1987.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Exchange Rates and Prices," American Economic Review, Vol.
77, March 1987, pp. 93-106.
Farrell, Joseph, and Carl Shapiro, "Dynamic Competition with Lock-In," Discussion
Papers in Economics No. 121, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University,
1987.

Fitoussi, J., and E. Phelps, "Causes of the 1980s Slump in Europe," Brookirtgs Papers
on Economic Activity, No. 2, 1986, pp. 487-513.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Kenneth Froot, "Using Survey Data to Test Standard Propositions Regarding Exchange Rate Expectations," American Economic Review, Vol
77, March 1987, pp. 133-153.

Froot, Kenneth, and Jeffrey Frankel, "Interpreting the Bias in Forward Rates in Light
of Evidence from Survey Data," NBER Working Paper no. 1963, August 1986.
Giovannini, Alberto, "ExchangeRates and Traded Goods Prices," forthcoming, Journal of International Economics, 1987.

looper, Peter, and Catherine Mann, "The U.S. External Deficit: Causes and Persistence," International Finance Discussion Paper no. 316, November 1987.

Huizinga, John, "An Empirical Investigation of the Long Run Behavior of Real Exchange Rates," University of Chicago, 1986.

Katz, Michael, and Carl Shapiro, "Network Externalities,Competition, and Compatibility," American Economic Review, Vol. 75, June 1985, pp. 424-440.
Keynes, John M.,

A Treatise

on Money,

New York, Macmillan, 1930.

Kiemperer, Paul, "Markets with Consumer Switching Costs," Quarterly Journal of
31

Economics, Vol. CII, May 1987a, pp. 375-394.

of Economics,

Competitivenessof Marketswith Switching Costs,"
Vol. 18, Spring 1987b, pp. 138-150.

Rand Journal

, "Entry Deterrencein Markets with Consumer Switching Costs," Economic Journal, Vol 97, Conference Papers, 1987c, pp. 99-117.

Krugman, Paul, "Pricingto Market When the Exchange Rate Changes," NBER Working Paper no. 1926, May 1986.
Krugman, Paul, and Richard Baldwin, "The Persistence of the U.S. Trade Deficit,"
Brookir&gs Papers on Economic Activity, 1987:1, pp. 1-56.
Mann, Catherine, "Prices, Profit Margins and Exchange Rates: After the Fall," Federal Reserve Board of Governors, July 1987.
Meese, Richard, and KennethRogoff, "Was it Real? The Interest Rate Differential Relation over the Modern Floating Rate Period," Journal of Finance, forthcoming,
1988.

Nelson, Philip, "Information and ConsumerBehavior," Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 78, March/April 1970, pp. 311-329.
Okun, Arthur, "Inflation: Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, No. 2, 1975, pp. 351-390.
Phelps, Edmund, "The Significance of Customers Marketsfor the Effects of Budgetary
Policy in Open Economies," Annales d'Economie de Statistique, September 1986,

pp.

101-118.

Phelps, Edmund, and Sidney Winter, "OptimalPrice Policy under Atomistic Competition," in Phelps et al., Microeconornic Foundations of Employment and Inflation
Theory, Norton, 1970, pp. 309-337.
Sanyal, Kalyan, and Ronald Jones, "The Theory of Trade in Middle Products," American Economic Review, Vol. 72 , 1982, pp. 16-31.

Stiglits,Joseph, "Price Rigidities and MarketStructure," American Economic
Vol. 74, 1984, pp. 350-355.

32

Review,

Elasticity of the Price with Respect
to a Temporary Exchange Rate Change
Table Ia

A

fraction of foreign costs denominated in domestic currency
0
.2
.5
.9

0

-.17

-.13

-.08

-.02

.4

-

.10

-

.06

- .01

.05

.8

-.04

-

.00

.05

.12

1.2

.02

.06

.11

.18

2.0

.14

.18

.24

.32

Table lb
The Cost Effect

A

fraction of foreign costs denominated in domestic currency
.9
0
.2
.5

0

-

.17

-

.13

.4

-

.17

-

.13

.8

-.17

-.14

-.09

-.02

1.2

-.18

-.14

-.09

-.02

2.0

-.19

-.15

-.10

-.02

Table

-

.08

-

.02

.08

-

.02

Ic

The Real Interest Rate Effect

A

fraction of foreign costs denominated in domestic currency
.2
.5
.9
0

0

.00

.00

.00

.00

.4

.07

.07

.07

.07

.8

.14

.14

.14

.14

1.2

.20

.20

.20

.20

2.0

.33

.33

.33

.33

Parameters:

N —

2,

A —

4,

C — 1, n* —

I

Elasticity of the Price with Respect
to a Temporary Exchange Rate Change
Table Id
The Impact of Foreign Penetration
number of foreign
1

firms, n

*

3

5

-.25

0

-.05

-.15

.4

.12

.01

.8

.32

.19

.06

1.2

.56

.41

.26

2.0

1.36

1.13

.90

N — 6, A
4, c
domestic currency
.5.
Parameters:

1,

.10

-

fraction of foreign costs denominated in

Table le
The Impact of Industry Concentration

A

2

Total number of firms,
6

20

0

-

.08

.4

-

.01

.01

.02

.8

.05

.19

.34

1.2

.11

.41

.85

2.0

.24

1.13

6.67

-

.15

N
.21

-

4*

— N/2, fraction of foreign costs
c
1, A
denominated in domestic currency = .5.

Parameters:

Table lf
The Impact of Marginal Costs
C
1.4

1

A

1.8

.15

-

.17

-

.18

.4

.01

- .06

-

.10

.8

.19

.05

-

.04

1.2

.41

.15

.03

2.0

1.13

.41

.16

0

-

N — 6, A — 4, n* — 3, fraction
domestic currency = .5.

Parameters:

of foreign costs denominated in

Elasticity of the Price with Respect
to a Permanent Exchange Rate Change
Table 2a

A

fraction of foreign costs denominated in domestic currency
0
.2
.5
.9

0

- .17

-

.13

- .08

-

.4

-.19

-.15

-.10

-.02

- .22

- .17

- .11

-

.02

1.2

- .24

- .20

- .12

-

.02

2.0

-.30

-24

-.15

-.03

Parameters:

N—2, A—4, C—i, n*_1

Table 2b

The Impact of Foreign Penetration

number of foreign firms, n*
5

A

1

3

0

-.05

-.15

-.25

.4

-.07

-.20

-.33

.8

-.08

-.25

-.42

1.2

- .11

- .33

- .55

2.0

- .20

-.59

- .98

Parameters: N—6, A-4, C—i, fraction of foreign costs denominated in
foreign currency — .5.

.02

Elasticity of the Price with Respect
to a Permanent Exchange Rate Change
Table 2c

The Impact of Industry Concentration
Total number of firms, N
A

2

6

20

0

-.08

-.15

-.21

.4

- .10

-

.8

-.11

-.25

-.43

1.2

-.12

-.33

-.67

2.0

-

.59

-3.41

Parameters:

.15

A—4, c-4, n*_.N/2,

-

.20

-

.30

fraction of foreign costs

denominated in domestic currency —

.5.

Table 2d

The Impact of Marginal Costs
Marginal Costs
1

A

1.4

1.8

.17

- .18

0

-

.15

-

.4

-

.20

-.21

-

.8

-.25

-.25

-25

1,2

-.33

-.30

-.29

2.0

-.59

-

.43

-.37

Parameters:
N—6, A—4, n*_N/2, fraction of foreign costs
denominated in foreign currey—.5.

.22

Figure

1

Average terest Differentiat
th.
4

— muty d Ffrdc

3

0

—1

4
.3
-4

ec

ii

Twelve—month eurodeposit interest differentials

from.DPJ.

Table 3
of Expected Real
Depreciation of the Dollar
(% per annum)
Measures

Yeats
Measures of expected nominal depreciation *

1976-8

1. One-year forward discount

1979-80

1981-2

1983-84

1985-6

0.18

2.57

3.34

1.85

0.10

NA

NA

8.57

8.60

1.03

0.61

NA

6.67

6.99

3.7Z

2. Expected depreciationfrom surveys

12 month

a. Economist

b. Amex 12 month

Measures of expected inflation differential**
3. One-year lag

-1.01

3.54

0.88

-0,35

0.62

4. Three-year distributed lag

-1.96

2,70

1.89

-0.18

0.1.1

5. DRI three-year forecast
.6. OECD two-year

forecast

**

NA

2.20

0.96

0.23

015

***

1.42

2.24

0.62

0.61

0.91

1.19

-0.97

2.46

2.20

7.69

8.95

0.41

5.11

5.74

1.09

Measures of expected real depreciation
7. One-year forward lag (1-3)

NA

8. Economist/one-year(2a-3)
9. Average (1,2)

Notes:

-

Average (3

6)

0.91

NA
-0.10

a measures of expected nominal depreciation calculated using a

gnp-

weighted average of the pound, Ffranc, mark, and yen against the
dollar.

measure! of expected inflation differentialcalculated as US
minus a gnp-weightedaverage of the UK, France, West Germany, and
Japan.

* available during 1985-86 for 1985 only.
** averages
of various forecast dates through March
*** OECD forecasts
Sources:

1978.

available during 1976-8 only for December 1978.

IMP International Financial Statistics, DRI FACS financial database
and forecasts, OECD Economic outlook, Amex Eank Review, and
Economist Financial Report.

-0.52

Table 4a
Exchange Rate Pass Through and
the Effects of Expected Depreciation

(a)

Ap''

i

UK US

Ai.FR.US

-

-

Ai.WGUS

-

-

i UK
Ap

.1399

(.0463)

Ai.FR.JA

all

.0135
(.0046)

.33

126

4.88

8.58

0013

.30

146

.87

0.27

Apt.FR.UK

.40

167

0.25

0.03

ApGJA

.32

154

0.24

0.12

Ai.WG.UK

.28

166

0.67

1.01.

-

Ai,JA.U1C

.29

115

0.51

0.14

.32

884

1.64

3.68

**

.0173

-

(.0380)

(.0038)

-

-

.0071

.0026

(.0240)

(.0033)

.0126
(.0400)

-

.0154

(.0169)

Ai.JA,US

DF

P2

**

.JA

.0048
(.0208)

.0003

Notes:

P1fl20

**

**

(.0040)

-

.0016

(.0026)

-

.0031

(.0032)

*
countries

F-test

SE

P1

-

Ai.JC.US

c
F-test

Dependent
Variable

Apt

+

.0437

.0026

(.0232)

(.0020)

Expected depreciation is measured using the appropriate 12-month
Euro-interest differential.
**, * represent statistical significance
i indexes the industry
at the S and 10 percent levels respectively.
Data set includes 65 industries for each country,
exports.
Standard
Equations estimated using 01.5.
annually from 1981-86.
errors are in parenthesea.

**

Table 4b
Exchange Rate Pass Through and
the Effects of Expected Depreciation

ii.k

4jAE(A)

+ S'F c
F-test

Dependent

SE

Variable

i,UKUS

-

i,UK,JA

-

.0824

(.0614)

i,FR,US

i,FR,US

-

-

i,WC,US

i,FRJA

i,FR,UX

i,WC,JA

-

t

t

pIJAUS

pi,JA,UK

.0022
(.0500)

.0198

countries

Notes:

.0159

F-test
fiz-i—°

.34

126

1.20

1.91

.30

146

0.77

0,01

(.0137)

-

.0022

(.0111)

.0026
(.0070)

.40

167

0.57

0.91

(.0235)

.0096
(.0515)

.0007
(.0115)

.32

154

0.20

0.05

.0094

.0004
(.0048)

.28

166

0.42

0.50

.0086
(.0058)

.28

115

337**

6.39

.0032
(.0024)

.32

884

1.95

3,80

(.0165)

.0472
(.0197)

all

-

OF

*

.0171
(.0093)

Expected depreciation is measured using survey data on exchange
rate, over a twelve month forecast horizon.
**,
statistical significance at the S and 10 percent levels respectively.
i indexes the industry exports. Data set includes 65 industries
for each country, over the 1981-86 period.
Equations

* represent

estimated using 0L,

Standard errors are in parentheses.

**

