NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MONETARY AND FISCAL HISTORY OF BRAZIL, 1960-2016
Joao Ayres
Marcio Garcia
Diogo A. Guillén
Patrick J. Kehoe
Working Paper 25421
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25421

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019

This is a chapter in forthcoming book The Monetary and Fiscal History of Latin America. We
would like to thank Marcelo Abreu, Pérsio Arida, Edmar Bacha, Marco Bassetto, Tiago Berriel,
Afonso Bevilaqua, Amaury Bier, Claudio Considera, Gustavo Franco, Fabio Giambiagi, Claudio
Jaloretto, Joaquim Levy, Eduardo Loyo, Timothy Kehoe, Ana Maria Jul, Randy Kroszner, Pedro
Malan, Rodolfo Manuelli, Andy Neumeyer, Juan Pablo Nicolini, Affonso Pastore, Murilo
Portugal, Thomas Sargent, Teresa Ter-Minassian, José Scheinkman, Rogério Werneck, and
participants at the “Monetary and Fiscal History of Latin America” workshops held in the
University of Chicago, LACEA-LAMES in Buenos Aires, PUC-Rio, Central Bank of Chile, and
Inter-American Development Bank. This project was coordinated by Marcio Garcia. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, Inter-American Development Bank, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25421.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Joao Ayres, Marcio Garcia, Diogo A. Guillén, and Patrick J. Kehoe. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Monetary and Fiscal History of Brazil, 1960-2016
Joao Ayres, Marcio Garcia, Diogo A. Guillén, and Patrick J. Kehoe
NBER Working Paper No. 25421
January 2019
JEL No. E0,E02,E3,E4,E42,E5,E58,E6
ABSTRACT
Brazil has had a long period of high inflation. It peaked around 100 percent per year in 1964,
decreased until the first oil shock (1973), but accelerated again afterward, reaching levels above
100 percent on average between 1980 and 1994. This last period coincided with severe balance of
payments problems and economic stagnation that followed the external debt crisis in the early
1980s. We show that the high-inflation period (1960–1994) was characterized by a combination
of fiscal deficits, passive monetary policy, and constraints on debt financing. The transition to the
low-inflation period (1995–2016) was characterized by improvements in all of these features, but
it did not lead to significant improvements in economic growth. In addition, we document a
strong positive correlation between inflation rates and seigniorage revenues, although inflation
rates are relatively high for modest levels of seigniorage revenues. Finally, we discuss the role of
the weak institutional framework surrounding the fiscal and monetary authorities and the role of
monetary passiveness and inflation indexation in accounting for the unique features of inflation
dynamics in Brazil.
Joao Ayres
Inter-American Development Bank
jluizayres@gmail.com

Diogo A. Guillén
Itau-Unibanco Asset Management
dguillen@gmail.com

Marcio Garcia
Pontifical Catholic University of Rio De Janiero
marciogomespintogarcia@gmail.com

Patrick J. Kehoe
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
patrickjameskehoe@gmail.com

1

Introduction

This chapter presents the monetary and fiscal history of Brazil between 1960 and 2016,
with emphasis on the hyperinflation episodes. It describes the evolution of the Brazilian
monetary and fiscal policy institutions and how they relate to episodes of macroeconomic
instability and growth experience, focusing on the high-inflation period (pre-1994) and
two stabilization plans: the Government Economic Action Plan (PAEG, an abbreviation
for Plano de Ação Econômica do Governo) and the Real Plan. The PAEG, in 1964,
stabilized inflation around 100 percent per year, whereas the Real Plan, in 1994, stabilized
inflation around 90 percent per month after six failed attempts in over a decade. The
analysis follows the conceptual framework in chapter 2 by focusing on the government
budget constraint.
A summary of the period is illustrated in figure 1, which shows the evolution of real
GDP per capita, inflation, and government deficits for the 1960–2016 period.1 Three
subperiods are identified: (1) 1960–1980: fast economic growth with high inflation and
moderate deficits; (2) 1981–1994: slow growth with hyperinflation and high deficits; and
(3) 1995–2016: moderate growth with low inflation and low deficits.2 The 1981–1994
subperiod stands out not only by its poor growth performance and hyperinflation but
also by severe balance of payments problems, a common feature among highly indebted
Latin American countries affected by the increase in international interest rates and the
slowdown in international economic growth.
When relating the episodes of macroeconomic instability to the government fiscal
and monetary policies, we observe the following: (1) both stabilization plans, PAEG in
1964 and the Real Plan in 1994, included measures to improve fiscal balances and were
followed by increased access to debt financing; (2) the government policy to increase
public investment in the wake of the first oil shock in 1973 explains the rapid increase in
external debt that preceded the external debt crisis of 1983 seen in figure 2; and (3) the
high-inflation periods (pre-1994) were characterized by the combination of fiscal deficits,
passive monetary policy, and constraints on debt financing, while the transition to the
low-inflation period (1995–2016) was associated with improvements in government fiscal
balances, higher de facto independence of the monetary authority (as of this writing,
Brazil still lacks a formally independent central bank), as well as much greater access to
debt financing.
In comparison to other Latin American countries, the following two characteristics
make the Brazilian experience rather unique: (1) a long period of high inflation, with
annual inflation rates above 100 percent between 1980 and 1994; and (2) modest levels
1

Appendix C discusses the data and methodology. Our definition of “deficit” is the primary deficit
plus real interest payments on debt discounting for real GDP growth (see chapter 2), and throughout the
chapter, we use the General Price Index from Getulio Vargas Foundation, IGP-DI, as our benchmark.
2
One must bear in mind that the quality of fiscal statistics decreases as we move back in time.

2

of deficits for very high underlying inflation rates. We discuss two features that may
explain these unique characteristics of the Brazilian hyperinflation. The first is a poor
institutional framework in which other public entities besides the monetary authority
had indirect control over money issuance. We discuss that framework in section 4.1. The
second is the combination of a high degree of indexation in the economy to past inflation
with a passive monetary policy.3 Together, these features created what was called at the
time inflation inertia, which could explain why the Brazilian hyperinflation was a much
more protracted process than elsewhere and gave many the illusion that it could be cured
without major improvements in the fiscal stance. We discuss that factor in section 4.2.
This chapter is organized as follows: in section 2, we present a summary of the
government budget constraint, and in section 3, we provide a historical description of
each of the subperiods 1960–1980, 1981–1994, and 1995–2016. In section 4 we discuss the
evolution of the institutional framework involving both fiscal and monetary authorities
and the genesis of inflation inertia, and in section 5, we present our final remarks and
conclusion.

2

The government budget constraint

We are interested in analyzing the evolution of the government budget constraint for
Brazil in 1960–2016. We attempt to match the variation in stocks (debt figures) with flows
(fiscal deficits), duly accounting for valuation effects.4 Table 1 presents a summary of the
results. In order to finance interest payments and primary deficits, the government can
either issue domestic and external debt or issue money and receive seigniorage revenues.
Transfers account for the residual.5
We divide the 1960–1980 subperiod into three parts: 1960–1964, 1965–1972, and 1973–
1980. In 1960–1964, markets for government debt securities were still underdeveloped,
and the government faced restrictions on both domestic and external debt financing.
Interest payments were low but primary deficits were on the rise, and had to be financed
with seigniorage revenues. In 1964–1967, the stabilization plan PAEG implemented both
fiscal and financial reforms, which reduced primary deficits and allowed the government
to issue domestic debt securities. Those reforms account for the increase in domestic
debt financing and the reduction in seigniorage revenues that we observe in the 1965–
1972 period. In 1973–1980, on the other hand, we observe a rise in both debt financing
in external markets and seigniorage revenues, which were associated with higher interest
3

Most prices, wages, taxes, and the exchange rate were indexed to past inflation.
Mainly the effect of devaluations on foreign-currency-denominated or indexed debt.
5
The sums of primary deficits and transfers is close to the measure of the primary deficit reported by
the Central Bank of Brazil starting in 1985, which is based on the public-sector borrowing requirements
and is usually referred to as the primary deficit below the line. See appendix C.
4

3

payments on external debt and a significant rise in transfers, the residual.6 Fortunately,
in this case, we can explain what most of these transfers are. In the wake of the first oil
crisis of 1973, the government implemented policies that aimed at boosting investment
through external borrowing, and that was done mainly through state-owned enterprises
(SOEs). The debt series that was used to compute the government budget constraint
includes SOEs, but the primary deficit series does not. The increase in investment by
SOEs, documented in table 2, accounts for a large fraction of the increase in transfers.7
Therefore, we argue that deficits at the time are better represented by adding the transfers
to the reported primary deficits, which is reported in row 9 of table 1, labeled “primary
deficits + transfers.”8
In 1981–1994, debt financing in external markets decreased sharply, and interest payments on external debt increased as a reflection of the debt crisis that followed the increase
in international interest rates. In that period, seigniorage revenues were used to finance
the payments of both principal and interest of the external debt as well as the primary
deficits.
The 1995–2002 period followed the agreement on the external debt renegotiations
and the end of the hyperinflation in 1994. It showed a significant reduction in seigniorage
revenues and a large improvement in primary and fiscal balances. Interest payments on
external debt decreased, whereas interest payments on domestic debt increased. The
2003–2011 period continued to show primary and fiscal surpluses and low seigniorage
revenues, and the external debt was replaced by domestic debt. As we will discuss, the
pattern that we observe in 1994–2011 reflects changes in both monetary and fiscal policy
institutions, with higher de facto independence of the central bank and greater control
over the government budget. However, in the most recent period, 2012–2016, we observe
a deterioration in fiscal balances that have been financed by a rapid increase in domestic
debt.
In the sections that follow, we provide a detailed historical background that describes
the fiscal and monetary policies adopted in the 1960–2016 period and that account for
the evolution of the government budget constraint.
6

Interest payments might be negative because we are discounting for growth rates in real GDP and
for the monetary correction of the debt.
7
According to Werneck (1991), the average capital expenditures of SOEs for the 1973–1980 period
made up 7.4 percent of GDP, so our figures might be underestimating their importance. Nevertheless,
both sources of data indicate a rapid increase in investments by SOEs in that period.
8
By doing so, we approximate what the Central Bank of Brazil has done in its fiscal statistics starting
in 1985. See appendix C.

4

3

Historical description

3.1

1960–1980: fast growth with macroeconomic instability

Brazil went through important transformations during the first subperiod of our analysis. It moved from being a rural society, in which 55 percent of the population lived in
rural areas, to an urban society, with 68 percent of the population living in cities. Its
production structure shifted toward the manufacturing sector, which increased its fraction of GDP from 32 to 41 percent, while the agricultural sector saw its fraction of GDP
reduced from 18 to 10 percent.9 It was a period of fast economic growth, with real GDP
per capita increasing 4.6 percent per year on average (figure 1a). However, it was also a
period of macroeconomic instability, with a deep recession in the early 1960s, increasing
external indebtedness following the first oil crisis in 1973, and nominal instability. Inflation rates rose in the beginning and reached levels around 100 percent in 1964, when
the stabilization plan PAEG was implemented after a military coup.10 Inflation rates fell
significantly but started to accelerate again around the first oil crisis in 1973, returning
to three-digit levels in 1980.11
To understand the fiscal and monetary policy institutions that were in place during
these years, one should note that it was a period of heated debate regarding the role of
the state in promoting economic development, during which the government undertook
major national development plans, such as the Targets Plan in 1956–1961, the National
Development Plan I in 1972–1974, and the National Development Plan II in 1975–1979.
That process also led to a surge in the number of public banks, with nine out of twentythree states creating their own banks between 1960 and 1964 to finance their fiscal deficits,
and to the creation of some of the largest Brazilian SOEs, such as Eletrobras in 1962
and Telebras in 1972.12 As we discuss below, they would all play an important role in
explaining the dynamics of the government budget constraint.
3.1.1

1960–1964

Before 1964, the government Treasury had direct control over money issuance through
the Bank of Brazil (BB), which was both the bank of the government and a commercial
bank.13 The main monetary policy instruments in use were the control over the monetary
base, subsidized credit to the industrial and agricultural sectors, and interventions in the
foreign exchange market. Some of those interventions aimed to protect the local industry
9

Data from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE).
The military dictatorship would last until 1985.
11
For thorough analyses of that period, we refer to Orenstein and Sochaczewski (2014), Mesquita
(2014), Lago (2014), and Carneiro (2014).
12
The other well-known Brazilian SOEs, Companhia Siderúrgica Nacional (CSN), Companhia Vale do
Rio Doce, and Petrobras, had been created in 1941, 1942, and 1953, respectively.
13
Section 4.1 discusses the institutional framework in which the central bank operated at length.
10

5

by imposing restrictions on the imports of products that were also produced locally, that
is, they were used to implement import-substitution policies.14 There was no centralized
market in which one could trade government debt securities in Brazil. Debt contracts
were very heterogeneous and faced legal limits on the nominal interest rates that could
be charged (12 percent per year).15 With rising inflation and primary deficits, that led to
a decrease in the stock of domestic debt before 1964 (figure 3), and seigniorage revenues
became the main source of funds for the government to cover its fiscal deficits, as table
1 shows. Access to external debt was restricted in that period. Brazil had a balance of
payments crisis in 1952 and faced balance of payments problems again in the late 1950s.16
On the fiscal side, Brazil already had a diverse set of tax instruments, such as income,
import, and consumption taxes, amounting to around 17 percent of GDP (figure 4).
Taxes on production were cumulative instead of value-added; that is, revenues and not
the value-added were taxed. There were no fiscal rules such as limits on fiscal deficits,
and the government could adopt expansionary policies without explicitly indicating how
to finance them.
During 1956–1961, President Juscelino Kubitschek launched the first major national
development plan, the Targets Plan, which had ambitious goals to create the necessary
infrastructure to facilitate the industrialization process in Brazil. The transportation and
energy sectors were the main targets, and the country exhibited a rapid expansion of its
highway and electric energy systems. That plan also became famous for the creation
of the new capital city, Brasilia. Besides relying on government funds, that plan also
relied on large foreign direct investment, especially in the automotive industry. During
its implementation, Brazil experienced high growth rates in real GDP per capita but
entered a recession in the following years, 1962 and 1963, accompanied by rising fiscal
deficits and inflation. That crisis was followed by a military coup in 1964 and by the
implementation of an economic stabilization program in 1964–1967, PAEG, which aimed
to stop the inflationary process and resume growth through fiscal and financial reforms.
PAEG was launched in November 1964. At that time, there was a clear relationship
between inflation and the expansion of the monetary base (figure 5a), and the government
understood that it should find alternative ways to finance its expenditures and investment
projects other than through seigniorage revenues. The government tackled that problem
on two fronts: a fiscal reform to decrease government deficits and a financial reform to
create other financing options. On the fiscal side, the government increased its tax revenues to around 23 percent of GDP (figure 4) and managed to reduce its fiscal deficits,
as documented in table 1, subperiod 1965–1972. That was achieved through the creation
of new taxes, increases in existing tax rates, and modernization of the tax system with
14

That was done through both quantity (restricted access to foreign currency) and price restrictions.
See Silva (2009) and Pedras (2009) for the history of Brazilian government debt.
16
Brazil started negotiations with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in the late 1950s, but the
negotiations were suspended when Brazil did not accept the IMF’s conditions.
15

6

the introduction of a value-added tax. On the financial side, the main changes were the
introduction of monetary correction (indexation) to circumvent the legal limits on nominal interest rates, the creation of the Central Bank of Brazil (CBB), and the adoption
of a banking system with a clear-cut separation between commercial banks and nonbank institutions. These changes would have important implications for the inflationary
process.
Regarding the Central Bank of Brazil, it is important to mention that upon its creation, the government established an account between the central bank and the Bank of
Brazil, Conta de Movimento, that ended up providing the Bank of Brazil with the power
to issue money. The Bank of Brazil could withdraw funds from that account whenever
prompted to further extend financing to sectors or firms targeted by economic policy,
and the central bank would automatically provide those funds through an expansion of
the monetary base.17 In addition, the government created the National Monetary Council, which would rule over the central bank. Both of these changes served to impose
constraints on the control of the monetary base expansion by the monetary authority,
as section 4 explains in detail. With respect to the monetary correction, the existence
of indexed public debt held by private savers on a voluntary basis was critical for the
development of financial markets in Brazil in the following years.
3.1.2

1965–1972

Figure 6 illustrates how successful PAEG was in controlling the inflation process. After
1964, primary deficits decreased, and the government was able to reduce its seigniorage
revenues, which explains the reduction in inflation and money growth rates that followed. The reforms also led to an increase in debt financing. The 1968–1973 period
became known as the years of economic miracle in Brazil, with annual GDP growth rates
in excess of 10 percent. That led to the optimistic view that the Brazilian state had
created a wholesome mechanism to capture private savings and channel them toward
public investment. The idea that public and private investment were complementary
led many to argue that, by borrowing to pay for large public projects, the government
could spur private investment. During those years, the government implemented the
National Development Plan I (1972–1974), focused on improving the country’s infrastructure. It included large projects such as the Itaipu Dam, Trans-Amazonian Highway,
and Rio-Niterói Bridge. The country also experienced higher investment by SOEs and an
increasing supply of credit by public banks, such as the Bank of Brazil and the National
Bank for Economic Development (BNDE).18
17

We added the variations in Conta de Movimento to the original primary deficit series to account for
the transfers between the Central Bank of Brazil and the Bank of Brazil. See appendix C.
18
BNDE was established in 1952, and it was renamed the National Bank for Economic and Social
Development (BNDES) in 1982. See Costa Neto (2004) for the history of public banks in Brazil.

7

3.1.3

1973–1980

When the first oil crisis in 1973 presented challenges to the feasibility of the highgrowth path, the Brazilian government kept its long-run strategy in the President General
Ernesto Geisel years (1974–1979) to grow its way out of the first oil crisis, even if it had to
rely on further increasing public indebtedness by borrowing from abroad. That explains
the rapid increase in external debt in figure 2 and also accounts for the rise in external
debt financing in the 1973–1980 period shown in table 1. One of its main goals was to
reduce the country’s dependence on oil imports through higher investment in domestic
oil production and the exploration of other sources of energy such as ethanol and nuclear
power. As part of this strategy, the government launched the National Development Plan
II during 1975–1979, which focused on the manufacturing, energy, transportation, and
communication sectors (table 2). It had the SOEs as its main implementation vehicle,
and that accounts for their increasing investment and debt accumulation.
The external debt series does not allow us to distinguish SOEs from the rest of the
public sector before 1981, but in that year, the external debt of SOEs represented 72
percent of the total, which indicates that they accounted for a large fraction of the
increase in public external debt after 1973 (figures 2 and 7a). The same holds for the
domestic debt, although in that case the concentration of SOEs was less pronounced.
They accounted for 35 percent of the total domestic debt in 1981, while 25 percent was
from states and municipalities, and 40 percent was from the federal government (figure
7b). These figures also show how the deficits at the subnational level accounted for a
large fraction of the increase in public domestic debt.
The change in economic policy that took place after the first oil crisis is clearly
illustrated in figure 6. After 1973, Brazil was back to a scenario of rising deficits, rising
seigniorage revenues, and rising inflation and money growth rates. That period was also
characterized by the poor management of the government budget, so it is important
to take into account the off-budget transactions when analyzing the dynamics of the
government budget constraint. As an example, at that time the government operated
at least three budgets: one that was discussed in Congress and presented in the official
statistics, the monetary budget that was controlled by the National Monetary Council
(see section 4), and the budget of the SOEs.
The main off-budget transactions we identified were the transfers from the central
bank to the Bank of Brazil and the operations of SOEs. The transfers between the
central bank and the Bank of Brazil are approximated by variations in the Conta de
Movimento, the dashed red line in figure 8 referred to as “variation in the balance of
BB accounts.”19 The figure shows the rise in those transfers in the 1973–1980 subperiod,
which reflects the rise in subsidies and subsidized credit provided by public banks to state
19

It can also be considered a proxy for the deficit of the monetary budget.

8

and local authorities and to the private sector. The deficits of SOEs are partially captured
by the transfers in the government budget constraint, since their debt is included in the
external debt series since 1973 and in the domestic debt series since 1981 (see appendix
C).20 Figure 9 compares the fiscal deficit series with and without transfers, and it shows
that transfers increased significantly during that period.
The strategy to sustain growth through external borrowing was successful in the first
few years, as the accumulation of public debt was compatible with the maintenance of
economic growth at high rates. Continuity of this process, however, relied on other factors:
on the growth of private wealth, on the wealth holders’ confidence in the capability of
the public sector to service its debt, and on the use that was ultimately being made of
the savings captured by the government. In the second half of the decade, GDP growth
declined sharply, inflation doubled, and controlling the growth of public-sector financial
needs became increasingly difficult. In the 1973–1980 subperiod, the average maturity of
the federal government debt securities reached its peak in 1975 (figure 10), but the share
of nonindexed bonds kept growing (figure 11) until the end of the decade, as interest rates
began to rise in 1976 following the abandonment of the interest rate ceilings, which had
prevailed until September 1976.
The first year of President General João Figueiredo’s term, 1979, started with a
reduction in the real value of public bond debt due to two effects. The first was the
decline in real interest rates due to the decline in nominal interest rates promoted by
Planning Minister Antônio Delfim Netto in an attempt to stimulate economic activity,
which reduced the attractiveness of the debt.21 The second effect was the increase in
exchange rate uncertainty related to the second oil crisis. Figure 12 shows how interest
rates were kept consistently below inflation rates between 1979 and 1981. Both factors led
to a decrease in the stock of public domestic debt (figure 3) and an increase in the fraction
of government debt securities that are indexed to inflation (figure 11). The policies
implemented by Delfim Netto, mainly low nominal interest rates and the corresponding
increase in the growth rate of the monetary base, had the effect of significantly increasing
inflation, from around 50 percent in 1979 to over 100 percent in 1980.

3.2

1981–1994: no growth with high macroeconomic instability

If the previous subperiod was characterized by the number of national development
plans that were implemented, the subperiod 1981–1994 is famous for its number of stabilization plans, some of which are indicated in figure 13, and by severe balance of payments
20
The government did not have control over the budget of its SOEs. Given the deterioration of their
accounts and trying to control that process, the government created the Secretary of Coordination and
Governance of State-Owned Enterprises (SEST) in 1979.
21
Delfim Netto replaced Mario Henrique Simonsen in August 1979 as the de facto manager of the
economy, less than six months into the new government of President General Figueiredo.

9

problems.22 In this section, we discuss Brazil’s balance of payments crisis and provide a
description of its stabilization plans during the 1980s and early 1990s, focusing on their
main points and reasons for their failures, and trying to find out the most important
differences between them and the ultimately successful plan, the Real Plan.
Even though inflation was increasing to rates above 100 percent per year, in the first
half of the 1980s, the greater concern was to reduce external imbalances rather than
reduce inflation. In 1981 and 1982, the main objective of Brazil’s macroeconomic policy
was to reduce the need for foreign capital. Figure 14 shows the current account balance,
trade balance, and net interest income. We can observe the increasing cost of interest
payments on external debt and the trade balance reversal (from deficit to surplus) in
those years. There was a large devaluation of the real exchange rate (figure 15), and
real GDP per capita contracted sharply.23 In 1982, Brazil entered a sequence of episodes
in which it accumulated arrears on interest payments of its external debt, illustrated in
figure 16, that would end only in 1994.24 These facts account for the drop in external
debt financing and the rise in interest payments on external debt reported in table 1,
subperiod 1981–1994. During that period, we also observed the nationalization of the
external debt. Foreign debtors would pay the Central Bank of Brazil in domestic currency,
and the central bank would retain those funds in the name of the creditors. Any gains
or losses resulting from the debt negotiations regarding write-offs and so on would be
captured by the central bank. In addition, new foreign debt would be deposited at the
central bank, which would then lend those funds to local debtors in local currency. As
a result, a large fraction of the external debt became concentrated in the central bank’s
balance sheet up to 1994, as figure 17 illustrates.
While the government’s attention was focused on the balance of payments crisis,
inflation kept increasing. It was only in 1986 that the sequence of stabilization plans
began. But before moving to the discussion about each stabilization plan in detail, it is
important to put into perspective what was considered to be the cause of high inflation at
that time. The first plans were based on the idea that inflation inertia due to the highly
indexed economy was the essence of the inflationary process, and breaking that inertia
should be the main focus of the stabilization plan. These plans had a neutral shock of
freezing prices as one of their main characteristics. However, the staggering of wages
and other prices under very high inflation was an extra obstacle to that strategy. At the
moment that a price freeze to stop inflation was introduced, agents with similar average
real wages would have different real wages depending on when the last adjustment was set.
Since inflation was supposed to decrease substantially after the plan, the differences in real
22

For thorough analyses of that period, we refer to Carneiro and Modiano (2014), Modiano (2014),
and Abreu and Werneck (2014).
23
Under our convention for the real exchange rate, a real depreciation happens when the real exchange
rate increases.
24
See Cerqueira (2003) for a detailed description of the external debt negotiations during that period.

10

wages at the moment of the plan would prompt losers to claim rights to be compensated,
while the winners would not complain. If the losers were compensated, that would reignite
the inflation spiral. To avoid that problem, a conversion table was always mandated at the
beginning of each plan, aiming at keeping, in the new low inflationary environment, the
same average real wage that had prevailed under the previous high inflationary period.25
An alternative and more standard orthodox theory considers the persistent and large
fiscal deficits as the main cause of the inflationary process, since the government had to
increase the growth rate of the monetary base to raise seigniorage revenues to finance
those deficits. We discuss both theories in section 4. As we will see, from the first to the
last plan, there was less emphasis on the heterodox part of the plan, which comprised
price freezes, and more emphasis on the orthodox part. Fiscal and monetary policies
became a major component of the latter plans while maintaining a device to synchronize
the adjustment of nominal variables to avoid threatening the new low inflation level.
Cruzado Plan: In February 1986, the government implemented the Cruzado Plan.
As what became standard in most Brazilian stabilization plans, the first rule was to change
the currency, in that case from cruzeiro to cruzado, which meant cutting three zeros.
Prices were frozen, and any indexation clauses for periods shorter than one year were
forbidden.26 Wages were converted into cruzados based on the average purchasing power
of the last six months but could be readjusted every time inflation hit 20 percent or during
the annual readjustment cycle. Moreover, unemployment benefits were introduced, and
the minimum wage was raised by 8 percent in real terms. The exchange rate regime also
changed, with the domestic currency now pegged to the US dollar. Fiscal and monetary
policies were put under the discretion of the policymakers, but there was an important
change: the end of the Conta de Movimento between the central bank and the Bank of
Brazil. In practice, however, that only took place after 1988 because another account
between the central bank and Bank of Brazil, Conta de Suprimentos Especiais, replaced
Conta de Movimento until its extinction in 1988 (see section 4). Another important
measure was the creation of the National Treasury Secretariat, which would take control
over both the administration of the domestic public debt and the government budget.27
At first, the Cruzado Plan was very successful in reducing inflation. The average
25

The change of currency allowed for reductions of those wages that had recently been adjusted, in
order to keep the same average real wage. Without the change of currency, the reduction in nominal
wages would not be possible, since nominal wage reductions are not allowed by Brazilian law.
26
For fixed rate contracts, a schedule for interest rate conversion was set. It was assumed that all
nominal interest rates were based on the inflation expectation of 0.45 percent a day (210 percent a year),
which had been the average daily inflation in 1985–1986. The real rate, then, was the (new) nominal
rate in the new currency (cruzado), since the new expected inflation (at least for the government) was
zero. For the variable interest rate contracts, which prescribed a nominal rate equal to the sum of the
monetary correction and variable (real) interest rates, the new nominal rates in cruzados were set to be
the ones above the monetary correction before the plan.
27
Before that, the Central Bank of Brazil managed both the domestic and external public debt, which
included issuances, amortizations, and interest payments.

11

monthly inflation from March to July of 1986 was 0.9 percent (11 percent per year).
Moreover, the claim to freeze prices had a civic impact since the population was encouraged to “audit” prices; but that led to overheating. Sales increased 23 percent in the first
six months of 1986 compared to the first six months of 1985, and real wages increased 14
percent from March to September of 1986 (figure 18). One story that is consistent with
such evidence is that even though prices were not allowed to change, equilibrium prices
were increasing, which produced overheating since posted prices were too low. Therefore,
production increased to meet the higher demand in the beginning, but then production
decreased and stores started to run out of stock. Meanwhile, the Central Bank of Brazil
tried to keep interest rates low to induce low expectations. One huge imbalance was the
inconsistency of the plan for inflation and the monetary base: the monetary base was
increasing much faster than inflation itself.
In July 1986, the government implemented a timid fiscal package, Cruzadinho, focusing on increasing government revenues. But in reality, Cruzadinho had the opposite result
of what policymakers expected. Expecting prices to be allowed to change again, demand
increased and the overheating problem became even more dramatic. Inflation remained
low, but it was not truly representative because products were scarce. Because of the
high demand, imports kept increasing while exports declined (figure 19), thereby exacerbating the trade deficit. A rumor of a large devaluation in the near future reinforced
that pattern. This expectation lead to a postponement of exports and an acceleration of
imports, which increased the problems with the balance of payments.28 Facing all these
challenges, in November 1986, the government opted for a fiscal plan, Cruzado II, trying
to increase revenues through the readjustment of some public prices and some indirect
taxes, which led to a high inflationary shock. Once again, the environment was one of
high inflation (17 percent per month in January 1987). Meanwhile, the external crisis
was just getting worse. In February 1987, the government suspended interest payments
on external debt for an indeterminate amount of time (figure 16). The idea was to stop
the losses of international reserves and to start a new phase of the renegotiation of the
debt with the support of the population.
Bresser Plan: In July 1987, the government implemented the Bresser Plan, named
after Finance Minister Luiz Carlos Bresser-Pereira. It was presented as a hybrid plan,
with fiscal and monetary policies as well as aspects to deal with inflation inertia. As in
the Cruzado Plan, prices were frozen. As usual, the moment in which the price freeze
took place was important because the relative prices would remain stuck and possibly
off-equilibrium. Trying to get a better result than the Cruzado Plan in this aspect,
after the price freeze there was an increase in the prices of public services and some
28

The government kept the mini-devaluations based on an indicator of the exchange rate–wage
(crawling-peg) ratio. However, this same indicator was suggesting that the exchange rate was appreciated.

12

administered prices to correct for misalignments in relative prices. The extinction of the
automatic trigger in wage resetting if inflation surpassed a 20 percent threshold was also
perceived as another improvement. But the economic team created another kind of wage
indexation, the URP (Price Reference Unit), in which in each quarter the government
would specify the readjustment for the next three months based on the average inflation
of the period. This would keep a monthly readjustment, but a gap would remain between
the readjustment and current inflation. In contrast to the Cruzado Plan, monetary and
fiscal policies were active. Real interest rates remained positive in the short term. In
the fiscal policy arena, the government aimed to reduce the operational deficit from the
expected 6.7 to 3.5 percent of GDP.29 The plan did not address (or seek to deal with)
the consequences of the previous default with creditors. Another interesting aspect of
this plan is that it did not target zero inflation, but was meant to be just a deflationary
shock.
Bresser-Pereira’s main purpose was to introduce a fiscal reform to reduce inflation.
However, the reform was not successful. In 1987, the deficit was much higher than
promised. Unlike the Cruzado Plan, which had popular support, the Bresser Plan was
not popular, and in February 1988, some liberalization of prices took place, reducing the
effectiveness of the price freeze. A third problem of the plan was that it led to a fall in
gross fixed capital formation.
After Minister Bresser-Pereira left, Maı́lson da Nóbrega, the second in command, took
his position. In January 1988, the government adopted an economic policy referred to
as the Feijão-com-Arroz policy, which can be translated to English as the “Black-Beansand-Rice” policy.30 Instead of freezing prices, its target was merely to keep inflation at
15 percent per month. The deficit was expected to reach 7 to 8 percent of GDP in 1988,
and there was a temporary freeze of public-sector wages to reduce it.
At first, this policy succeeded in avoiding an inflationary explosion, and the fiscal
stance improved. The default on external debt was suspended, and the government
started negotiations with external creditors. However, inflation started rising again, and
the target of 15 percent per month was not achieved in the second quarter of 1988.
In October 1988, a new constitution was enacted. The new constitution increased
fiscal expenditures, reduced the flexibility of expenditure switching between fiscal accounts, and substantially increased labor costs. It did so by increasing expenditures and
increasing the transfers from the central government to states without transferring the
corresponding responsibilities, which induced an increase in the deficit of the central gov29

At the time, the government used the public-sector borrowing requirement as a measure of the
nominal deficit. However, nominal deficits were very high because of the monetary correction of the
value of the debt. In order to overcome that, the operational deficit was adopted as the main deficit
measure, which included only the nominal value of real interest payments. See appendix C.
30
The policy name reflects the meaning of black beans and rice in Brazilian culture. It is the dish that
Brazilians eat every day. It is considered to be neither very interesting nor complicated, but it does the
job of providing a healthy meal.

13

ernment. To put this into perspective, 92 percent of the revenues were earmarked; that
is, revenues from different sources were dedicated to specific programs or purposes (or
both), reducing the flexibility of fiscal policies. In addition, the new constitution reduced
the standard weekly working time from forty-eight to forty-four hours and increased the
cost of overtime.
Summer Plan: The government implemented the Summer Plan in January 1989.
Again, it was a hybrid plan, but the debate on the need for changes in fiscal and monetary
policies was increasing. Like the previous plans, it included a component of price freezing
as well as the adoption of a nominal anchor. In this case, a fixed exchange rate (1 cruzado
novo = 1,000 cruzados = US$1) was implemented for an indefinite time. Moreover, an
attempt was made to end inflation indexation. On the fiscal and monetary side, the plan
was to adopt a tight monetary policy and to fight inflation by controlling the public deficit.
It intended to control expenditures and increase revenues through the privatization of
publicly owned assets and a reduction in the wage bill of the public sector.
Overall, the plan seemed to incorporate everything that was missing in the previous
plans. Although it kept a heterodox flavor, it was mostly an orthodox plan aiming to
reduce subsidies, close public firms, and fire public employees, with a deindexation plan
that was sort of a small default. However, the government did not have the political power
to carry it through. Without Congress, privatizations and other unpopular measures,
such as the closing of public firms, were canceled. In the end, the reforms were not
implemented. Moreover, the tight monetary policy put interest rates at high levels and
increased the fiscal deficit of the government. With low credibility and a reform that did
not go through, inflation accelerated, and the Summer Plan also failed.
The 1980s ended with inflation rates of about 70 percent a month and with almost 100
percent of the federal bond debt being rolled over in the form of zero-duration bonds.31
This state of affairs reflected not only the extremely high uncertainty regarding inflation
and interest rates but also the fear of an explicit default of the public debt by the incoming
administration, headed by President Fernando Collor de Mello. At the time, the credit
risk of the public securities was clouded with widespread suspicion, which was indeed
validated by the new administration’s actions. Collor de Mello was elected president of
Brazil after twenty-nine years of either indirect or undemocratic elections. The very day
he took office, he launched the first Collor Plan.
Collor Plan I: In March 1990, the government launched the Collor Plan I. Prices
and wages were frozen. The plan recognized that a reduction in deficits was necessary
to end the hyperinflation, and it implemented both temporary and permanent fiscal
policies. Among the temporary measures were the establishment of a tax on financial in31

Zero-duration bonds are bonds that pay ex post the accrual of daily overnight interest rates. Therefore, the price of these bonds is insensitive to interest rate changes. It was a way to separate interest
rate risk from maturity risk, thereby somewhat lengthening the very short-term public debt.

14

termediation and the suspension of tax incentives. But the permanent policies were more
important. An effort was made to reduce fiscal evasion (one of the president’s trademarks during the presidential campaign) and increase taxes. Other major components
included privatizations and an administrative reform. However, that plan became famous
for its (controversial) monetary policy. In an attempt to reduce the money supply, the
government confiscated deposits in both transaction and savings accounts for a period
of eighteen months.32 Those resources amounted to 80 percent of bank deposits and
financial investments, which would be held at the Central Bank of Brazil and invested
in federal government bonds. These resources were remunerated while they were kept
at the central bank, but their rates of return were decided by the government itself and
therefore were subject to partial defaults.
Following the plan’s implementation, monetary aggregates fell sharply, especially the
higher ones (figure 20), and real GDP per capita contracted by 5.7 percent in 1990. This
reduction in liquidity, however, was not sufficient to control inflation. Regarding the fiscal
reform, the threatening behavior of the government toward the public-sector employees
made the reform very unpopular. The plan encountered a lot of resistance, and in the
end, it could not deliver on what it had promised. While some privatizations succeeded,
most of its reforms were short-lived.
Collor Plan II: In January 1991, the same government implemented the Collor Plan
II. Just like the previous one, it planned to reduce government expenditures by firing civil
servants and closing public services. It also proposed the privatization of state-owned
enterprises. As usual, the plan included some price freezes. Wages were converted by a
twelve-month average, a new tablita was adopted based on the assumption that inflation
would fall to zero, and the plan put an end to indexation.33 Not entirely related to the
fight against inflation, this plan had a motif that Brazil had to improve the quality of
its products. In the words of the president, Brazil was producing horse-drawn coaches
instead of cars. To achieve that goal, the government opened the Brazilian economy to
foreign competition and privatized state-owned firms.
Following the plan’s implementation, the country experienced a recession. But it recovered afterward, and this recovery is usually attributed to enhanced competition in the
economy. Inflation ended up rising again, but this plan did make two important permanent changes. First, it opened up the Brazilian economy and expanded trade, reversing
the previous trend (figure 19). Second, it increased productivity. In the beginning of 1992,
when expectations of accelerated inflation did not materialize, the effects of the recovery
in investors’ confidence started to show up in public debt markets. Those expectations
had been based on the combination of price liberalization, corrections of public tariffs,
32

The government confiscated the amounts exceeding $50,000 cruzados novos. The resources actually
became available before the eighteen-month period, as figure 20 shows.
33
Tablita was the name for the interest rate conversion table when the currency changed.

15

and the devaluation that followed the floating of the exchange rate in October 1991, in
face of the strong monetization of the hijacked assets during Collor Plan I.34 The return
of investors’ confidence is also confirmed by the recovery of foreign exchange reserves
after 1992.
Following the high political turbulence that characterized the months preceding the
impeachment of President Collor de Mello (October 2, 1992), the beginning of Itamar
Franco’s presidency was marked by high uncertainty concerning economic policy. Proposals of another moratorium, and even repudiation of the public debt, were constantly in the
press. It was only after the president nominated Fernando Henrique Cardoso, his fourth
minister of finance in less than six months, that the recovered confidence materialized in
higher external reserves.
Real Plan: In February 1994, the government launched its last stabilization plan,
the Real Plan, which would finally put an end to the hyperinflation. The plan that
conquered Brazilian inflation did not have the blessing of the IMF, an always troubled
relationship in the previous decades. The plan’s concepts were different from the previous
ones: it aimed to reduce deficits, modernize firms, and reduce the distortions that arose
from previous price freezes. An important difference from previous plans is that it was
planned in advance, with several measures being taken before its official announcement.
Its first stage started in June 1993, when the government launched the Programa de
Ação Imediata (Program for Immediate Action), designed to focus on fiscal imbalances
that would arise when the seigniorage revenues fell.35 It included an increase in existing
tax rates, such as income tax, the creation of new taxes, such as the tax on financial
intermediation, and the renegotiation of subnational government debt in an attempt to
control the deficits of subnational governments.36 Another fiscal adjustment came in the
beginning of 1994, with the Fundo Social de Emergência (Emergency Social Fund), a way
to suspend part of the earmarked revenues of states and municipalities, providing more
flexibility in the government budget. On the monetary side, a clearly stated intention
to limit issuances of the new currency led to the adoption of a high interest rate policy
and high reserve requirement ratios (100 percent reserve requirements on new deposits
after July 1, 1994). In addition, the plan included changes in the institutional framework
in which the central bank operated, such as the transfer of management of the external
debt to the National Treasury Secretariat and the reduction of the size and duties of
the National Monetary Council. Section 4 discusses those changes in more detail. On
34

The recovery of the stock of public debt in the portfolio of the private sector was a clear demonstration
that asset holders were willing to return to business as usual in spite of the disruptions of repeated
interventions that had been made in the rules of indexation and the liquidity of public securities during
the previous twelve years. One should bear in mind that the majority of economic analysts at the time
were forecasting that the government would never again be able to place new debt.
35
The program was announced in June 1993, but many of the reforms were implemented later in that
year or even in 1994.
36
See Portugal (2017) for a discussion of the fiscal adjustments that were adopted in that period.

16

top of all these measures, the government also reached an agreement on its external debt
renegotiations under the Brady Plan, and in March 1994 its defaulted debt was securitized
and the country regained access to international capital markets.37
The Real Plan did not involve price freezes itself, but it was able to solve the problems
of staggered wages and prices. Actually, this was considered the most controversial aspect
of the plan but ended up being very successful. The creation of a new unit of account,
the URV—Unidade Real de Valor (Unit of Real Value)—aimed at establishing a parallel
unit of value to the cruzeiro real, the inflated currency. The idea was to make the unit
temporary. Prices were quoted in both URVs and cruzeiros reais, but payments had to
be made exclusively in cruzeiros reais. The URV worked like a shadow currency that had
its parity to cruzeiro real constantly adjusted, since it was one-to-one with the dollar.
Therefore, a conversion rate of the URV/cruzeiro novo (the old currency) was set every
day, and many conversions were left to free negotiation between economic agents, with
the government having more interference in oligopolized prices. That would allow agents
to observe the low inflation of the parallel currency, therefore breaking the expectations
of high inflation once the currency was changed. The URV was created in February 1994
when the Real Plan was officially launched, and in May 1994 the government announced
that the real would become the new currency in July 1994. The government kept its
plan, and the URV was extinguished on July 1, 1994, when it was converted to the new
currency, the real, with the parity being 1 dollar = 1 real = 1 URV = 2,750 cruzeiros
reais, and the adoption of a crawling-peg regime followed.
After the currency conversion was implemented, inflation rates fell significantly, and
the hyperinflation period in Brazil came to an end. Figure 21 illustrates how the increasing primary surplus since 1993 allowed the government to reduce its seigniorage revenues
after the Real Plan was implemented. The drop in seigniorage revenues was associated
with a reduction in both inflation and money growth rates. In table 3 we use the monthly
data to compute the government budget constraint around the time the Real Plan was
implemented. Note that while the primary surplus increased in May/93–May/94, the
government was able to accumulate foreign reserves by 6.3 percent of GDP (which explains the negative 6.3 percent of GDP relative to net external debt in table 3). Then,
between May/93–May/94 and May/94–May/95, seigniorage revenues fell from an average
of 2.7 percent to only 0.7 percent of GDP, and that was possible because of the increase
in primary surplus, from 2.8 to 4.0 percent of GDP, as a result of the fiscal measures
described above. However, in May/95–May/96, after inflation was under control and
seigniorage revenues fell, the government showed a deterioration in its primary balance
that would be reversed in the subsequent years. That fiscal deterioration was financed
through domestic debt issuance, which shows that the credibility of the reforms played an
important role, as it allowed the government to keep seigniorage revenues at low levels.
37

The agreement was signed in November 1993.

17

In addition, the increase in real money balances following the Real Plan also contributed
to increasing the financing options of the government (figure 22). Lastly, Brazil started
to accumulate external debt again after 1994, but that was done by the private sector (or
by public entities that were not included in the fiscal and debt statistics), which borrowed
from abroad and, concurrently, financed the government. That accounts for the current
account deficits after 1994 (figure 14), explained by lower trade balances as a result of
increasing imports (figure 19).
Here, it is important to mention that the analysis above used the official primary
deficits plus transfers as the benchmark measure of government primary deficits. We did
so because there are large discrepancies in fiscal statistics around the time the Real Plan
was implemented.38 If instead we considered only the primary deficits from government
accounts, without the transfers, we would observe a transition from large primary deficits
to large primary surplus upon the implementation of the Real Plan, without the subsequent deterioration in primary balances mentioned above. We discuss that in appendix
C. We were not able to explain the differences between both series. We chose the primary
deficits plus transfers as our benchmark measure because it is closer to the primary deficit
series reported by the Central Bank of Brazil, and it has been the preferred measure by
economists that analyzed the fiscal policy in Brazil at that time (e.g., Giambiagi and
Alem 2011 and Portugal 2017).
Under our benchmark measure of primary deficits, the fiscal deterioration from May/94–
May/95 to May/95–May/96 is usually explained by the increase in wages that resulted
from wage negotiations in 1994, and by the Bacha effect, which worked as the reverse of
the Olivera-Tanzi effect.39 The reason is that fiscal revenues in Brazil were very well indexed to inflation, but fiscal expenditures were not.40 So the executive branch could, and
indeed did so, cut the real value of expenditures just by disbursing the originally planned
nominal amounts with some delay, as higher inflation rates would rapidly erode the real
value of those expenditures. Of course, this had the collateral effect of creating large
problems, since public hospitals would run out of money at the end of the year, several
bridges or roads would stay unfinished for many years, and so on. Guardia (1992) studied
the budget for 1990 and 1991 in detail and reported significant differences between total
expenditures in the (federal) budget and the actual expenditures. In 1990 and 1991, total
expenditures hovered around 63 and 60 percent of the voted expenditures, respectively.
Therefore, after inflation was under control, the government had to deal with the large
discrepancies between nominal expenditures and revenues in the budget, which could
38

One advantage is that it allows us to make the analysis using monthly data because the official fiscal
statistics covering the national public sector are reported at an annual frequency.
39
See Bacha (2003) and Tanzi (1977).
40
A daily index, the UFIR (Fiscal Reference Unit), was computed based on inflation. Taxes would be
denominated in this indexed unit of account and then translated to the nominal hyperinflated currency
on the very day that taxes were paid to the banking system.

18

explain the temporary deterioration in fiscal balances in the subsequent years.
The success of the Real Plan in conquering the hyperinflation is indisputable, but
many discussions have taken place regarding which were the most important points in
accounting for it. As is evident, many important changes were taking place around the
implementation of the Real Plan, so it is hard to answer that question. One important
condition was the availability of foreign financing, as foreign capital inflows resumed after
the government reached an agreement with its foreign creditors under the Brady Plan.41
That was the end of a long process of foreign debt rescheduling. Another important
factor was the fiscal reform that increased primary surpluses (figure 21). That reform
also included other important fiscal measures that, most likely, did not have an immediate
impact on government fiscal statistics. Among those measures was the imposition of fiscal
constraints on subnational governments, seen as an important achievement of the Real
Plan. The deficits of the subnational governments became a big issue in the 1980s and
1990s, and many attempts were made, often including bailouts, to solve that issue. In
1989, for example, a debt renegotiation with the state governments took place, and only
two years before the government had renegotiated the debt of ten state banks. The state
banks, in particular, were constantly used to finance subnational government deficits.
Many of them actually operated with negative reserves, which ultimately pressured the
central bank to expand the monetary base (see section 4.1). In 1993, the reforms enabled
the federal government to use the fiscal revenues of subnational governments as debt
guarantees and also forbid the state banks from making new loans to their respective
state governments. That was the beginning of a sequence of reforms that would culminate
in the implementation of the Fiscal Responsibility Law in 2000. Finally, the tightness of
monetary policy was an important characteristic of the Real Plan, and it still characterizes
monetary policy to this day.

3.3

1995–2016: moderate growth with higher stability

The last subperiod of our analysis represents the period of lowest inflation in Brazilian
history. Inflation rates averaged only 8 percent per year, accompanied by the adoption
of active fiscal and monetary policy rules. Economic growth resumed, but at moderate
rates. Real GDP per capita grew 1.2 percent per year on average. We also observed
the process of fiscal consolidation, with primary surpluses in 1995–2002 and 2003–2011
averaging 2.3 and 2.8 percent of GDP, respectively (row 9, table 1). Despite all those
advancements, the country experienced a big shift in its economic policy at the onset
of the international financial crisis in 2008–2009, which eventually culminated in a rapid
41

The capital inflows were a main factor in the expansion of the interest-bearing public debt, as the
Central Bank of Brazil conducted massive sterilized purchases of foreign exchange. In 1993, so much
capital was flowing into Brazil that the government implemented controls on capital inflows (Carvalho
and Garcia 2008).

19

deterioration of its fiscal balances and a deep recession in recent years. These events have
raised concerns about the capability of the government to maintain a low-inflation regime
in the future.42
3.3.1

1995–2002

The years following the implementation of the Real Plan represented a consolidation
of the reforms that had begun in the previous subperiod. The government kept the privatization process and promoted both fiscal and banking reforms. Part of these reforms
were possible only because of the success of the Real Plan in conquering the hyperinflation, which gave the government the political support to push its agenda of reforms. The
value the public bestowed on the new low-inflation scenario became clear in the following presidential elections. Fernando Henrique Cardoso, the finance minister during the
elaboration of the Real Plan, was elected president of Brazil in the first round, not only
in the presidential elections of 1994 but again in the 1998 elections.43
The low-inflation regime, however, also brought some challenges. For example, a
banking crisis followed the Real Plan, during which some private and state-owned banks
failed. One of the reasons for the failure was that the fall in inflation led to a fall in
seigniorage-like revenues (the float) that were partially captured by these banks. Here
is an example of how this mechanism works. The Central Bank of Brazil increases the
monetary base by $1,000 reais by depositing that amount in the account that holds the
bank reserves. Assuming that the banks have no incentives to hold any voluntary reserves,
the banking system lends the $1,000 reais to the public. The public borrows that amount,
and after spending it, the $1,000 reais return to the banks as deposits. Assuming that the
reserve requirement ratio is, for example, 10 percent, the banks keep $100 reais as reserves
and now have $900 reais left to lend to the public again. Then the public borrows that
amount, and after spending it, the $900 reais return to the banking system as deposits
again. The banking system holds $90 reais as reserves and lends the rest. That process
continues indefinitely, and the increase in the amount of deposits converges to $10,000
reais (= $1,000 + (1 − 10%) × $1,000 + (1 − 10%)2 × $1,000 + . . .), which represents ten
times (the inverse of the reserve requirement ratio) the initial increase in the monetary
base. The ratio of deposits to bank reserves in Brazil is illustrated in figure 23. Finally,
given that banks charge interest when lending money to the public, and that deposits
are usually not remunerated, that process represents an increase in the revenues of the
banking system. So, overall, in order for inflation to fall, the Central Bank of Brazil must
42

For thorough analyses of that period, we refer to Werneck (2014a,b).
According to the constitution of 1988, the president is elected by a majority voting in a two-round
system. If a presidential candidate receives more than 50 percent of the valid votes in the first round, that
is, after the exclusion of blank and null votes, then the candidate is elected president without a second
round. So far, no other presidential candidate besides Fernando Henrique Cardoso has been elected in
the first round after the constitution of 1988 was enacted. Voting is mandatory in Brazil.
43

20

make fewer such increases to the monetary base and thus must collect fewer revenues, as
we have just described. That decrease in revenues hurt the balance sheets of banks and,
all else equal, contributed to the banking crisis.
Besides the banking crisis, the government also faced turbulence in international capital markets. The first one was the 1997 Asian financial crisis, which was immediately
followed by the 1998 Russian financial crisis. After the latter, there was a speculative
attack on the real, and the Central Bank of Brazil experienced a fast deterioration of
its international reserves (figure 24). The IMF stepped in, but the situation was such
that the central bank could no longer hold the crawling-peg regime, and in January
1999, a floating exchange rate regime was adopted. This change also culminated in the
replacement of the governor of the central bank, but not of the finance minister.44
In March 1999, following the adoption of the floating exchange rate regime, Brazil
adopted an inflation-targeting regime, an arrangement that holds to this day. Concurrently, the government started to announce fiscal policy targets and took important measures to improve the conduction of its fiscal policy. One important step in that process
was the Fiscal Responsibility Law, enacted in 2000, which imposed rigid fiscal constraints
on both federal and subnational governments. Those measures led to fiscal surpluses, as
illustrated in figure 9.
However, the government faced another deterioration in the external scenario in 2001,
with the recession in the United States and the fall of the Argentine peso. To make
matters worse, the country also experienced a major energy crisis. It resulted from the
poor management of its infrastructure, and the government ended up imposing mandatory
rationing of electricity. The government lost its popularity, and during the presidential
campaigns of the 2002 elections, the stability of Brazil’s macroeconomic policy was put
to the test. The polls indicated that Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, “Lula,” would be the
new president, and that led to an episode of current account reversal (figure 14), with
a large devaluation of the real exchange rate (figure 15) and a sharp increase in the
interest rates of government debt securities, in both the domestic and external debt
markets. The reason behind this new episode is that the leading candidate had advocated
for a debt renegotiation of both domestic and external debt in the past, indicating the
possibility of an outright default. Under the adverse scenario, the IMF stepped in again,
its last intervention in Brazil. Lula ended up announcing that he would keep the main
macroeconomic policies that the previous government had implemented. Once elected,
he kept his promise, and the financial markets returned to normality.
44

The central bank had eighteen different governors between 1985 and 2016.

21

3.3.2

2003–2011

The years following the election of President Lula were characterized by a favorable
external scenario, with a worldwide boom in commodity prices. In particular, the period
between 2004 and 2008 had the best economic outcomes of the 1960–2016 period. It
was characterized by fiscal surpluses, high growth rates of real GDP per capita, current
account surpluses, an expansion of international trade, a reduction of the public external debt and the accumulation of international reserves, and the consolidation of the
inflation-targeting regime that had been adopted in 1999. In addition, the government
implemented large conditional cash transfer programs, such as the social welfare program
Bolsa Famı́lia, which led to big improvements in income inequality in the fight against
poverty.
Nevertheless, following Lula’s reelection in 2006, the government shifted its macroeconomic policy toward a larger intervention of the state in the economy, which would
eventually lead to a deterioration in fiscal balances. In 2007, for example, the government launched the Growth Acceleration Program (PAC), a major infrastructure program
consisting of investment projects and policies that aimed at boosting economic growth.
Through BNDES, Brazil’s development bank, the government began to invest heavily
in large national companies in an attempt to increase its competitiveness in the global
market. And through the now state-controlled mixed-capital oil company Petrobras, the
government promoted large investments in the exploration of oil in the pre-salt layer,
which had recently been discovered. As expected, some of these policies represented the
expansion of fiscal deficits, but since neither BNDES nor Petrobras was included in the
public-sector fiscal statistics in that time, they did not show up in the official statistics. In
fact, in those years the government started to implement budget maneuvers to artificially
inflate its primary surplus to meet the fiscal policy targets, which makes the assessment of
the actual fiscal deficit figures even harder for that period. That effort became popularly
known as contabilidade criativa (creative accounting).
With the global financial crisis in 2008–2009, the government started to push those
policies even further, seeking to implement a countercyclical policy that would prevent
the country from going through a major recession. Initially, the policy seemed to be very
successful, as real GDP per capita grew 6.2 percent in 2010. However, it did not last for
long.
3.3.3

2012–2016

In 2012, the economy was already showing signs of exhaustion, with annual growth
rates of real GDP per capita decelerating to only 1 percent. The drop in commodity
prices made the situation even worse. The fiscal deterioration accelerated, and the use of
contabilidade criativa to hide deficit figures became even more pronounced. The govern22

ment was now also intervening in SOEs in an attempt to manage inflation through the
control of administered prices; that is, the government maintained low prices for goods
and services (e.g., fuel and electricity) that were sold by SOEs, even though the other
prices in the economy were increasing. The main reason for this intervention is that the
government did not want to bear the political burden of reporting higher inflation rates,
since it was the government itself that pressured the central bank to reduce nominal
interest rates in the first place.
Further, the government also used its public banks (as well as private banks) to hide
its deficits. Here is one way that it did so. The government instructed the public banks
to pay social security pensions to the public, but then the government never reimbursed
the public banks for the full value of those payments. Hence, the public banks registered
losses that should have been counted as deficits of the government.
Brazil was now back to a scenario in which the government used public banks and
SOEs to hide its deficits while economic growth kept decreasing. These fiscal maneuvers
became popularly known as pedaladas fiscais and eventually led to the impeachment of
former president Dilma Rousseff in 2015, who had replaced Lula in 2010 and was reelected
in 2014.
In 2015 and 2016, real GDP per capita decreased by 4.6 and 2.7 percent, respectively,
and fiscal deficits reached levels of around 7 percent of GDP in 2016. The fiscal situation
proved to be worse than previously expected. The previous government avoided tackling
the reforms that would lead to a fiscal consolidation, such as the reforms to the pension
system, and, at the time of this writing, the outstanding question is whether the next
president can resolve the current precarious fiscal situation. As figure 3 shows, public
domestic debt is now at record levels, and previous fiscal adjustments were implemented
through higher public expenditures and even higher public revenues. But the tax burden
in Brazil is already very high, imposing an extra constraint on the capability of the
government to raise more revenues.
With this history in mind, we now turn to discussing why inflation rates were so
persistently high before the implementation of the Real Plan.

4
4.1

Weak institutions, deficits, and inflation inertia
Weak institutions that provided indirect access to the printing press

One of the most striking features of Brazilian monetary and fiscal history is its long
period of high inflation pre-1994. Figure 5 shows that inflation rates were closely related
to the growth rates of the monetary base and to seigniorage revenues. We argue that the
high degree of passiveness in monetary policy due to a weak institutional arrangement,
23

together with persistent and large fiscal deficits during that period, delivers a type of
inflation persistence that goes a long way in accounting for these facts. In this section,
we present a summary of the history of the Central Bank of Brazil, starting from the
discussions surrounding its creation, and provide a description of how the government
accessed seigniorage revenues. As will become clear, the Central Bank of Brazil was used
many times to perform operations that are not consistent with the current notion of an
autonomous monetary authority.
Before 1945, there was no clear separation between monetary and fiscal authorities, in
the sense that the government Treasury had total control over money issuance. Rather,
that was done through the Bank of Brazil, which held a monopoly over money issuance
and operated in many instances as the bank of the government, as a commercial bank,
and as a development bank. The debate surrounding the establishment of a central
bank started before 1945, but it was only in that year when the first measures took
place. The government created the Superintendency of Money and Credit (SUMOC),
whose council had regulatory powers over the Central Bank of Brazil’s monetary affairs,
and this SUMOC was supposed to serve as a stepping stone toward the creation of a
central bank. However, the Bank of Brazil received the majority of seats on that council,
which meant that, in practice, there was no disruption in the way monetary policy was
conducted. Therefore, instead of establishing a central bank directly, Brazil opted for a
two-step approach, in which the first step, SUMOC, lasted for twenty years. That process
reflected a political impasse, with many interest groups reluctant to lose privileged access
to subsidized credit, that is, their indirect access to money printing.
In 1964, the Central Bank of Brazil was finally established.45 However, the SUMOC’s
council was restructured to form the National Monetary Council (CMN), which had
regulatory powers over the central bank and still operates today. In the beginning, CMN
had nine members: the finance minister, the president of the Bank of Brazil, the president
of the National Bank for Economic Development, and six other members with fixed terms
of six years each. Four of those six members would compose the board of the Central Bank
of Brazil, one being its governor. Although the fixed terms granted some independence
to the central bank, it did not last for long. In 1967, during the first transition of power
within the military regime, the board of the central bank, including the governor, was
forced to resign, and the fixed terms were officially abolished later on. The evolution of the
number of members in the CMN and its composition provide an interesting perspective
on the passiveness of monetary policy in Brazil because, in practice, that council ended
up operating a separate budget from the one approved in Congress, usually referred to as
the monetary budget. In the hyperinflation periods, the number of members in the CMN
increased to twenty-six, and they came from very different sectors of the government
and society, including business leaders and labor union representatives. That process
45

The Central Bank of Brazil was created on December 31, 1964, and started to operate in 1965.

24

reflected the increasing importance of the monetary budget for the implementation of
economic policy. It was only in 1994 that the Real Plan reduced its number of members
to the actual three (the governor of the Central Bank of Brazil, the finance minister, and
the minister of planning), granting the board of the central bank greater control over
monetary policy.46 Figure 25 shows how the number of members in that council changed
over time. The correlation between inflation rates and the number of members in the
National Monetary Council is remarkable. In our reading of history, whenever the council
was increased to allow additional groups to play a more prominent role, the desire of the
council to pursue anti-inflationary measures with positive long-term consequences but
negative short-term consequences was weakened.
With respect to the central bank’s operations, figure 26 shows the evolution of its
balance sheet between 1965 and 2016, separating assets from liabilities. The complexity
of its balance sheet during the high-inflation period shows that it was used many times
to perform operations that normally do not fall to a central bank, and most of the time,
these operations were effectively dictated to the central bank by the government. For
example, upon its creation, the share of the monetary base in the central bank’s liabilities
was only 50 percent, with the rest consisting mostly of government funds to implement
economic policies. The reason is that, instead of focusing exclusively on monetary policy,
the Central Bank of Brazil also played the role of a development bank. For example, the
central bank was given the job of providing insurance to agriculture (PROAGRO).
Additionally, the Central Bank of Brazil took on some of the tasks normally reserved
to the Treasury, as it was made responsible for managing both the domestic and external
public debt, which involved issuances and payments of principal and interest. During the
external debt crisis, for example, the central bank was one of the main players involved
in the negotiations. When the external debt was nationalized, it was forced to absorb all
of this debt on its balance sheet, as described in section 3.2. The Real Plan ended that
policy in 1994 and transferred the administration of the external debt to the national
Treasury, and at the time, the government clearly stated that that action was taken to
avoid monetary pressures. Regarding domestic debt, the government created the National
Treasury Secretariat in 1986, which became responsible for managing that debt. However,
the central bank was still authorized to purchase government debt securities directly from
the Treasury under special circumstances, such as in the case of failed auctions. That was
forbidden in 1988, but evidence suggests that it kept doing so until the implementation of
the Real Plan, which partially accounts for the concentration of federal government debt
securities on the Central Bank of Brazil’s balance sheet. Figure 27 shows that during the
hyperinflation years, the fraction of government domestic debt securities at the central
bank reached levels above 80 percent.47
46
47

See Franco (2017) for a complete description of that process.
The confiscation of savings during the Collor Plan I and the fact that external debt was being held at

25

Next, when we analyze the central bank’s operations during the high-inflation period,
we find evidence that the government had access to and was using seigniorage revenues.
Up to 1988, that was done mainly through its operations with the Bank of Brazil. As
mentioned before, many of the government policies, such as subsidized credit, were initially conducted by the Bank of Brazil, and they continued to be after the central bank
was created. In order to facilitate the interaction between both institutions, the government created the Conta de Movimento, a Bank of Brazil’s account that would show up
on the central bank’s balance sheet as a credit and whose balance should average zero.
In practice, that provided the Bank of Brazil with control over money issuance, since it
could automatically withdraw funds from that account, which would automatically be
matched with an expansion of the monetary base, of equal value, on the central bank’s
balance sheet. Not surprisingly, figure 28 shows that the correlation between variations in
that account’s balance over GDP and the variation in the monetary base over GDP was
very high, and that a large part of seigniorage was, de facto, “spent” by funding credit
programs through the Bank of Brazil.48 Since the Bank of Brazil worked in large measure
as the government’s banker (Pastore 2014), this should not be a surprise. Note also that
those transfers increased significantly around 1975, which coincides with the period in
which government deficits and inflation rates started to rise again. The following quote
from Mailson da Nobrega (2005), former minister of finance, suggests how little control
the central bank had over the expansion of the monetary base, and how such seigniorage
was used to finance fiscal deficits, especially of subnational governments:
In 1983, a troublesome fact occurred. Some newly elected state governors
realized that their banks could overdraw cash from their accounts at Bank
of Brazil (which held the reserves). It would take more than a month for
the Central Bank of Brazil to realize that through its financial statements.
There was no system that could provide that information in real time. The
first one was the governor of Rio de Janeiro. The governors of Goiás, Santa
Catarina, and Paraı́ba followed. The governor of Paraı́ba, Wilson Braga, was
kind enough to let me know about his overdraft in the same day it took place,
given that we are friends and from the same state. I warned him that it
was very serious, but he replied to me saying that he needed to pay public
employees and that the overdraft had already occurred. (Nobrega 2005)
The previous quote also indicates that one should analyze the operations of public
banks, such as the Bank of Brazil and state banks, to understand how the seigniorage
the Central Bank of Brazil also account for the increase in that share, since those resources were mostly
invested in government debt securities.
48
The funds transferred to the Bank of Brazil from the central bank were technically loans that in
practice paid no interest. In a high-inflation environment, these no-interest loans would fall quickly in
value and soon lose importance on both balance sheets. This is how a loan became akin to a government
expenditure.

26

revenues were ultimately used. These operations were mostly done off-budget, so they
must be taken into account when computing public deficits in Brazil, especially during
the high-inflation periods. We use the transfers from the central bank to the Bank of
Brazil as an approximation of those deficits, and we add those transfers to the deficits
data.49 However, the evidence above suggests that Brazil effectively had multiple monetary authorities during the high-inflation period, so those transfers might not represent
all of the deficit that was financed through money issuance. The reason is that given
the size of the public financial sector, part of the seigniorage-like revenues (the float) described in section 3.3.1 was captured by public banks, so the total revenue of the public
financial sector was probably somewhere between the variation of the monetary base over
GDP and the variation of M1 over GDP, both illustrated in figure 29.50 However, we do
not have enough information on those banks, so we restrict our analysis to the transfers
between the central bank and the Bank of Brazil.
Initially, the Central Bank of Brazil did not transfer its profits to the government
Treasury, so the use of Conta de Movimento was a direct way in which the government
could access seigniorage revenues. Interestingly, when that account was frozen in 1986,
the government started to use another similar account between the Bank of Brazil and
the central bank, Conta de Suprimentos Especiais, until its extinction in 1988.51 When
both accounts became unavailable, the government established the transfer of the profits
of the central bank to the Treasury.52 In fact, after 1988, there were two ways in which the
government could access seigniorage revenues: through the transfer of profits and through
the remuneration of its deposits at the Central Bank of Brazil. The new constitution in
1988 established that the government could not have accounts with commercial banks,
only one account, and that account should be at the central bank, the Conta Única do
Tesouro (Single Government Account), which should be used for all its transactions. A
particular feature of this account is that the Central Bank of Brazil became responsible
for paying interest on its balances, which was based on the average remuneration of the
government debt securities in its portfolio. Since deposits are usually not remunerated,
those transfers can also be interpreted as part of the seigniorage revenues. Figure 28
demonstrates that they match well with the series of seigniorage revenues.
The discussion above shows that the persistence and magnitude of the inflation process
in Brazil are closely related to the persistence and magnitude of the degree of passiveness of its monetary policy and to the government’s fiscal deficits, and that important
49

See appendix C.
Salviano Junior (2004) also makes that point in his analysis of the process that led to the privatization
of the public banks (PROES) that followed the Real Plan.
51
Between 1965 and 1987, the average variation in the monetary base over GDP was 2.6 percent, while
the average variation in the Bank of Brazil’s accounts over GDP was 2.8 percent. Those figures show
that seigniorage revenues were used mostly to finance the operations of the Bank of Brazil.
52
See Carvalho (2017) for a description of the evolution of the institutional framework regarding the
relationship between the Central Bank of Brazil and the government Treasury.
50

27

structural changes took place in both the institutional arrangements and fiscal balances
in the transition to the low-inflation period. In addition, it also provides an explanation
of why the government increased seigniorage revenues in the 1970s despite its access to
debt financing. The direct access to the central bank’s funds through Conta de Movimento provided incentives for some groups to use that account instead of going through
negotiations with Congress. In this case, the “provinces” effect might have played an
important role in accounting for the high and persistent inflation in Brazil. That was
the term used by Calvo and Vegh (1999) as a possible explanation for chronic inflation
episodes, in which different entities of the government choose their deficit level without
taking into account its effect on the aggregate deficit, which would lead, in equilibrium,
to higher deficits that are financed through higher seigniorage revenues, therefore leading
to higher inflation.53

4.2

Inflation indexation and passive monetary policy

Another factor that contributed to the Brazilian inflation process is indexation, which
was often mandatory and became a widespread phenomenon in Brazil after its introduction in the 1960s. Most prices, wages, taxes, and the exchange rate, as well as asset prices,
were indexed to past inflation. That, together with a peculiar form of monetary passiveness, would create the so-called inflation inertia. The main idea is that the widespread
indexation would induce agents to expect even higher inflation rates in the future and
to demand more money balances, which would then be satisfied by the (passive) monetary policy. So agents’ expectations of higher inflation rates would translate into higher
growth rates of money balances and higher inflation rates, leading to a vicious circle.
In such an environment, inflationary shocks, like the maxi-devaluations undertaken
during external crises, would permanently increase the inflation rate. As the monopsonist
in the money market, the central bank could, in theory, opt not to validate such an
increase in money demand by not increasing money supply, that is, by substantially
increasing the interest rate. However, this was not the monetary policy that was followed
during the pre–Real Plan years. Monetary policy at the time was more geared to keeping
the ex-ante real interest rate at a low positive level (Pastore 1994, 1996). The adoption
of a more active monetary policy by the Real Plan represented a major change in the
way monetary policy was conducted, and that could explain part of its success.
This hypothesis regarding inflation inertia gave many economists the illusion that
the hyperinflation could be cured without major improvements in the fiscal stance, as
discussed in our description of the stabilization plans. This mechanism has been studied
by many economists in Brazil (Pastore 2014; Cati, Garcia, and Perron 1999; Garcia
1996), but it has not been completely formalized yet, so we still cannot fully evaluate its
53

That issue was formally analyzed in Chari and Kehoe (2007) in the context of a monetary union.

28

importance.54

5

Final remarks and conclusion

This chapter has shown that a simple fiscal story goes a long way in accounting for
the inflation dynamics in Brazil, in which inflation rates are highly correlated with both
money growth rates and seigniorage revenues. In 1960–1973, debt financing was still very
restricted, and the government relied mostly on seigniorage revenues to finance its deficits.
Then, in 1973–1988, even though the government had some access to debt financing, the
institutional arrangement was such that seigniorage revenues were being channeled to
finance deficits at the Bank of Brazil. During the period with the highest inflation
rates, 1989–1994, the connection between government financing needs and seigniorage
revenues became more complex. The government obtained higher seigniorage revenues,
but that was done through the profit transfers from the central bank to the Treasury and
also through the remuneration of its deposits at the central bank, which were less direct
mechanisms than before. The financial repression during the Collor Plan I also guaranteed
that part of household savings was used to finance government deficits and allowed the
government to partially default on interest payments given that the remuneration of the
confiscated savings was chosen by the government itself. Finally, in the low-inflation
period (after 1994), Brazil showed primary surpluses and low seigniorage revenues.
The fiscal story is also consistent with the fiscal adjustments that were implemented
by PAEG and the Real Plan, the two successful stabilization plans that managed to
reduce inflation in Brazil. In both cases, the drop in seigniorage revenues that followed
their implementation was compensated by higher primary surpluses. The credibility of
these stabilization plans also played an important role, given that they paved the way
for increased access to debt financing by the government, which allowed the adjustments
to be implemented more gradually. In the case of the Real Plan, the increased access to
debt financing even allowed for a temporary deterioration in fiscal balances in subsequent
years, in which increased access to debt financing enabled the government to keep low
seigniorage revenues.
On the other hand, the connection between government fiscal deficits and growth
performance is much less clear. Even though many of Brazil’s recessions were associated
54

Garcia (1996) highlights a distinct aspect of the Brazilian hyperinflation with respect to the causal
relation between seigniorage and inflation. He points out that although seigniorage revenues were used to
finance fiscal deficits, the causal relation was not a direct one from higher deficits to higher inflation and
higher seigniorage. According to his partial equilibrium model, seigniorage was endogenously generated
by the interaction between indexation and money demand in the case in which the government provided a
currency substitute, that is, inflation-indexed accounts offered by the banks that invested in government
bills with daily liquidity. To keep this system from collapsing, the central bank had to match the increase
in nominal money demand, thereby generating seigniorage. The central bank, however, could generate
neither more nor less. Garcia (1996) calls this the “non-controllability” of seigniorage revenues.

29

with government fiscal imbalances, such as in the early 1960s, early 1980s, and the most
recent one, the large reduction in macroeconomic instability that was achieved after the
Real Plan in 1994 did not result in much higher growth rates of real GDP per capita.
Nevertheless, the periods of fast economic growth in 1968–1973 and most recently in 2004–
2008 were associated with improvements in fiscal balances, so that leads us to conclude
that fiscal stability is a necessary but not sufficient condition for sustained growth. That
has shown to be a more difficult task and would have to include, for example, reforms to
Brazil’s education, tax, political, and judicial systems.
Another lesson from the Brazilian case is that the government often used off-budget
transactions, mostly through public banks and state-owned enterprises, to “hide” its fiscal
deficits, especially in the high-inflation period (pre-1994). Some recent developments in
Brazilian public finances, as the pedaladas fiscais, accounting maneuvers that eventually
led to the impeachment of former president Dilma Rousseff, remind us that we should
always be aware that there are constant attempts to “violate” the intertemporal budget
constraint.
Finally, we observed that Brazil’s transition to its low-inflation regime beginning in
1994 was associated with the institution of active monetary policy in a context in which
fiscal dominance has been avoided with several initiatives to improve the fiscal stance,
most notably the Fiscal Responsibility Law. Unfortunately, after this great achievement,
and the very substantial improvement in the fiscal stance, especially after the floating of
the currency in 1999, Brazil’s primary surplus decreased rapidly in the last few years. To
make matters worse, the public-debt-to-GDP ratio accelerated again and now hovers at
record levels. With the tax burden at also very high levels, Brazil must finally confront
the political challenges required to reign in public expenditures. This major challenge
facing the next president of the country will have to be tackled, or the Real Plan will
pass to history as a long noninflationary interregnum.

References
Abreu, Marcelo de Paiva, and Rogério L. F. Werneck. 2014. “Estabilização, abertura e privatização, 1990-1994.” In A ordem do progreso: dois séculos de polı́tica
econômica no Brasil, 2nd ed., edited by Marcelo de Paiva Abreu. Rio de Janeiro:
Elsevier.
Bacha, Edmar L. 2003. “Brazil’s Plano Real: A view from the Inside.” In Development Economics and Structuralist Macroeconomics: Essays in Honor of Lance
Taylor. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Vegh. 1999. “Inflation Stabilization and BOP
30

Crises in Developing Countries.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1C, edited
by John Taylor and Michael Woodford, 1531–1614. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Carneiro, Dionı́sio D. 2014. “Crise e esperança, 1980–1984.” In A ordem do progreso:
dois séculos de polı́tica econômica no Brasil, 2nd ed., edited by Marcelo de Paiva
Abreu. Rio de Janeiro: Elsevier.
Carneiro, Dionı́sio D., and Eduardo M. Modiano. 2014. “Ajuste externo e desequilı́brio interno, 1980–1984.” In A ordem do progreso: dois séculos de polı́tica
econômica no Brasil, 2nd ed., edited by Marcelo de Paiva Abreu. Rio de Janeiro:
Elsevier.
Carvalho, Antonio C. C. D’Ávila Jr. 2017. “BC e Tesouro: um estudo sobre a constituição, leis complementares, leis ordinárias e medidas provisórias.” In A crise
fiscal e monetária Brasileira, 2nd ed., edited by Edmar L. Bacha. Rio de Janeiro:
Civilização Brasileira.
Carvalho, Bernardo S. de M., and Márcio G. P. Garcia. 2008. “Ineffective Controls
on Capital Inflows Under Sophisticated Financial Markets: Brazil in the Nineties.”
In Financial Markets Volatility and Performance in Emerging Markets, edited by
Sebastian Edwards and Márcio G.P. Garcia. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cati, Regina Celia, Márcio G. P. Garcia, and Pierre Perron. 1999. “Unit Roots in the
Presence of Abrupt Governmental Interventions with an Application to Brazilian
Data.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 14 (1): 27–56.
Cerqueira, Ceres Aires. 2003. Dı́vida externa brasileira. 2nd ed. Banco Central do
Brasil.
Chari, V. V. and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2007. “On the Need for Fiscal Constraints in a
Monetary Union.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (8): 2399–2408.
Costa Neto, Yttrio Corrêa da. 2004. Bancos oficiais no Brasil: origem e aspectos de
seu desenvolvimento. Banco Central do Brasil.
Franco, Gustavo H. B. 2017. “O conselho monetário nacional como autoridade monetária:
das origens aos dias actuais.” In A crise fiscal e monetária brasileira, 2nd ed., edited
by Edmar L. Bacha. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira.

31

Garcia, Márcio G. P. 1996. “Avoiding Some Costs of Inflation and Crawling Toward
Hyperinflation: The Case of the Brazilian Domestic Currency Substitute.” Journal
of Development Economics 51 (1): 139–159.
Giambiagi, Fabio, and Ana Claudia Alem. 2011. Finanças públicas - teoria e prática
no Brasil. 4th ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Guardia, Eduardo R. 1992. “Orçamento público e polı́tica fiscal: aspectos institucionais e a experiência recente–1985/1991.” Master’s thesis, Universidade Estadual
de Campinas, Instituto de Economia.
Lago, Luiz Aranha Corrêa. 2014. “A retomada do crescimento e as distorções do
milagre, 1967–1974.” In A ordem do progreso: dois séculos de polı́tica econômica
no Brasil, 2nd ed., edited by Marcelo de Paiva Abreu. Rio de Janeiro: Elsevier.
Mesquita, Mário M. C. 2014. “Inflação, estagnação e ruptura, 1961–1964.” In A ordem do progreso: dois séculos de polı́tica econômica no Brasil, 2nd ed., edited by
Marcelo de Paiva Abreu. Rio de Janeiro: Elsevier.
Modiano, Eduardo M. 2014. “A ópera dos três cruzados, 1985–1990.” In A ordem do
progreso: dois séculos de polı́tica econômica no Brasil, 2nd ed., edited by Marcelo
de Paiva Abreu. Rio de Janeiro: Elsevier.
Nóbrega, Maı́lson da. 2005. O futuro chegou: instituições e desenvolvimento no
Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Globo.
Orenstein, Luiz, and Antonio Claudio Sochaczewski. 2014. “Democracia com desenvolvimento, 1956–1961.” In A ordem do progreso: dois séculos de polı́tica econômica
no Brasil, 2nd ed., edited by Marcelo de Paiva Abreu. Rio de Janeiro: Elsevier.
Pastore, Affonso Celso. 1994. “Déficit público, a sustentabilidade do crescimento das
dı́vidas interna e externa, senhoriagem e inflação: uma análise do regime monetário
brasileiro.” Brazilian Review of Econometrics 14 (2): 177–234.
Pastore, Affonso Celso. 1996. “Por que a polı́tica monetária perde eficácia?” Revista
Brasileira de Economia 50 (3): 281–311.
Pastore, Affonso Celso. 2014. Inflação e crises: o papel da moeda. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
32

Pedras, Guillermo B. V. 2009. “História da dı́vida pública no Brasil: de 1964 até os
dias atuais.” In Dı́vida pública: a experiência brasileira, edited by Lena Oliveira
de Carvalho, Otavio Ladeira de Medeiros, and Anderson Caputo Silva. Brasilia:
Secretaria do Tesouro Nacional, Banco Mundial.
Portugal, Murilo. 2017. “Polı́tica fiscal na primeira fase do Plano Real, 1993–1997.”
In A crise fiscal e monetária brasileira, 2nd ed., edited by Edmar L. Bacha. Rio
de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira.
Salviano Junior, Cleofas. 2004. Bancos estaduais: dos problemas crônicos ao PROES.
Banco Central do Brasil.
Silva, Anderson Caputo. 2009. “Origem e história da dı́vida pública no Brasil até
1963.” In Dı́vida pública: a experiência brasileira, edited by Lena Oliveira de Carvalho, Otavio Ladeira de Medeiros, and Anderson Caputo Silva. Brasilia: Secretaria do Tesouro Nacional, Banco Mundial.
Tanzi, Vito. 1977. “Inflation, Lags in Collection, and the Real Value of Tax Revenue.” IMF Economic Review 24 (1): 154–167.
Werneck, Rogério L. F. 1991. “Public sector adjustment to external shocks and domestic pressures, 1970-85.” In The Public Sector and the Latin American Crisis,
1970-1985, edited by Felipe Larrain and Marcelo Selowsky. San Francisco: International Center for Economic Growth.
Werneck, Rogério L. F. 2014a. “Alternância polı́tica, redistribuiçãao e crescimento,
2003–2010.” In A ordem do progreso: dois séculos de polı́tica econômica no Brasil,
2nd ed., edited by Marcelo de Paiva Abreu. Rio de Janeiro: Elsevier.
Werneck, Rogério L. F. 2014b. “Consolidação da estabilização e reconstrução institucional, 1995–2002.” In A ordem do progreso: dois séculos de polı́tica econômica no
Brasil, 2nd ed., edited by Marcelo de Paiva Abreu. Rio de Janeiro: Elsevier.

33

A

Tables
Table 1: Government Budget Accounting (% of GDP)
subperiod
60–64

65–72

73–80

81–94

95-02

03-11

12-16

0.0
0.0
-0.4
4.1

0.8
0.0
-0.2
1.9

-0.2
1.7
-0.2
2.4

-0.3
-1.8
-0.1
3.2

-0.6
0.0
0.1
0.4

1.1
-2.3
0.1
0.4

3.5
0.0
-0.1
0.3

0.3
0.0
2.9
0.5

0.4
0.0
1.0
1.1

1.3
0.7
0.2
1.6

0.4
1.9
3.1
-4.5

2.0
0.3
-3.0
0.7

1.7
0.3
-2.7
-0.1

3.2
0.1
-1.1
1.5

3.4
3.2
3.7

2.2
1.5
2.6

1.8
2.1
3.7

-1.4
5.5
1.0

-2.3
-0.8
0.0

-2.8
-0.6
-0.8

0.4
2.1
3.6

Sources
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

domestic debt
external debt
real monetary base
seigniorage

Uses
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

interest on domestic debt
interest on external debt
primary deficits
transfers (residual)

Other measures
(9) primary deficits + transfers
(10) fiscal deficits
(11) fiscal deficits + transfers

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: See appendix C for a description of the budget constraint. Transfers are computed as
(8)=(1)+(2)+(3)+(4)-(5)-(6)-(7). The fiscal deficit is computed as (10)=(5)+(6)+(7).

Table 2: Investment by State-Owned Enterprises (% of GDP)
sub-period

All sectors
Manufacturing
Energy
Transportation
Communication

60–72

73–80

81–94

95–00

2.2

4.7

2.7

1.3

1.0
0.4
0.3
0.1

1.5
1.0
0.9
0.8

0.6
0.8
0.3
0.6

0.3
0.2
0.0
0.5

Source: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), Estatı́sticas do Século XX
(https://seculoxx.ibge.gov.br/economicas.html).

34

Table 3: Government Budget Accounting: Real Plan (% of GDP)
subperiod
May/92–
May/93

May/93–
May/94

May/94–
May/95

May/95–
May/96

-1.4
-2.1
-0.3
2.8

-2.6
-6.3
-0.1
2.7

-4.1
0.6
1.4
0.7

7.8
-4.1
0.1
0.3

0.8
-0.1
-1.8

-3.4
-0.2
-2.8

2.7
-0.1
-4.0

3.3
0.2
0.5

Sources
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

domestic debt
external debt
real monetary base
seigniorage

Uses
(5) interest on domestic debt
(6) interest on external debt
(7) primary deficits + transfers

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: See appendix C for a description of the budget constraint. Transfers are computed as
(8)=(1)+(2)+(3)+(4)-(5)-(6)-(7).

35

B

Figures
Figure 1: Real GDP per capita, inflation, deficit, 1960–2016
(a) Real GDP per capita

(b) Annual inflation rate (log scale)

(c) Deficit

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: Inflation rates are computed using the General Price Index, IGP-DI, from Getulio Vargas Foundation. See
appendix C for a description of how we construct the deficit series and the series of nominal GDP. Numbers correspond to
the (geometric) average of inflation rates in each subperiod in figure 1b, and to the (arithmetic) average of the deficits as
a percentage of GDP in each subperiod in figure 1c.

36

Figure 2: Net external debt, 1960–2016
(a) Percentage of GDP

(b) Constant US dollars

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: Net private external debt represents the series of registered private external debt (code 3566) from the CBB.
Public net external debt is computed as the registered public external debt (code 3564) minus the foreign reserves (code
3566), both from the CBB. The external debt of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) represents the series of net debt of the
public-sector, state-owned companies from IPEADATA. The total external debt is computed as the sum of net public
external debt and net private external debt after 1973, and by subtracting foreign reserves from the series of total
registered external debt from IBGE before that. Exchange rates represent end-of-period values (code 3691). See appendix
C for a description of how we compute the nominal GDP series. The series codes correspond to the codes used on the
website of the CBB
(https://www3.bcb.gov.br/sgspub/localizarseries/localizarSeries.do?method=prepararTelaLocalizarSeries). We use the
US GDP deflator from the Bureau of Economic Analysis to compute constant US$ values.

37

Figure 3: Domestic debt

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: Before 1981, domestic debt consists of the federal and state governments’ debt securities, together with the Dı́vida
Publica Fundada, available from Estatı́sticas do Século XX, IBGE. After 1981, it is the net debt of the public sector
computed by the Central Bank of Brazil plus the balance of the Bank of Brazil accounts on the balance sheet of the
central bank. See appendix C for an explanation of why we adjust the debt series for the Bank of Brazil accounts at the
central bank, and for a description of how we compute the series of nominal GDP.

Figure 4: Government revenues and expenditures

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), National Treasury Secretariat (STN), and Central Bank
of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: Revenues correspond to direct and indirect taxes. See appendix C for a description of how we compute the
revenues and expenditures of the public sector, and the nominal GDP series.

38

Figure 5: Inflation, seigniorage, and money growth, 1960–2016
(a) Money growth and inflation

(b) Seigniorage and inflation

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: For the inflation and money growth series, we plot the transformation log(15 + X), in which X denotes the annual
percentage rate. We sum 15 to avoid taking logs of negative numbers. Inflation rates are computed using the General
Price Index, IGP-DI, from Getulio Vargas Foundation. See appendix C for a description of how we compute the
seigniorage and nominal GDP series.

39

Figure 6: PAEG
(a) Money growth, inflation, and seigniorage

(b) Primary deficits and seigniorage

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: For the inflation and money growth series, we plot the transformation log(15 + X), in which X denotes the annual
percentage rate. We sum 15 to avoid taking logs of negative numbers. Inflation rates are computed using the General
Price Index, IGP-DI, from Getulio Vargas Foundation. See appendix C for a description of how we compute the
seigniorage, deficit, and nominal GDP series.

40

Figure 7: Sectoral composition of the public debt, 1960–2016
(a) External debt

(b) Domestic debt

Sources: IPEADATA, Central Bank of Brazil (CBB), and Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics.
Notes: The series of net debt, both external and domestic, of the federal government, state governments, and SOEs are
from IPEADATA. We add the balances of Bank of Brazil accounts on the balance sheet of the central bank to the series
of net domestic debt of the federal government. See appendix C for a description of how we compute the nominal GDP
series.

41

Figure 8: Bank of Brazil (BB) and the central bank

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: The variation in the balance of BB accounts denotes the variation in the balance of the accounts of the Bank of
Brazil that are reported on the balance sheet of the Central Bank of Brazil, which comprises the Conta de Movimento
and the Conta de Suprimentos Especiais. See appendix C for a description of how we compute the nominal GDP series.

Figure 9: Deficit and transfers

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: Our definition of “deficit” is the primary deficit plus real interest payments on debt discounting for real GDP
growth, and transfers represent the residual (the variation in debt that cannot be explained by official deficit statistics).
See appendix C for a description of how we compute the series of deficits, transfers, and nominal GDP.

42

Figure 10: Average maturity of debt

Sources: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB) and National Treasury Secretariat (STN).
Notes: We use the series of average maturity of the registered external debt (code 3688) from 1971 to 2012, and the series
of the average maturity of the gross external debt (code 3689) from 2005 to 2016, both from the central bank. Regarding
the maturity of the domestic debt, from 1964 to 2008, we used the average maturity reported in the statistical appendix,
table A.4.5, of the book Dı́vida Pública: A Experiência Brasileira published by the National Treasury Secretariat in
2009. After 2009, we use the series of average maturity of the federal government debt securities (code 10621) from the
central bank. The series codes correspond to the codes used on the website of the CBB.

Figure 11: Indexation of federal government debt securities

Source: IPEADATA.
Notes: Debt securities indexed to inflation correspond to those indexed to either IGP-DI or IGP-M. Those indexed to
IPCA or other price indexes are included in others. Debt securities that are not indexed correspond to nominal bonds.
Finally, debt securities indexed to the interest rate denote those that are indexed to the interest rate that is used by the
central bank as its policy instrument, the SELIC. These securities are sometimes referred to as zero-duration bonds.

43

Figure 12: Nominal interest rate and inflation

Source: IPEADATA.
Notes: Interest rates correspond to the daily averages of the interest rates charged in the overnight operations between
the central bank and other financial institutions. Inflation rates are computed using the General Price Index, IGP-DI,
from Getulio Vargas Foundation.

Figure 13: Inflation and stabilization plans

Source: IPEADATA.
Note: Inflation rates are computed using the General Price Index, IGP-DI, from Getulio Vargas Foundation.

44

Figure 14: International accounts

Source: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: We use the exchange rate series with average purchase values in the year (code 3693) from the central bank to
convert dollar values to reais. The current account, trade balance, and net interest income values correspond to the series
with codes 2301, 2301, 2398, respectively. The series codes correspond to the codes used on the website of the CBB. See
appendix C for a description of how we compute the series of nominal GDP.

Figure 15: Real exchange rate

Sources: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB), IPEADATA, and Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).
Notes: We consider the bilateral real exchange rate between the United States and Brazil. The real exchange rate is
computed as the US price index times the exchange rate divided by the price index in Brazil. We use the US CPI as the
price index for the United States, the exchange rate series (R$/US$) with average purchase values from the central bank,
and the General Price Index, IGP-DI, from Getulio Vargas Foundation as the price index for Brazil.

45

Figure 16: Interest payments refinanced and in arrears

Sources: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB) and IPEADATA.
Notes: We use the monthly series for interest actually paid (code 2833), in arrears (code 2835), and refinanced (code
2834) relative to the external debt from the central bank. We use the exchange rate series with average purchase values in
the month from IPEADATA to convert dollar values to reais. We use accumulated values in three months to smooth the
series and report annualized values by multiplying the series by four. The series codes correspond to the codes used on
the website of the CBB. See appendix C for a description of how we compute the series of nominal GDP.

Figure 17: Net external debt of the Central Bank of Brazil

Source: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: We use data on assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency on the balance sheet of the central bank to
compute the net external debt of CBB. We use end-of-period exchange rates (code 3691) to convert to dollars. See note in
figure 2 for how we computed the series of total external debt. We use the US GDP deflator from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis to compute constant US$ values. The series codes correspond to the codes used on the website of the CBB.

46

Figure 18: Real wages

Sources: IPEADATA and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: Wages correspond to the average remuneration in the metropolitan region of Sao Paulo. Real values are computed
using the General Price Index, IGP-DI, from Getulio Vargas Foundation. We use a three-month average to smooth the
series.

Figure 19: Exports and imports

Sources: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB) and Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).
Note: We use the US CPI to compute constant dollar values.

47

Figure 20: Monetary aggregates

Source: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).

Figure 21: Real Plan

Sources: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB) and Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE).
Notes: In this plot we are using the opposite of primary deficits plus transfers. See appendix C for a description of how
we constructed the seigniorage, deficit, and transfers series.

48

Figure 22: Real money balances

Sources: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB) and Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE).
Note: See appendix C for a description of how we constructed the nominal GDP series.

Figure 23: Money multiplier

Source: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).
Notes: The money multiplier is defined as the ratio of bank deposits over bank reserves.

49

Figure 24: Exchange rate and foreign reserves

Source: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).

Figure 25: Size of National Monetary Council (CMN) and inflation

Sources: IPEADATA and Franco (2017).

50

Figure 26: Composition of the balance sheet of the Central Bank of Brazil
(a) Assets

(b) Liabilities

Source: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).

51

Figure 27: Government debt securities held by the Central Bank of Brazil

Source: IPEADATA.

Figure 28: Transfers from the central bank to Bank of Brazil and to the treasury

Source: Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).

52

Figure 29: Variation in M0 and M1 over GDP

Source: IPEADATA.

53

C

Appendix

This appendix describes the data and methodology that were used to compute the
government budget constraint that is used in table 1. Also discussed are the different
primary deficit series that are available for Brazil.
We consider the following consolidated budget constraint of the government in units
of the domestic currency (in our case, reais):
∗
Pt bt + Et Pt∗ b∗t + Mt = Pt (Dt + Tt ) + Pt rt−1 bt−1 + Et Pt∗ rt−1
b∗t−1 + Mt−1 ,

(1)

where P is the price level of the domestic good in local currency, b is the real stock of
domestic debt in units of the domestic good, E is the nominal exchange rate between the
foreign (dollar) and local currencies, P ∗ is the price level of the foreign good in foreign
currency, b∗ is the real stock of external debt in units of the foreign good, M is the
monetary base in units of the local currency, D is the real primary deficit in units of the
domestic good, r is the gross real return on domestic debt, r∗ is the gross real return
on the external debt, and T denotes the transfers in units of the domestic good. The
transfers, T , account for the residual in equation (1).
We follow the same methodology as in chapter 2, with two simplifying assumptions:
(1) we assume that the share of the domestic good in the domestic price level is one
(α = 1), and we express the stock of external debt, b∗t , in units of the foreign good, so
the value of the external debt in units of the foreign currency is Pt∗ b∗t ; and (2) we assume
that all domestic debt is real because most domestic debt in Brazil is indexed to inflation
or nominal interest rates (or both), and we do not have data on interest payments that
separate real from nominal debt.
Dividing equation (1) by Pt Yt , in which Yt is real GDP of the domestic country, and
after some algebra, we can express the consolidated government budget constraint as
∗
) + (mt − mt−1 ) +
(θt − θt−1 ) + ξt (θt∗ − θt−1
{z
}
| {z } |
{z
} |
domestic debt

=

external debt

rt−1 − gt
θt−1
gt
|
{z
}

interest on domestic debt

monetary base

πt gt − 1
mt−1
πt g t
|
{z
}

(2)

seigniorage

∗
rt−1
− gt ∗
+ ξt
θt−1 +
(dt + τt )
,
| {z }
gt
|
{z
}
primary deficit + transfers
interest on external debt

b∗

E P∗

where we used the following definitions: θt ≡ Ybtt , θt∗ ≡ Ytt , ξt ≡ Pt t t , mt ≡ PMt Ytt , gt ≡
Yt
t
, and πt ≡ PPt−1
. Next, we describe how we use the available data to compute the
Yt−1
government budget constraint in equation (2), whose averages are reported in table 1.
The fiscal deficit, as in figure 1c, corresponds to interest on domestic debt + interest on
external debt + primary deficit.
We start by describing how we compute the price level, real GDP, and exchange rate
54

series.55 An important issue in our case is that stock values are expressed in units of
the domestic currency at the end of the period, while the official price statistics report
average prices within the period. In periods of high inflation, the difference between endof-period and average prices is substantial. To overcome that, we deflate stock values
by an estimate of end-of-period prices. In addition, for the most recent period (after
1990), we are able to compute the government budget constraint for each month, so we
use the twelve-month sum of the budget constraint to compute the annual sequence of
government budget constraints. To do that, we also construct a monthly series of real
GDP.
Price index We use the General Price Index (IGP) from Getulio Vargas Foundation.
It is composed of three price indexes: 60 percent Producer Price Index (IPA), 30 percent
Consumer Price Index (IPC), and 10 percent Construction Price Index (INCC). Prices
are collected from day one to day thirty of the reference month. Data are available at the
IPEADATA website, IGP-DI - geral - ı́ndice (ago. 1994 = 100). End-of-period values
are computed as the geometric average between t and t + 1. We normalize the IGP-DI
such that its average is equal to the GDP deflator in 1995. The GDP deflator in 1995
is equal to the nominal GDP in 1995 divided by 100 (we normalize real GDP to 100
in 1995). Data on nominal GDP are from IPEADATA, Produto interno bruto (PIB) a
preços de mercado - referência 2000). Regarding the price index of the foreign good, we
use the GDP deflator for the United States for the annual series and the US CPI for the
monthly series.
Real GDP Data are from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE),
series SCN53. It is annual, from 1947 to 2014. The series show the percentage variation
in volume. We normalize real GDP in 1995 to 100 and use the variation to construct
the series of real GDP. We use the annual variation in real GDP (reference year 2010)
between 2015 and 2016 to update the series to 2016. It is available at the IPEADATA
website. To construct a monthly series, we assume that the annual values correspond to
July values and use linear interpolation to compute real GDP for the other months.
Exchange rate We use the exchange rate (buy price) between the Brazilian currency
and US$. Both average and end-of-period series are available at the IPEADATA website.
Subperiod 1960–1981
Most series are available at an annual frequency for this subperiod, so we only compute
the budget constraint at an annual frequency. We use the sum of three series to compute
55

Nominal GDP is computed as the price level multiplied by real GDP.

55

the stock of domestic debt Pt bt : federal government debt securities out of the central
bank, debt securities of states and municipalities, and dı́vida pública fundada. Data are
from IBGE, Estatı́sticas do Século XX. We use the series of monetary base, M 0 (end-ofperiod) from IPEADATA, as our measure of Mt .
We use the series of real interest payments on domestic debt divided by nominal GDP
as our measure of interest payments on domestic debt rt−1gt−gt θt−1 . We avoid manipulating
these series in the first subperiods because the series of interest payments and stock of
debt come from different sources. The series of real interest payments is computed as
the series of nominal interest payments on domestic debt minus the series of monetary
correction, multiplied by the fraction of federal debt securities out of the central bank,
all from IBGE, Estatı́sticas do Século XX.
Regarding the net external debt, we assume that b∗t is zero up to 1972. After that, we
use the series of registered public external debt (code 3564) minus foreign reserves (code
3566) as the measure of Pt∗ b∗t , both from the Central Bank of Brazil.56 For the series
of interest payments on external debt, we only observe the total payments of interest
on gross external debt, which includes both public and private debt. We observe both
the series of total gross external debt (code 3682) and public gross external debt, so we
assume that interest payments are proportional to the stocks, which gives us a series of
∗
interest payments on public external debt, Pt∗ (rt−1
− 1)b∗t−1 .
The series of primary deficit is computed as expenditures minus tax revenues plus the
transfers from the central bank to the Bank of Brazil. Tax revenues include direct and
indirect taxes. Expenditures correspond to government consumption, subsidies, transfers,
and investment, net of other current net revenues. Data are from IBGE, Estatı́sticas do
Século XX. The transfers to Bank of Brazil are computed as the variation in the balance
of the Bank of Brazil accounts at the central bank: Conta de Movimento and Conta de
Suprimentos Especias. The transfers τt are computed as the residual of equation (2).
Subperiod 1982–1990
In 1981, the Central Bank of Brazil started to publish the series of the public-sector
borrowing requirement, which requires the computation of both net domestic and net
external debt series of the nonfinancial public sector. We rely mostly on these series to
construct the budget constraint after 1981. As our measure of domestic debt, Pt bt , we
use the series of net domestic public debt, available at IPEADATA. However, this series
includes the monetary base as liabilities and the accounts of the Bank of Brazil at the
central bank as assets, so we adjust the series for that. We subtract the monetary base
and add the balance of the Conta de Movimento and Conta de Suprimentos Especias on
the balance sheet of the central bank to the series of net domestic debt.
56

Codes denote the series codes on the website of the central bank.

56

Regarding the series of net public external debt, the central bank does not distinguish
between exchange rate adjustments and inventory adjustments; it reports only the sum.
We construct the series of exchange rate adjustments and use the difference as the proxy
for inventory adjustments on the external debt.We assume that, for the 1981–1990 period,
all the adjustments that are made to compute the nominal deficit based on the variation
in total net public debt are from adjustments on the net external debt series. The reason
is that this period is characterized by a sequence of external debt renegotiations, which
could lead to variations in the net external debt figures without being related to nominal
deficits.
In order to compute the series of interest payments on external debt, we proceed in
a similar fashion as in the previous subperiod, but now we adjust the value of interest
payments on external debt for default. We compute the fraction of total interest paid
over total interest due relative to total gross external debt and use this fraction to adjust
for interest payments that were actually paid. The source of these data is the same as in
figure 16.
Regarding the series of interest payments on domestic debt, we use the same method
as before up to 1984. After that, the central bank started to publish the series of nominal
interest payments. We then subtract the series of interest payments on external debt
described above and use the result as our measure of interest payments on domestic debt.
Subperiod 1990–2018
After 1990, the central bank began to publish its fiscal statistics on a monthly frequency. From that point on, we have all the information that is needed to compute the
government budget constraint in (2), except for the primary deficit. At this point, we can
only compute the sum of primary deficit plus transfers, corresponding to the residual of
(2). This is similar to the primary deficit series that the central bank uses. As mentioned
above, we proceed by summing the monthly budget constraints to have a annual series
for the government budget constraint. We then use the primary deficit series from IBGE
and subtract it from (primary deficit+transfers) to compute the transfers. Finally, note
that the series of primary deficits from IBGE is available up to 2000. After that, we
use the publications of the consolidated national public-sector accounts available on the
website of the National Treasury Secretariat.

C.1

Primary deficit series in Brazil

In Brazil, there are two main sources of data on the public-sector primary deficit:
the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and the Central Bank of
Brazil (CBB). The data from IBGE are annual and cover the period from 1947 to the

57

present.57 The IBGE data include the federal government, states, and municipalities,
and are published in the national accounts—public sector.58 The data are based on the
executed budget of the government. The data on primary deficits from CBB, on the other
hand, are available on an annual frequency since 1985 and on a monthly frequency since
January 1991. These data include the federal government, states, and municipalities, as
well as the central bank and state-owned enterprises (SOEs). We illustrate both (original)
series in figure 30.
There are important differences in the methodology used to compute each of these
series. The data from IBGE use the actual data reported on the books of government
authorities and can be considered the traditional measure of primary deficit.59 The CBB,
on the other hand, estimates its data based on the public-sector borrowing requirement.
That is, the CBB computes the variation of the stock of net debt and money supply
from the federal government, central bank, states and municipalities, and state-owned
enterprises. That variation gives a proxy for the fiscal deficit of the government, which
includes both interest payments and the primary deficit. CBB then estimates the interest
payments based on the characteristics of assets and liabilities and computes the primary
deficit as a residual.
Figure 30: Primary deficit: CBB versus IBGE

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).

In Brazil, there is a preference among economists to use the deficit series from the
57

From 1947 to 2000, the series can be downloaded from the Estatı́sticas do Século XX from IBGE. We
extrapolate it using the annual publications of the public-sector accounts on the website of the National
Treasury Secretariat.
58
Data on the federal government deficit and central government are also readily available on the
website of the Department of the Treasury for the most recent period.
59
For example, IBGE uses data from the Balanço Geral da União (Union General Budget) for the
federal government.

58

CBB after 1985.60 A few factors explain that preference. First, at the onset of the
external debt crisis in the early 1980s, authorities needed to work with recent data, and
the statistics on the primary deficit took a long time to be released. The CBB, on the
other hand, had the ability to compile debt information for both domestic and external
debt in a timely fashion, so it decided to compute its own fiscal statistics based on the
public-sector borrowing requirements. The second factor is the inclusion of SOEs. The
debt series used by the CBB covered SOEs, whereas the other deficit series did not.
Since SOEs were constantly used by the government to implement its economic policies
(see main text), that was considered a significant advantage. Third, there was lack of
confidence in the capability of the government to accurately report its finances. The
National Treasury Secretariat, for example, was only created in 1986.
Next, we discuss a few points regarding the primary deficit series of the central bank.
First, the inclusion (or not) of SOEs in the primary deficit series does not make a big
difference after 1985, especially after the 1990s when most privatizations took place (figure
30). Second, the CBB did not take into account privatizations when estimating primary
deficits. In other words, if the government sold some of its assets to finance current
expenditures, that would not be captured in the deficit series from the CBB. Figure 31a
compares both series, with privatization and no privatization, for the period after 1996,
which is the year when the data on privatizations used by the CBB become available.
Third, the CBB does not account for defaults. It estimates interest payments on
an accrual basis. So if the government defaulted on its interest payments, the CBB
would underestimate the primary deficit. The reason is that the CBB assumes that the
government paid all the interest that was due. Therefore, it would conclude that the
government had the resources to pay for the interest due, which must have come from
lower primary deficits (or higher surpluses) according to CBB’s methodology. Remember
that the primary deficit is computed as a residual. But if the government defaulted on
the interest payments, then it must be the case that deficits were actually higher than the
ones reported by the CBB. As the main text mentions, the country accumulated arrears
on interest payments on the external debt for many years, especially in the 1990–1994
period. We use the information on the fraction of interest on external debt that was
actually paid to correct for both the interest payments and the primary deficit series
reported by the CBB. The difference in the primary deficit series is illustrated in figure
31b. Unfortunately, we do not have information regarding defaults on domestic debt.
Fourth, the CBB does not distinguish “bad assets” from the rest of the government’s
assets. In these cases, the CBB might conclude that the government is saving, since
it is accumulating more assets, when in reality those assets are worthless (the extreme
case). One example is the accounts from Bank of Brazil (BB) on the CBB’s balance sheet
(see main text) that were used to transfer funds from the CBB to the BB. In figure 32a
60

See Giambiagi and Alem (2011).

59

Figure 31: Adjustments to primary deficit series from CBB
(a) Privatization adjustment

(b) Default adjustment

(c) Debt recognition adjustment

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).

we show the magnitude of those transfers given by the variation in their balances. By
looking at its own assets, the CBB would conclude that it is saving, but those funds were
never repaid and represented deficits. We did correct the primary deficit series for the

60

transfers between the CBB and BB through those accounts. However, there might be
other cases. Imagine, for example, the case in which the government bails out a public
bank by exchanging the “bad assets” that they were holding on their balance sheet. The
CBB would conclude that there were no surpluses or deficits, since the government is
exchanging assets for liabilities in “equal” amounts, when in reality, they were transfers
to finance expenditures.61
Additionally, in some cases, debt recognitions (skeletons) enter the debt series. The
CBB does not include those variations when estimating the primary deficit, but it shows
that some previous deficits were not taken into account. They are shown in figure 31c.
Finally, note that the IBGE series also misses the transactions between the CBB and
BB, so we also need to make that adjustment in the IBGE series. See figure 32b.
Implications
As we can see in figure 30, the difference between both series is significant, especially
around the time of the Real Plan. However, the main conclusion from our analysis
does not change, even when we include the adjustments mentioned above. The lowinflation period (after 1994) is characterized by improvements in fiscal balances. Note
that both series show primary surpluses after 1998. The main controversy arises in
the period surrounding the implementation of the Real Plan. It is usually emphasized
that the government switched from large surpluses to large deficits when the plan was
implemented, but given the pitfalls in CBB’s series, one cannot be 100 percent sure of
it. If we look at IBGE’s series instead, we observe the opposite: large deficits before the
Real Plan and an improvement right after. But again, this series also has its own pitfalls,
so one must be careful when drawing conclusions based on these observations.

61

In other words, the value of those assets on the balance sheet do not represent their true value.

61

Figure 32: Adjustment regarding Bank of Brazil (BB)
(a) CBB + BB

(b) IBGE + BB

Sources: Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and Central Bank of Brazil (CBB).

62

