                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                GOOD CARRY, BAD CARRY

                                        Geert Bekaert
                                       George Panayotov

                                      Working Paper 25420
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25420


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2019




We acknowledge many fruitful suggestions by Raymond Kan and discussions with Gurdip
Bakshi, Utpal Bhattacharya, Steve Riddiough, Giorgio Valente and Jialin Yu, who also helped us
obtain some of the data used in the paper. Participants at the 2016 Annual Conference in
International Finance at City University of Hong Kong, the Bank of England, Banca d’Italia and
ECB 6-thWorkshop on Financial Determinants of Foreign Exchange Rates, and seminars at
Nanyang Technology University, UNSW, SAIF and Xiamen University provided helpful
insights. Any remaining errors are our responsibility alone. Panayotov acknowledges support
from a Hong Kong RGC Research grant (No. 16505715). The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Geert Bekaert and George Panayotov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Good Carry, Bad Carry
Geert Bekaert and George Panayotov
NBER Working Paper No. 25420
January 2019
JEL No. C23,C53,G11

                                        ABSTRACT

We distinguish between ”good” and ”bad” carry trades constructed from G-10 currencies. The
good trades exhibit higher Sharpe ratios and sometimes positive return skewness, in contrast to
the bad trades that have both substantially lower Sharpe ratios and highly negative return
skewness. Surprisingly, good trades do not involve the most typical carry currencies like the
Australian dollar and Japanese yen. The distinction between good and bad carry trades
significantly alters our understanding of currency carry trade returns, and invalidates, for
example, explanations invoking return skewness and crash risk.


Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu

George Panayotov
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Business School - Dept. of Finance
Clear Water Bay
Kowloon, Hong
panayotov@ust.hk
I     Introduction
     The currency carry trade, which goes long (short) currencies with high (low) yields continues to attract

much research attention, as it has been shown to earn high Sharpe ratios, while its returns are largely un-

correlated with standard systematic risks (e.g., Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2011),

Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011)). Prototypical carry currencies among the liquid G-10 curren-

cies are the Swiss franc (CHF) and Japanese yen (JPY), which almost always exhibit the lowest yields

and hence a typical G-10 carry trade would short them, and the New Zealand dollar (NZD) and Australian

dollar (AUD), which typically have the highest yields and would be held long. These four currencies

feature prominently in extant explanations of the returns of the carry trade. One such explanation invokes

crash risk (e.g. Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2009)) and thus relies implicitly on the fact that JPY

and AUD provide the most ”skewed” return perspectives from the view point of a US investor. Another is

based on the differential exposure to global productivity shocks of producers of final goods, such as Japan

and Switzerland, versus commodity producers, such as Australia and New Zealand (Ready, Roussanov,

and Ward (2017)).

     While the prior literature takes for granted that the prototypical carry currencies1 drive carry trade

profitability, we document the existence of ”good” and ”bad” currency carry trades. We consider an

investor who sequentially tests whether reducing the set of G-10 currencies improves the historical Sharpe

ratio, and then implements equally weighted carry trades with fewer currencies. We find that such trades

improve the return profile (in terms of both Sharpe ratio and skewness) relative to the carry trade which

employs all G-10 currencies, and denote them as ”good” carry trades. Most surprisingly, these good trades

almost never include the AUD and JPY, or the NOK - another commodity currency. Next, we construct
    1 Toclarify terminology, we note that a key component of the return of a carry trade is the interest rate (or forward) dif-
ferential between the investment and funding currencies that are long and short in the trade, respectively. This component is
often, even if perhaps confusingly, referred to as ”carry”, and we also follow this tradition, for brevity. For the same reason we
also sometimes refer to ”carry currencies”, ”carry profitability”, ”carry returns”, etc., instead of ”carry trade currencies”, ”carry
trade profitability” and ”carry trade returns”. The context is clear in all these cases, and should allow no ambiguity.

                                                                 1
carry trades using fixed subsets of the G-10 currencies over the full sample, and find that trades involving

only the prototypical currencies have lower Sharpe ratios and more negatively skewed returns. We denote

them as ”bad” carry trades. The trades using the remaining currencies preserve the desirable features of

”good” carry trades.

   Providing a first glimpse on the issue, Figure 1 contrasts the return properties of carry trades that in-

volve various subsets of the G-10 currencies. In particular, the figure plots (with black dots) the skewness

versus Sharpe ratio for all carry trades constructed from five currencies that use three of the prototypical

currencies (AUD, CHF and JPY), together with any possible pair from the remaining seven currencies.

The currencies enter each trade with equal weights, as is common in the literature and finance industry.

Strikingly, these 21 trades show worse Sharpe ratios, and also substantially lower skewness than the strat-

egy that uses all G-10 currencies (denoted with the horizontal and vertical lines in the graph). Therefore,

trades constructed predominantly from the prototypical carry currencies appear to be ”bad” carry trades.

We subsequently refer to the trade from all G-10 currencies as ”standard carry” and denote it as SC.

   Probing further, Figure 1 also displays (with unfilled circles) the skewness versus Sharpe ratio of the

complements of the previous 21 carry trades, which are constructed with the remaining five currencies in

each case, again with equal weights. It is noteworthy that 14 out of the 21 complement trades feature higher

Sharpe ratios than that of the standard carry (SC) trade (in one case almost double that ratio), and 16 show

higher (less negative or positive) skewness. Furthermore, half of the complement trades improve both on

the skewness and Sharpe ratio of the SC trade, qualifying them as ”good” carry trades. These findings

cast doubt on efforts to explain carry trade returns by focusing on properties of the prototypical carry

currencies, and undermine the practice of associating the carry trade predominantly with such currencies.

   In Section IV we investigate the ability of good carry trades to function as risk factors for certain cross

sections of currency returns (see, e.g. Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) and Menkhoff, Sarno,


                                                     2
Schmeling, and Schrimpf (2012)). We find that good carry trades perform at least as well as previously

suggested currency market risk factors, and sometimes drive out such factors in a horse race. We also

re-examine the predictability findings in Bakshi and Panayotov (2013) and Ready et al. (2017), and find

that previously identified carry return predictors strongly predict the returns of bad, but not of good carry

trades. In Section V we revisit several interpretations of carry returns that have been advanced in the recent

literature, including the explanatory ability of factor models with equity market risk factors, a crash risk

explanation of their returns as in Brunnermeier et al. (2009), and the peso problem hypothesis of Burnside

et al. (2011). Almost invariably, the results differ greatly across good versus bad carry trades.

    In Section VI, we further explore the properties of good and bad carry trades to kindle research on

economic models that may explain the strong differences between the two types of trades. We show, for

example, that the returns of bad (good) trades derive mostly from the gain that comes from investing at

the higher interest rate while borrowing at the lower interest rate, which is partially offset (reinforced)

by exchange rate changes. We also examine the relationship between good carry trades and the ”dollar

carry” trade introduced in Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2014), which goes long (short) all currencies

relative to the US dollar when the average foreign interest rate differential relative to the dollar is positive

(negative). Because our good carry trades always involve the dollar, they do show substantial return

correlation with dollar carry, but we demonstrate that they clearly present a distinct currency and economic

risk.

    Before introducing ”good” and ”bad” carry trades in Section 3, we describe the data in Section 2

and discuss some important concepts regarding the design of carry trades. The remainder of the article

demonstrates how the good-bad trade distinction fundamentally alters our thinking about carry trades.




                                                       3
II       Data and carry trade design
      Following previous work, we employ currency spot and forward contract quotes to construct carry

trade returns. Using one-month forward quotes on the last trading day of each month in the sample, and

spot quotes on the last day of the following month, we calculate one-month carry trade returns over the

sample period from 12/1984 till 06/2014 (354 monthly observations). The return calculations take into

account transaction costs, exploiting the availability of bid and ask quotes. The data comes from Barclays

Bank, as available on Datastream, and have been used in Burnside et al. (2011) and Lustig at al. (2011,

2014), among many others.

      Our results are reported for percentage returns and equal (absolute) weights of the currencies entering

a trade. On two occasions we report instead results with logarithmic returns or weights proportional to

forward differentials, to facilitate comparability with previous studies.

      Let Sti (Fti ) denote the spot (forward) exchange rate of currency i at time t, quoted as foreign currency

units per U.S. dollar. That is, the U.S. dollar is the benchmark currency and all trades are implemented

relative to the dollar. Then, with t indicating the end of a given month, the percentage excess one-month

return at t + 1 of one dollar invested at t in a long (short) forward foreign currency contract is:

                         i,long
(1)                   Rxt+1 = Fti,bid /St+1
                                        i,ask
                                              −1              and            i,short
                                                                           Rxt+1     = 1 − Fti,ask /St+1
                                                                                                     i,bid
                                                                                                           ,


whereby bid and ask quotes are denoted in the superscript.2

      We employ the G-10 currencies, which are the New Zealand dollar (NZD), Australian dollar (AUD),

British pound (GBP), Norwegian krone (NOK), Swedish krona (SEK), Canadian dollar (CAD), US dollar

(USD), Euro (EUR), Swiss franc (CHF) and Japanese yen (JPY), whereby prior to 1999 the German mark

(DEM) is used instead of the Euro. These currencies represent the most liquid traded currencies, and are

most often used both in the academic literature and professional practice to construct carry trades.
     2 These   can also be seen as the payoffs to forward contracts in the foreign currency per ”forward” dollar.

                                                                    4
      As indicated above, the carry trades that we consider go long and short an equal number of currencies

relative to the USD, with equal weights. Various alternative weighting schemes are possible, mostly based

on the magnitude of the interest rate differentials (see Table 1 for concrete examples from practice and the

academic literature), but we prefer to keep the trade as simple as possible. Moreover, the total investment

each period is one dollar, that is, the sum of all long and short positions (in absolute value) equals one.

Specifically, when the trade uses all G-10 currencies, the five currencies with the lowest interest rates at

the end of each month are shorted, and the remaining five are held long. In practice, we rank the currencies

based on their forward differentials relative to the U.S. dollar, defined as FDt = Ft /St − 1 at time t and

                                                                                        1             1
calculated using mid-quotes. The weight of currency i held long (short) is ωti =        10   (ωti = − 10 ). The

percentage excess return of this trade from t to t + 1 is:

                                   10 n                                        o
                             carry                 i,long              i,short
(2)                        Rxt+1 = ∑ 1ωti >0 ωti Rxt+1 − 1ωti <0 ωti Rxt+1
                                       i=1

where 1(.) is an indicator function.

                                                                                                      1
      When a subset of N currencies is used to construct a carry trade and N is even, we set ωti =    N   or − N1

in (2) and substitute N for 10. If N is odd, the currency with the median forward differential is dropped

from the trade, and we use N − 1 instead of N in the definition of ωti and the summation in (2).

      We consider carry trades that are symmetric, in that they have an equal number of short and long

positions, with equal total weights on the long and short side. Currencies are ranked according to their

interest rates, and only the rank determines whether the position taken is short or long, while the signs

of the interest rate differentials are irrelevant for the trade design, as these change with the currency per-

spective (see also Clarida, Davis, and Pedersen (2009)). Importantly, our carry trade design also ensures

(approximate) numeraire independence, as we do not give a special role to the benchmark currency, and

hence the positions taken in the various participating currencies are the same, regardless of the bench-



                                                       5
mark. Numeraire independence is an attractive property, and implies that only one currency trade must

be defined for the world at large. Moreover, the returns on such a trade are very similar from any cur-

rency perspective, because the translation from one currency to another simply introduces cross-currency

risk on currency returns, which is a second-order effect. In fact, the logarithmic returns of our strategies

are exactly the same from any perspective, by triangular arbitrage (see Maurer, Tô, and Tran (2018) for

further discussion). The major commercial investable carry products delivered by the major players in

the foreign exchange market, such as Deutsche Bank or Citibank, described in Table 1, are symmetric

and numeraire-independent as per our definition. They do not all assign equal weights to all positions

however, e.g. the well-known tradeable Deutsche Bank carry strategy takes only the three highest- and

lowest-yielding currencies among the G-10 currencies.

   Non-symmetric trade designs are also possible, and have been considered, for example in a recent well-

recognized article by Burnside et al. (2011), where all currencies with interest rates that are higher (lower)

than the US dollar interest rate are bought (sold) in equal proportions. Such a strategy is obviously not

symmetric, and also may deliver very different results depending on the benchmark currency (see Daniel,

Hodrick, and Lu (2017) for further discussion). Another example of a non-symmetric trade is the ”dollar

carry” trade, studied in Lustig et al. (2014). These trades are also ”dollar-neutral”, excluding positions

in the benchmark currency (which would generate zero excess returns). In contrast, our symmetric trades

are not dollar-neutral: positions in the benchmark currency are explicitly included.



III     Good and bad carry trades from the G-10 currencies
   In this section we first outline a disciplined approach to create historically attractive symmetric carry

trades from subsets of the G-10 currencies, exploiting all available foreign exchange history at each point

in time. It evaluates on each trading date whether excluding currencies can improve on the standard carry



                                                      6
trade (SC) that uses all G-10 currencies, and if so, which currencies should be excluded. Because of its

dynamic implementation, the procedure yields out-of-sample results. Next, we exploit the information

garnered in his exercise to create fixed subsets of ”good” and ”bad” currencies that do not change over

time, and use them to construct carry trades over the full sample period.


A    Enhancing the currency carry trade
    Imagine an investor starting to trade at the end of December 1994 (t = T1 ). On this date, and at the end

of each month going forward till May 2014 (t = T2 ), he uses all available return information for the period

since December 1984 (t = T0 ) and first calculates the Sharpe ratio (denoted ”benchmark Sharpe ratio”) of

the standard carry trade (SC) that employs all G-10 currencies. The trade ranks these currencies according

to their forward differentials at the end of each month between T0 and t − 1, for t = T1 , ..., T2 , and goes

long (short) over the following month the five currencies with the highest (lowest) forward differentials,

all with equal weights.

    To create an enhanced carry trade with nine currencies, on date t the investor excludes one by one

each of the G-10 currencies, and computes the Sharpe ratios over T0 to t of the ten possible trades that

involve only nine currencies. These trades exclude the currency with the median forward differential at the

end of each month between T0 and t − 1 and go long (short) the four currencies with the highest (lowest)

differentials. If the highest of the ten Sharpe ratios obtained in this way exceeds the benchmark Sharpe

ratio, an enhanced trade is implemented over the following month (t to t + 1) using the nine currencies

corresponding to this highest Sharpe ratio, while the one currency left out of the trade is the first to be

excluded on date t. If, on the other hand, all ten Sharpe ratios are lower than the benchmark ratio, then no

currency is excluded and the enhanced trade for this date has the return of the standard trade.

    Note that the dynamic and real-time nature of this enhanced trade could, in principle, result in a

substantially different currency mix used at different points of time. Further, our enhancement rule is


                                                     7
intentionally simple and uses an easily understood and popular performance measure, whereas a wide

range of sophisticated optimization rules could be applied in this context as well (see, e.g., Barroso and

Santa-Clara (2014)). Mimicking the construction of the enhanced trade that uses nine currencies, we

construct analogous enhanced trades that exclude more than one of the G-10 currencies. In particular,

on date t when one currency has been excluded, we use the remaining nine currencies to find the highest

Sharpe ratio across the nine possible trades that involve only eight currencies. Again, if this highest ratio

exceeds the benchmark Sharpe ratio, the currency that was omitted to achieve it is the second currency

to be excluded for this date, whereas if all Sharpe ratios are lower than the benchmark one, no further

currency is excluded and the enhanced trade that uses eight currencies has the return of the standard trade

for that date. Similarly, we attempt to exclude up to seven of the G-10 currencies on this date t, and thus

obtain seven enhanced trades, which use a decreasing number of currencies. Importantly, we record the

exact order in which currencies have been excluded. The above procedure is repeated on each date in the

sample to obtain time series of returns of the seven enhanced carry trades.

    For completeness of the search algorithm, we have postulated that if no improvement on the bench-

mark Sharpe ratio can be achieved for a certain date and number of excluded currencies, then no further

currencies are excluded on this date, and all enhanced trades with fewer currencies have the return of the

standard trade. In practice, however, this choice is inconsequential (see below).


B    Return patterns for enhanced trades
    Table 2 presents results for the enhanced carry trades that allow excluding from one to as much as

seven currencies on each trading date, and, for comparability, for the standard carry trade. Returns are

computed as described in Section II, with equal currency weights and in percent. Panel A of Table 2

reports the annualized average returns, annualized Sharpe ratios, and return skewness for each carry trade,

with interest in skewness justified given its important role in certain explanations for the carry trade returns


                                                       8
(e.g., Brunnermeier et al. (2009), Jurek (2014)). Also reported are p-values for the hypothesis that the

respective Sharpe ratio or skewness does not exceed that for the standard trade SC. Because carry returns

tend to be negatively skewed, we cannot rely on standard tests for the difference between Sharpe ratios,

as for example in Jobson and Korkie (1981) or Memmel (2003), that apply to Gaussian distributions.

Therefore, we resort to the bootstrap tests, described in Ledoit and Wolf (2008) for Sharpe ratios, and

Annaert, Van Osselaer, and Verstraete (2009) for skewness (see Appendix OA-II for details). Our p-

values use one-sided bootstrap confidence intervals, as the enhanced carry trades are designed with the

goal to improve on SC.

   The SC trade has an annualized Sharpe ratio of 0.32, and return skewness of -0.33. The benchmark

Sharpe ratio is thus close, for example, to the value of 0.31 for the HML trade reported in Lustig et al.

(2014) for their set of developed countries, over a similar sample period and using equal weighting and

bid and ask quotes. When one currency is excluded from the carry trade on each trading day, practically

no change is observed, but when two currencies are excluded, the Sharpe ratio increases to 0.41, while

skewness drops to -0.57. When three to six currencies are excluded, the Sharpe ratios remain somewhat

higher than the benchmark ratio (between 0.41 and 0.46), with the differences not statistically significant.

However, skewness improves sharply in three out of these four cases and turns positive on two occasions

(and as high as 0.21 on one), whereby two of the associated p-values are below 5% and another one

equals 10%. These findings indicate a possible two-dimensional beneficial effect of excluding three or

more of the G-10 currencies, given that both the Sharpe ratio and skewness improve, albeit not always in

a statistically significant way. This effect is further confirmed by the enhanced trade that excludes seven

currencies: the Sharpe ratio is now 0.61, while skewness is positive, and both are marginally significantly

different from the benchmark values.

   Our findings echo previous results, where significant improvements in skewness are obtained without


                                                     9
a substantial change in the Sharpe ratio (for example, the option-hedged carry trades in Burnside et al.

(2011). However, what is surprising in our case is that the improvement of the return profile is (i) in both

dimensions, and (ii) achieved simply by excluding currencies from the symmetric carry trade. Addition-

ally, the two-dimensional improvement is achieved by a procedure that maximizes the Sharpe ratios alone,

without considering the skewness of the returns so obtained.


C    Identity of the excluded currencies
    While on each trading date the enhanced trade re-considers the available return history and thus can

potentially deliver a different set of currencies to be excluded, we consistently observe the same currencies

to be excluded. Panel B of Table 2 shows the number of months that each G-10 currency is excluded by the

enhancement rule from Section A over the 234-month sample period of enhanced trading. In particular, it

shows how many times the respective currency is the first, or among the first two, or among the first three,

etc., to be excluded from the carry trade.

    The consistency is observed most clearly with respect to the first three currencies excluded. Specifi-

cally, AUD is the first to be excluded on 135 out of the 234 trading dates in the sample. Furthermore, it

is among the first three currencies to be excluded on a total of 192 dates. Similarly, NOK is among the

first three excluded on 219 occasions, and JPY is among them on 214 occasions. These three currencies

appear to be by far the most detrimental to carry trade Sharpe ratios - no other currency is ever excluded

first, and only the EUR has been excluded second or third more than a handful of times.

    The next currencies to be the most often excluded are the EUR, NZD, CAD and CHF, and while the

order of their exclusion is somewhat ambiguous, these are the obvious further candidates for exclusion

by the enhancement rule. The remaining three currencies are clearly found valuable by the rule: GBP

and SEK are among the first seven to be excluded only on about 60 occasions each, and in fact are never

among the first four excluded. Most conspicuously, however, the USD is never among even the first seven


                                                     10
excluded currencies, reminiscent of previous studies discussing the special role of the USD in the carry

trade (e.g., Lustig et al. (2014), Daniel et al. (2017)) from various perspectives.

   These findings are surprising, as the enhancement rule consistently excludes from the carry trade pre-

cisely the prototypical carry trade currencies, like the JPY and AUD, which have been perpetually among

the lowest- or highest-yielding G-10 currencies, and feature commonly as examples in various carry trade

discussions. Because the consistency refers to the entire period since 1994, the recent financial crisis,

which witnessed drastic valuation changes in those currencies, cannot be solely responsible. Likewise, the

enhancement rule also tends to exclude the NZD and CHF, which have also been among the few highest-

or lowest-yielding currencies over our sample period.

   The design of the enhancement procedure, as described in Section A, leaves open the possibility that

on some date no improvement of the Sharpe ratio can be achieved after certain number of exclusions,

whereby no further currencies are excluded and the respective enhanced trades are assigned the SC return

for the next trading period. This possibility is of some concern, as it could blur the distinction between

enhanced trades that exclude a different number of currencies. However, Panel B in Table 2 reveals that

this has never happened in our sample, as evidenced by the fact that the sum of the numbers in the first

row equals 234, the sum of those on the second row equals 234 × 2, and so on. Therefore, on each date in

the sample period the enhancement rule has identified seven currencies to be sequentially excluded, and

hence seven distinct enhanced trades to be implemented.

   In sum, Table 2 shows that the enhancement rule consistently excludes the same few currencies from

the carry trade, among which are those epitomizing the essential concept underlying carry trades that low

(high) yield currencies should be sold (bought). The surprising evidence presented in Table 2 thus calls

for a re-consideration of this concept and/or its implementation.




                                                     11
D    Good and bad carry trades from fixed subsets of the G-10 currencies
    Prompted by the finding that the dynamic enhancement rule excludes the same currencies over and

over, we now examine carry trades constructed with fixed subsets of the G-10 currencies. While staying

close to the spirit of the enhanced trades, the fixed subsets allow for better comparison with previous carry

trade results, which are similarly obtained using fixed sets of currencies over fixed sample periods. Our

choice of the fixed subsets is informed by the order of exclusion implied by Panel B of Table 2, which

shows that (i) the three currencies that are the least often excluded by the enhancement rule are the GBP,

SEK and USD, (ii) the next three least often excluded are the CAD, NZD and CHF, whereas (iii) the AUD,

NOK and JPY are the most often excluded currencies.

    In particular, we construct five carry trades from fixed subsets, which (i) exclude only the AUD, NOK

and JPY, (ii) include the GBP, SEK and USD, together with any of the three possible pairs from the CAD,

NZD and CHF, and (iii) keep only the GBP, SEK and USD. These carry trades are designed to illustrate

the properties of enhanced carry trades, and we denote them by G1 to G5, a notation we shall clarify

shortly. The first column of Table 3 displays the codes of the currencies included in each of these five

trades. We also consider the trades complementary to G1-G5, which include the currencies that are left

out of each of these trades, and denote these complements by B1 to B5, respectively, with currency codes

again displayed in the first column of Table 3. For example, only the three most often excluded currencies

(AUD, NOK and JPY) enter the B1 carry trade.

    In addition, we consider a larger set of trades which can represent more broadly the enhanced carry

trades: it consists of 18 trades from five currencies each, and is denoted by GC, whereby each trade

includes the three least often excluded currencies (GBP, SEK and USD), together with any possible pair

from the remaining currencies which has none or only one of the three most often excluded currencies

(AUD, NOK and JPY). This choice yields a reasonably large cross section of trades which maintains the



                                                     12
predominant presence of currencies that are preferred by the enhancement rule. Again, we also consider

the 18 complementary trades, and denote them by BC. Despite creating many carry trades from only five

currencies, the average correlation among the returns of the 18 good trades is 0.66, and thus lower, for

example, than the average correlation among the 25 value-weighted Fama-French portfolios sorted on size

and book-to-market for the same period, which is 0.80.

   Table 3 presents results for the SC trade, the G1-G5 and B1-B5 trades, and the GC and BC trades

described above, using the entire sample period from 12/1984 till 6/2014. Shown are annualized average

returns, return standard deviations and Sharpe ratios, as well as skewness. For the GC and BC trades we

show averages of these quantities. Also reported are p-values for tests of differences between the Sharpe

ratios and skewness coefficients, similar to those in Table 2. In the last two lines, the first (second) number

in parentheses shows how many of the 18 corresponding individual estimates for the GC or BC trades

are significant at the 5% (10%) level. Where p-values are (not) in square brackets, the null hypothesis is

that the Sharpe ratio or skewness of a G1-G5 trade or GC trade does not exceed that of the corresponding

B1-B5 trade or BC trade (SC trade). Note that over the full sample period the benchmark Sharpe ratio and

skewness remain close to those reported in Panel A of Table 2 for the shorter period since 1994.

   The G1-G5 trades exhibit invariably higher average returns than the SC trade. In addition, their average

returns and return standard deviations tend to increase as the number of currencies in a trade decreases.

The Sharpe ratios of the G1-G5 trades all exceed the benchmark Sharpe ratio (in two cases by a factor of

about two), with the difference statistically significant at the 5% significance level in three cases out of

five. Skewness increases in three cases for the G1-G5 trades, even though this increase is significant only

for G1. Overall, these five trades reproduce the features that characterize the enhanced trades in Table 2.

   In contrast, the complementary trades B1-B5 fare much worse. The average returns are often two to

three times lower than those of the SC trade, whereas the standard deviations are on average twice higher,


                                                      13
leading to much lower annualized Sharpe ratios, which are between 0.04 and 0.18. In addition, the return

skewness is markedly more negative for these complementary trades, averaging -0.77 (versus -0.11 for the

G1-G5 trades). Furthermore, the p-values shown in square brackets, pertaining to tests of the differences

in Sharpe ratios and skewness between the corresponding G1-G5 and B1-B5 trades are below 0.02 for

four out of five Sharpe ratios, and show three (one) rejections at the 5% (10%) level for skewness.

    The relatively high Sharpe ratios and slightly negative or positive skewness of the G1 to G5 trades earn

them the label ”good” carry trades (”G” for good). Analogously, we refer to the B1 to B5 trades with low

Sharpe ratios and strongly negative skewness as ”bad” carry trades (”B” for bad), from now on.

    Turning to the larger sets of GC and BC trades, each constructed from five currencies, the GC average

returns (Sharpe ratios) are on average three (three and a half) times higher than those for the BC ones, and

the GC skewness is on average twice lower (in absolute terms), whereby the differences are statistically

significant in about half the cases. The Sharpe ratios for the GC trades are significantly higher than those

for the SC trade in one third of the cases, in line with what was observed for the comparable G2 to G4

trades.

    To further illustrate the properties of the GC and BC carry trades, Figure 2 plots their Sharpe ratios

versus skewness, similar to Figure 1, with unfilled circles and black dots, respectively. The distinction

is sharp and clear in the Sharpe ratio dimension, where, with no exception, the GC trades dominate the

BC trades, thus justifying their classification as good trades. On the other hand, a few GC (BC) trades

display low (relatively high) skewness, hence the distinction is not as clear in this dimension, even though

on average the skewness of the BC trades is still twice lower, consistent with the bad trades classification.3

    In sum, eliminating some typical carry trade currencies, such as the AUD, JPY and NOK, from the

    3 In unreported results we find that when trades from five currencies involve the three least often excluded currencies (GBP,

SEK, USD) in each case, but are now combined with any other pair that excludes the JPY, the good and corresponding bad
trades deliver striking separation in both the Sharpe ratio and skewness dimension.



                                                              14
currency set leads to good carry trades, with Sharpe ratios and skewness mostly higher than those of the

SC trade, and the complementary bad carry trades that involve the typical carry trade currencies. Also,

with the exception of the G1 and B1 trades, the correlations between the various trades and SC are always

higher for the bad trades (on average 0.80, versus 0.67 for the good trades).


E    Statistical significance of the distinction between good and bad carry trades
    Table 3 shows that the distinction between good and bad carry trades is economically and statisti-

cally important. However, the statistical evidence must be interpreted with caution. In particular, the

reported p-values rely on the block bootstrap procedure under the alternative, developed by Ledoit and

Wolf (2008) (see Appendix OA-II). While this procedure accounts for certain finite-sample properties of

the distribution of currency returns, it does not reflect two aspects of our good carry trades. First, they are

constructed using information from the enhancement procedure, as reported in Panel B of Table 2, and

thus the procedure suffers from look-back bias. Second, the enhancement procedure applied to a finite

sample is bound to lead to improved Sharpe ratios, even if in population all 10 currencies are necessary to

attain optimal results. Therefore, a modified test is needed to assess the statistical contribution as fairly as

possible. We emphasize, however, that the results in Table 3 need not be statistically significant to impact

carry research: the finding that the prototypical carry trade currencies, if anything, worsen or certainly do

not provide a positive contribution to carry returns, suffices.

    With respect to the look-back bias, starting the sample in 1994, rather than 1984 weakens the statistical

significance somewhat, but we still retain significance at the 10% level for the majority of the trades (not

reported). A full correction for this bias would require a much longer sample where we actually let the

procedure choose which currencies to exclude ex-ante, before we record trading results.

    Incorporating the selection procedure into a test of statistical significance is harder, because it requires

creating a benchmark world in which carry trades still have realistic attractive returns, but somehow the


                                                      15
identity of the currencies contributing to these returns is randomized. Appendix OA-III describes in de-

tail a procedure creating entirely randomized individual currency returns which nonetheless reproduces

exactly the returns of standard carry (SC) in each randomized sample. We then apply our enhancement

strategy to 1000 such randomized samples, finding that the selection procedure biases the Sharpe ratios of

the good trades upwards by about 0.15 and that only the G5 (at the 5% level) and G3 (at the 10% level)

deliver statistically significant improvements in Sharpe ratios, using proper t-statistics.

   Thus, there is no overall strong statistical evidence that the enhancement procedure delivers signifi-

cantly higher Sharpe ratios. However, it remains the case that the prototypical, ”skewed” carry currencies

can be removed from the trade without worsening performance.



IV         Good carry trades as currency market risk factors
   Lustig et al. (2011) suggest as a key currency market risk factor the return of a trading strategy

that each month goes long (short) a portfolio with the highest (lowest) forward differentials. This is

obviously a symmetric carry trade strategy and is denoted here as ”HMLFX ” (to be distinguished from the

Fama-French HML factor used in Section V). Creating test portfolios by ranking currencies on forward

differentials, they find that the covariation with HMLFX largely explains the difference in average returns

between these portfolios. Furthermore, they propose HMLFX as a proxy for a global risk factor in a no-

arbitrage model explaining the results, and show that it is also related to a measure of aggregate stock

market volatility. Menkhoff et al. (2012) conduct a similar exercise using a global exchange rate volatility

factor as a proxy for the global risk factor. We now revisit these findings by considering the good carry

trades as risk factors and comparing their performance with that of the previously used currency market

factors.




                                                      16
A     Test assets and risk factors
    The test assets in our pricing tests are five portfolios of currencies of developed countries (denoted

”Developed”), and six portfolios which also include emerging market currencies (denoted ”All”), created

by sorting the respective set of currencies on forward differentials, and taken from Adrien Verdelhan’s

website for the period ending in 12/2013. We consider these 11 portfolios together in our tests, and not

the ”All” and ”Developed” separately, as Lustig et al. (2011) do. The larger cross section poses a higher

hurdle to the various risk factors that are examined and compared.4 Our versions of the 11 portfolios

account for transaction costs.

    Moving to the risk factors, first we use HMLFX (”All” version) as in Lustig et al. (2011) (and available

at Verdelhan’s website). Next, we use a mimicking portfolio for the innovations in foreign exchange

volatility (denoted ”FXVol”) as in Menkhoff et al. (2012). Finally, we also consider as risk factors the good

carry trades G1-G5 to contrast their performance, particularly with HMLFX . Because the correlations

between the G1-G5 trades and HMLFX (FXVol) are on average 0.39 (-0.29), and do not exceed 0.55

in magnitude multi-collinearity concerns do not arise. The respective correlations for the B1-B5 trades

average 0.64 (-0.71), suggesting a closer relation between the previously considered currency market

factors and our bad carry trades.


B     Design of asset pricing tests
    We adopt a standard asset pricing framework, following Cochrane (2005, Chapters 12 and 13), and

consider linear factor models, both in their beta representation and stochastic discount factor (SDF) form,

    4 Whileusing some currencies twice in each test, the average correlation between the six ”All” portfolios and five ”Devel-
oped” portfolios is only 0.74, which is just slightly higher than the average correlation among the ”Developed” (0.72) or the
”All” portfolios (0.68). Moreover, we have verified that the relative performance of the risk factors separately on the ”All” and
”Developed” portfolios remains largely the same.




                                                              17
assuming SDF’s specified as:


(3)                                              mt+1 = 1 − b0 ( ft+1 − E[ f ]).


In (3) ft+1 is a K × 1 vector of risk factors and b is a conformable constant vector of SDF coefficients.

Without loss of generality, we set E (mt+1 ) = 1, given that excess returns of test assets are used.

                                             i m                    i
      The SDF form of a pricing model is E[rxt+1 t+1 ] = 0, where rxt+1 are the excess percentage returns

                                                                                      i ] = λ0 βi , with
of the test assets, indexed by i. The beta representation of the pricing model is E[rxt+1

systematic risk exposures for asset i given by the vector βi , and λ a vector of factor risk prices. The vectors

βi are estimated by GMM from time-series regressions of returns rxt+1
                                                                  i   on the factors, and λ is estimated

from a cross-sectional regression (without a constant) of average returns on the β’s. We report the SDF

coefficients b and factor risk prices λ with corresponding p-values, as well as p-values for the χ2 statistic

testing if the pricing errors are jointly equal to zero (see, e.g., Cochrane (2005, page 237)).5


C      Good carry trades in competition with other currency market risk factors
      Table 4 shows the results of tests which compare the performance of HMLFX and the good carry trades

as risk factors. As in Lustig et al. (2011), each test also includes the dollar factor, denoted RX, which

is the average excess return of their basket of currencies held long against the USD. In each of the two

panels of the table, the first line refers to a model with the RX and HMLFX factors alone, the next five

lines to models with RX and each of the good carry trades G1-G5, and the remaining five lines to models

    5 Denoting    by Rxt+1 the N × 1 vector of the rxt+1  i ’s, the moment conditions we use are:


                                                                                        0 − E[ f 0 ])b]
                                                                                                     
                                       E[Rxt+1 mt+1 ]              E[Rxt+1 − Rxt+1 ( ft+1        t+1
(4)                            g=                            =                                            .
                                      E[ ft+1 − E[ ft+1 ]]                 E[ ft+1 − E[ ft+1 ]]
                                                                                           
                                                                                    d 0                              0 − Rx         0
The weighting matrix defining which moments are set to zero is a =                             , where d = E[Rxt+1 ft+1    t+1 E[ ft+1 ]].
                                                                                    0 IK
                           T                       T
Further, if µ = 1/T ∑t=1       ft and Rx = 1/T ∑t=1    Rxt , where T is the length of the return time series, then the GMM estimates
            0    −1  0
of b are (d d) d Rx, and that of E[ ft+1 ] is µ. The standard errors of the b estimates are obtained fromthe covariance matrix
                                                                                                       Rxt+1 mt+1
1/T (d 0 d)−1 d 0 Sd(d 0 d)−1 , where S is an estimator of ∑∞j=−∞ E[ut+1 ut+1− 0
                                                                                    j ] and ut+1 =                . As in Lustig et al.
                                                                                                        ft+1 − µ
(2011), we use one Newey-West lag throughout to estimate S.

                                                                   18
combining RX, HMLFX and each of the G1-G5 trades. The top panel summarizes results from time-series

regressions of each of the test assets, and reports average coefficient estimates and (in parentheses) the

number of respective estimates that are significant at the 5 or 10% confidence levels. (The regression

results for each individual test asset are shown in the Online Appendix, Table OA-6.) The bottom panel

reports both the prices of risk λ and the SDF coefficient estimates b. The latter are key in evaluating

the relative importance of alternative factors for pricing a given cross section (see, e.g., Cochrane (2005,

Chapter 13.4)).

   The top panel of the table does not reveal important differences between HMLFX and the good carry

trades: the slope coefficients β in the time-series regressions are similarly significant; the R2 related to

HMLFX is slightly higher, but so are the respective intercepts α. When entering the regression jointly,

the two factors also show similar significance, with the HMLFX coefficients remaining negative on aver-

age, but the coefficients on the good trades turning all positive on average. The RX factor always has a

statistically significant slope coefficient of around 1.1. In the bottom panel of Table 4, all two-factor mod-

els (RX with either HMLFX or a good carry trade) show significant prices of risk λ for HMLFX and the

good trades (at the 5% level), but not for the RX factor. However, in the three-factor models the p-values

increase somewhat for HMLFX , and in three cases become significant only at the 10% level, while the

significance remains unaffected for the λ’s of the good trades.

   An essential difference, however, is observed with respect to the SDF coefficients b. In the two-factor

models, the b-coefficient for HMLFX is significant at the 10% level only, but at the 5% level for all

good trades. However, in the three-factor models the b coefficients turn highly insignificant for HMLFX ,

whereas for the good carry trades they remain significant at the 5% level in three of the five cases, and at

the 10% level in one case. Moreover, the test for the pricing errors being jointly equal to zero rejects in

this sample for the two-factor model with RX and HMLFX with a p-value of zero, while the corresponding


                                                     19
p-values for the models with RX and a good trade are all above 0.10, except for G3 where the p-value is

0.09. The test fails to reject the three-factor models at the 5% level for all specifications. In addition, the

b coefficients appear similar across different specifications for the good trades, but not for the HMLFX

factor, where the sign switches across specifications. The results in the bottom panel of Table 4 clearly

favor the good carry trades over HMLFX as risk factors explaining the returns of the interest rate-sorted

currency portfolios.

    Table OA-1 in the Online Appendix shows results from analogous tests, but with the currency volatility

factor FXVol replacing HMLFX . The conclusions remain robust: the good carry trades again win the horse

race, with p-values for all their SDF coefficients equal to 0.01 or lower, while these p-values are never

below 15% for FXVol.


D    Return predictability of good and bad carry trades
    The cross-sectional tests we have conducted follow the extant literature and assume constant prices of

risk and betas. It is surely conceivable that these assumptions are violated and thus that additional factors

may affect the unconditional cross section of currency returns (see e.g. Jagannathan and Wang (1996)).

There is, in fact, evidence of carry return predictability. Bakshi and Panayotov (2013) document that

commodity index returns and exchange rate volatility strongly predict carry trade returns. Further, Ready

et al. (2017) find time-series predictive ability of an index of shipping costs, the Baltic Dry Index (BDI),

for carry trade returns. They primarily investigate an unconditional carry strategy that is always long

the currencies of commodity exporters (commodity-producing countries) and short those of commodity

importers (countries producing final goods), which is a key component of their model.

    In Table 5 we reconsider the evidence for time-series predictability from the perspective of good and

bad carry trades. To follow closely the empirical design in the two studies cited above, we use log returns

of equally-weighted good and bad carry trades. The commodity index predictor is defined as the three-


                                                      20
                                                                                    avg
month log change in the CRB index. Exchange rate volatility, σt , is the cross-sectional average of

the annualized standard deviation of the daily log changes over each month t for each of the G-10 spot

exchange rates against the USD. The volatility predictor at the end of month t (and used to predict the
                                                               avg avg 
return for month t + 1) is then the three-month log change ln σt /σt−3 . The shipping cost predictor is

the three-month log change in the BDI. As in Bakshi and Panayotov (2013), we show in-sample predictive

slope coefficients β and their p-values, using Hodrick (1992) standard errors, adjusted R2 ’s, and p-values

for the MSPE-adjusted statistic of Clark and West (2007).6 In addition, we show an (out-of-sample)

measure of the economic significance of the predictability, using the following strategy: if the predicted

carry return for month t + 1 is positive (negative), the strategy enters a carry trade at the end of month t

(no position is taken and the strategy’s return for month t + 1 is zero). The reported measure ”∆ SR” of

economic significance equals the difference between the Sharpe ratio of the trading strategy, implemented

with the respective subset of G-10 currencies, and the corresponding carry trade as shown in the first

column. The predictive regressions use an expanding window with initial length of 120 months.

    Table 5 shows clear differences between the return predictability results for good and bad carry trades.

Out of 15 possible combinations with the three predictors, the G1-G5 trades show a significant predictive

slope on three occasions, whereas the B1-B5 trades record 13 occasions with p-values not higher than 0.05

and another one with a p-value below 0.10. The average predictive R2 is 0.7% for the G1-G5 trades and

2.2% for the B1-B5 trades. The MSPE statistics show significant out-of-sample predictability in one case

(out of 15) for the G1-G5 trades and in 13 cases for the B1-B5 trades. Finally, exploiting the predictability

in dynamic trading does not materially impact the Sharpe ratio for the G1-G5 trades (the average change

is -0.005), while it mostly improves the Sharpe ratio for the B1-B5 trades, on average by 0.10. The
   6 MSPE   stands for ”mean squared prediction error”. The statistic is obtained using ft+1 = (yt+1 − µt+1 )2 − [(yt+1 −bµt+1 )2 −
(µt+1 − b     2
        µt+1 ) ], where b
                        µt+1 is the prediction for month t + 1 from a predictive regression yt+1 = a + bxt + εt+1 , and µt+1 is the
historical average of y. Both bµt+1 and µt+1 are estimated using data up to month t. The null hypothesis is that b   µt+1 does not
improve on the forecast which uses µt+1 as the predictor. The test statistic is the t-statistic from the regression of ft+1 on a
constant, for which we report one-sided p-values.

                                                               21
improvement is economically large , because the Sharpe ratios for bad carry trades are often below 0.10

(see Table 3). The above patterns are confirmed by the results from the GC and BC trades, where again

the GC trades show insignificant predictive slopes for two of the predictors, twice smaller predictive R2 ’s,

rarely significant out-of-sample predictability, and on average a reduction in Sharpe ratios from exploiting

predictability by 0.01, in contrast to the BC trades which exhibit an increase by 0.09 in Sharpe ratios on

average.

    Our predictability results echo some findings in Ready et al. (2017). The CRB commodity index most

strongly predicts the returns of the factor that they denote IMX, which is long AUD, NZD and NOK, and

short JPY and CHF, as often true for our bad trades.7 Therefore, our Table 5 confirms the predictive ability

of the CRB and BDI for a ”commodity focused” carry trade as implied by their commodity trade model.

Our contribution here, however, is to highlight the similarity between the commodity-based trade and our

bad carry trades, and the fact that a commodity-based interpretation of carry trade returns reflects mostly

features of bad carry trades.

    Our results therefore qualify the prevailing carry return predictability story. A carry trade that focuses

on the prototypical carry currencies is rather unattractive, but its return properties can be enhanced by ex-

ploiting return predictability. In contrast, our good carry trades have attractive properties which, however,

cannot be enhanced by the predictors previously identified in Bakshi and Panayotov (2013). It remains, of

course, conceivable they are predictable by other variables.



V      Good and bad carry trades and previous carry interpretations
    This section reconsiders previous studies of carry trades from the good-bad carry trade perspective.
    7 They also show that a complement to the IMX trade (denoted CHML) is not predictable at all by the CRB or BDI, and also
has practically zero skewness, similar to some of our good trades. However, the Sharpe ratio of CHML is still below that of their
version of the standard carry trade (0.85 vs. 0.95 in their sample and without transaction costs), hence their orthogonalization
procedure fails to identify a good carry trade.




                                                              22
A    Explaining carry trade returns with equity market risk factors
    We start by re-examining a key result in the literature stating that standard (linear) equity market

factor models cannot explain the time variation in carry returns, which appear uncorrelated with these

risk factors in normal times, but correlate highly with them in crisis times (e.g., Melvin and Taylor (2009),

Christiansen, Ranaldo, and Söderlind (2011)). We examine three models: (i) the Fama-French three-factor

model, following Burnside et al. (2011), (ii) a three-factor model with the market factor, the global equity

volatility factor used in Lustig et al. (2011), and their product, and (iii) a model with two factors which

explicitly distinguish the down- and up-moves of the equity market, in the spirit of Lettau, Maggiori,

and Weber (2015). The latter two models effectively exhibit a non-linearity that may capture the time-

variation in the correlation mentioned above. To conserve space, we relegate detailed results to the Online

Appendix, summarizing the key results here.

    Let’s start with the model featuring a market factor (denoted MKT), proxied by the total return of

the MSCI-World equity index, in excess of the risk-free rate and expressed in USD, an equity volatility

factor (EqVol) constructed as in Lustig et al. (2011), and the interaction term (the product of MKT and

EqVol). Table OA-2 shows that in time-series regressions of carry trade returns on the three risk factors

the main difference between good and bad trades is in their loadings on the product factor. These are

typically negative, albeit rarely significant, for the good trades, while they are positive, much larger in

magnitude, and almost always significant at the 5% significance level for the bad trades. Given that

increases in volatility tend to coincide with market downturns, the market exposure of the bad trades

increases substantially in bad times, making them under-perform in times of crisis.

    We also perform GMM-based cross-sectional tests on the GC and BC return cross sections. For the

GC trades, the risk price for the MKT factor is significant at the 5% level, while for the BC trades no risk

price is significant, although the model is not rejected for either of the two cross sections. When we run a



                                                     23
simple OLS regression of actual average returns on a constant and the model-based expected returns, we

obtain an R2 of 0.67 for the GC trades, and 0.29 for the BC trades. The combined evidence suggests that

this three-factor model does not adequately describe the returns of the bad carry trades, but still saliently

reveals the high exposure of these trades to the equity market during high-volatility periods. In contrast, a

significant price of risk for the market factor and tighter link between model expected returns and average

returns show the promise of the model to provide a risk-based interpretation of good carry trades.

   The Online Appendix further shows quite similar results for the model with an Up- and Down-market

factors. Table OA-3 shows that good (bad) carry trades load primarily on the Up (Down)-market factor,

with beta exposures being economically and statistically very different across the two types of trades.

In the cross-sectional tests, the prices of risk for both factors are significant; the pricing errors are not

statistically different from zero and the model generates expected returns highly (weakly) correlated with

good (bad) carry trades.

   The Online Appendix and Table OA-4 report analogous results for the Fama-French three-factor

model. Here the time-series regressions reveal that good carry trades do not load much on any of the

three factors, and retain significant alphas relative to the model. In contrast, the bad carry trades feature

significantly higher regression slope coefficients on all three factors and it is striking that their SMB and

HML exposures are positive and economically meaningful (often even above 0.10). However, the Fama-

French model fails to fit expected returns cross-sectionally, with all prices of risk being insignificantly

different from zero for both good and bad carry trades.

   In sum, the evidence from Tables OA-2 to OA-4 provides (weak) support for the ability of risk fac-

tors from the equity market to explain the returns of the good carry trades. Our results are not directly

comparable to studies analysing numeraire-dependent carry trades, such as Daniel et al. (2017).




                                                     24
B    Currency crashes as an explanation for the carry return puzzle
    One established explanation for the carry trade’s profitability is that it reflects compensation for the

negative return skewness or crash risk, inherent to these trades. For example, Brunnermeier et al. (2009)

argue that ”investment currencies are subject to crash risk, that is, positive interest rate differentials are

associated with negative conditional skewness of exchange rate movements.... The skewness cannot easily

be diversified away, suggesting that currency crashes are correlated across different countries .... This

correlation could be driven by exposure to common, crash-risk factors”. If agents exhibit a preference for

positive skewness, an equilibrium model may generate negatively skewed returns and high Sharpe ratios

for the carry trade.

    However, the crash risk hypothesis is not consistent with our findings from good and bad carry trades

(see Figure 1 and Table 3): good carry trades have relatively high Sharpe ratios and slightly negative

(or even positive) skewness. The assertion in Brunnermeier et al. (2009) that the negative skewness in

carry trade returns cannot be diversified away must also be qualified. We have demonstrated that, in fact,

skewness can be dramatically improved by judiciously removing currencies from the carry trade, without

impairing profitability. Studies relying on option market data (e.g., Burnside et al. (2011), Jurek (2014))

have criticized the crash-risk hypothesis before, because options can essentially hedge away the crash risk

without undermining much the carry trade’s profitability.



VI      Further exploration of good and bad carry trades
    In this section we embark on a more detailed examination of the good and bad carry trades, trying to

set the stage for future work that will hopefully clarify fully the economic interpretation of our findings.

First, we reflect on the return components of various carry trades and how they contribute to the differential

performance of the good and bad trades. Second, the good carry trades always include the USD (it is never



                                                     25
excluded in our selection procedure). There is a burgeoning literature stressing the special nature of the

USD in international financial markets: Adrian, Etula, and Shin (2015) associate increased global dollar

funding with expected currency depreciations; Hassan (2013) argues that economies representing a larger

share of world wealth have low interest rates and low risk premiums, whereas Maggiori (2013) ascribes

a low premium to holding the USD to its role as a reserve currency. Lustig et al. (2014) explore a new

trade, denoted ”dollar carry”, which goes long (short) in all foreign currencies against the USD with equal

weights when their average interest rate differential relative to the USD is positive (negative). The dollar

carry trade has a very attractive Sharpe ratio, substantially higher than that of SC, raising the issue that

we may have simply repackaged dollar carry into our good carry trades. We show that this is not the case,

and these two types of trades, while correlated, are economically distinct.


A    The sources of good and bad carry returns
    In Table 6, we decompose carry trade returns into an interest rate (or forward differential) component,

and an exchange rate change component. SC derives more than 100% of its returns from the interest rate

component, i.e., the investment currencies do depreciate and/or the funding currencies do appreciate, but

the exchange rate component is sufficiently small relative to the ”carry” to leave an attractive return on the

table. Bad carry trades have higher carry return components, both in absolute terms (and the difference is

statistically significant) and in relative terms, but even more negative exchange rate components, so that

lower returns than those for standard carry are obtained. In contrast, good carry trades derive their returns

both from the carry and exchange rate components. Their carry component is on average about 20 basis

points lower than that of SC in three cases (and statistically significant at the 5% level for the G4 trade),

while it is significantly higher for the G3 trade (even if still lower than the carry of any bad trade).

    The contrast between the carry contributions to the returns of bad and good trades is illustrated in

Figure 3. The graph plots total average return on the horizontal axis, and the ratio of carry to total return


                                                      26
on the vertical axis for all trades considered in this paper (18 GC trades, 18 BC trades, as well as the G1

and G5, and B1 and B5 trades). The graph also includes the standard and dollar carry trades. Bad carry

trades have lower returns and much higher carry-to-return ratios; good carry trades have higher returns,

and derive between 50 and 100% of their returns from carry (the G5 trade being the only exception).

   These results suggest that the unbiasedness hypothesis may not be strongly rejected for bad carry

currencies, which include the prototypical carry currencies. Recall that a necessary condition for a carry

trade to deliver excess returns is that the unbiasedness hypothesis does not hold, at least for some period

of time (see Bekaert, Wei, and Xing (2007) for recent tests of the hypothesis). However, when examining

standard regressions testing the unbiasedness hypothesis for the four pairs containing prototypical carry

currencies, AUD/JPY, NZD/JPY, AUD/CHF and NZD/CHF (see Table 7), we find no strong rejections

of the hypothesis. In particular, we regress future exchange rate changes onto a constant and the current

forward differential, and the null hypothesis is that the constant is zero and the slope coefficient is one.

The constants (slope coefficients) in all four regressions are insignificantly different from zero (one).

Most saliently, the slope coefficient for the AUD/JPY regression is 0.92, and thus remarkably close to one.

However, our analysis reveals the NOK also to be a ”bad” currency, more so than the CHF and the NZD.

Interestingly, Table 7 shows that the slope coefficient in unbiasedness regressions of the NOK relative

to the CHF and JPY is either not significantly different from one, or exceeds one by a large amount,

indicating an expected depreciation of the NOK relative to the JPY when the NOK interest rate exceeds

the JPY one. This is partially counteracted by a positive and significant constant.

   The decomposition and the regression results above also suggest that the good carry trades are likely to

be more ”active” than the bad or standard carry trades, i.e., they likely involve more frequent re-balancing.

The insightful paper by Hassan and Mano (2015) decomposes the carry trade into a ”static” trade (which

goes long (short) currencies with unconditionally low (high) forward differentials) and a dynamic trade,


                                                     27
which also helps explain deviations from unbiasedness. Such deviations, driven by the slope coefficient

in the unbiasedness regressions being different from one, lead to dynamic trades when forward premiums

are high or low relative to their unconditional means. However, carry trades can also be profitable simply

through non-zero constants in the unbiasedness regressions (see Bekaert and Hodrick (2012, Chapter 7)).

    Table 8 provides some evidence on the dynamic nature of the various carry trades. We create a dummy

variable that records the proportion of currencies that change position (from long to short or vice versa) at

each point of time. For example, for a completely static trade this proportion is zero, whereas a trade where

half the currencies switch positions at each point of time would record 50% on this measure. Furthermore,

since the dynamic nature may be related to the number of currencies in the trade, it is important to take

sampling error into account. The table shows the sample averages of these proportions, together with 95%

confidence intervals, computed using the bootstrapped carry trade returns employed in Section E.

    Clearly, the good carry trades are more ”dynamic” than the bad trades and the SC trade. Note that the

average proportions for good trades are invariably above the confidence interval for SC (and vice versa for

the bad trades). Yet, the proportions for the good carries and SC are relatively highly correlated in the time

series (ranging between 49% and 82%), suggesting that these trades switch currency positions at roughly

similar times. For bad carry trades the proportion of switches is typically within the confidence interval of

SC, except for the B3 trade.

    The last three columns in Table 8 report the ratios between the average returns of various static carry

trades (which are never re-balanced), and the returns of the corresponding good or bad carry trade, mim-

icking the Hassan and Mano (2015) methodology.8 The trades are constructed with all G-10 currencies,

as well as with the currencies entering the G1-G5 and B1-B5 trades. The various ”static trades” use as

weights the average forward differentials over the 12/1984-12/1994 period (the first 120 months of our

   8 We use log returns and currency weights equal to the demeaned and normalized forward differentials at each trading date
over 1/1995-6/2014.


                                                            28
sample), demeaned and normalized to have absolute values that sum to one. The weights are kept fixed

for the entire sample period 1/1995-6/2014, without ever re-balancing.

   Hassan and Mano (2015) find that static trade returns account for about 70% of carry trade returns

(but the standard error on that estimate is substantial), whereas according to Lustig et al. (2011) this

proportion is between one third and one half. Analogously, the average return of the static SC trade in

Table 8 is about half of that of the original SC trade. Importantly, there is a clear distinction between the

relative performance of the static versions of the good and bad carry trades, with the ratios between the

corresponding average returns never exceeding 0.30 (and sometimes going negative) for the good trades,

but ranging between 0.60 and 1.2 for the bad trades. The distinction is even clearer in terms of Sharpe

ratios (see the last two columns), which for the good static trades rarely exceed 0.15, much worse than

their re-balanced counterparts. In contrast, the Sharpe ratios of the re-balanced and static ”bad” trades are

close to one another.

   Hence, good carry represents a dimension of standard carry that is not well explained by its static

component. This is intuitive, because good carry trades tend to exclude currencies with either the highest

or lowest forward differentials, and thus do not have stable short and long positions. In contrast, and as

shown above, the currencies involved in bad carry trades typically switch less often from long to short

positions and vice versa. Our results thus confirm the Hassan and Mano (2015) decomposition for ”bad

carry trades”, but not for ”good carry trades”. Hassan and Mano (2015) split up carry trades in the

static carry trade we studied above and a ”dynamic” trade, which essentially exploits time-variation in

the relative ranking of currencies in terms of their forward differentials, relative to their unconditional

counterparts. This dynamic trade must necessarily be relatively more important for good trades, which

feature currencies with less extreme interest rate differentials relative to the dollar, and for which the

unbiasedness hypothesis does not hold. The dynamic trade therefore also contributes positively to the


                                                     29
trade exploiting deviations from unbiasedness (what they called the ”forward premium trade”). Do note

that our results are not entirely comparable to Hassan and Mano (2015) because they do not impose

symmetry on their carry trade, while we do.


B    Good carry versus dollar carry
    In this section, we characterize the differences and similarities between the dollar carry trade and our

good carry trades. First, note that dollar carry (hereafter DC for short) does not satisfy the standard condi-

tions for a carry trade as discussed in Section II. Carry trades go long (short) high (low) yield currencies,

whereas DC combines high and low yield currencies on one side of the trade. Going back to Table 6, the

last column reports the carry (i.e., interest rate) and exchange rate change components for DC, and the last

row of the table reports p-values for a test of equality between the carry components of the trade in the re-

spective column and DC. The DC trade derives most of its substantial returns from currency appreciation,

and only 22% from interest rate differentials. This proportion is significantly lower than that of any other

carry trade. Perhaps not surprisingly, the G5 trade, only featuring three currencies which include the USD

comes closest to DC. In Figure 3, the DC trade also represents somewhat of an outlier. Furthermore, when

constructing versions of DC from ”good” and ”bad” currencies separately, we find that their Sharpe ratios

are very similar.

    Second, DC is much less dynamic than the good trades: the last row of Table 8 shows that it switches

positions more rarely (despite any switch involving all currencies). The switching proportions are also not

very correlated with those for the good trades (at most 39%) or the SC trade (47%). Furthermore, Table 8

(column ”days w/o switch”) shows that while the typical proportion of days when no currency switches

position from long to short or vice versa ranges between 0.60 and 0.80 in carry trades, it is 0.93 for DC.

    Third, because good carry trades eliminate some non-dollar exposure, they should be more correlated

with DC than SC or the bad carries are. Table 9 confirms this intuition, showing in Panel A that DC has


                                                     30
the highest correlation with good trades. However, for the G1, G2 and G3 trades the correlation is less

than 50%, and it does not exceed 70% for the G5 trade. Moreover, the correlations between the good

trades (except G5) and SC are higher than those for DC. Good carries thus preserve their close link with

the SC trade, and remain distinct from DC.

    In Panel B of Table 9 we report on regressions which have the returns of SC, DC or good carries either

as dependent or independent variables. Both SC and good carries have explanatory power for the DC

trade, but SC is insignificant in two specifications. The R2 ’s are relatively low, being less than 40% in

all but one case. The DC trade mostly delivers significant alphas relative to these two factors, which is

not surprising, given its very attractive return profile. Next, both SC and DC have explanatory power for

good carry trades, with almost all slope coefficients featuring p-values below 1% and R2 ’s ranging from

43 to 75%. The coefficients on SC, however, are typically much larger than the coefficients on DC. The

G2, G3 and G5 trades still show significant alphas with respect to these two factors. Finally, the return of

SC is explained with R2 s between 18 and 75% and all intercepts are insignificantly different from zero.

The explanatory power in this case comes predominantly from the good carries, as evidenced by the small

coefficients and some high p-values on DC.

    Table 9 shows that neither good carries, nor DC can be perfectly spanned by other trades, despite

being correlated with them. In contrast, SC is spanned, and this is mostly due to the good carry trades.

Being proper carry trades, the good carries should therefore be viewed, unlike DC, as better versions

of SC.9 We also investigate the explanatory power of three economic factors for various carry trades,

including DC, namely, the global equity market volatility, global industrial production growth, proxied by

the OECD total growth10 , and the residual from regressing the US industrial production growth onto the
   9 For further validation of this claim,
                                         in unreported results we consider creating a mean-variance efficient portfolio from DC,
SC and one of the G1-G5 portfolios. When we do so, the good carries invariably get a large positive weight, always exceeding
that of DC, sometimes by factor of two or three, and SC is always shorted (except if paired with the G5 trade, when its weight
is close to zero). In other words, good carries dominate DC and SC is pushed out.
   10 From stats.oecd.org, Monthly economic indicators, Production of total industry excluding construction, growth rate over



                                                              31
global growth variable (see Online Appendix Table OA-5 for the results). We find that, the various carry

trades are similarly related to the macro factors considered, but that DC appears to have no significant link

to these factors. Hence, an economic interpretation of the carry trade returns remains elusive.

    Finally, DC and good carry trades both exhibit little skewness, but use very different mechanisms to

eliminate the impact of bad carry currencies in this respect. While the good trades simply remove the

currencies, DC puts such naturally ”long” and ”short” currencies on the same side of the trade. To see

this more clearly, consider the small table underneath, which shows average forward differentials against

the USD for the remaining G-10 currencies over our full sample period 12/1984 to 6/2014 (together with

the first three moments of the percentage returns of long positions in each currency against the USD, not

adjusted for transaction costs). All numbers are annualized and in percent, except for skewness. The bad

                         NZD           AUD      NOK      GBP      SEK      CAD      EUR     CHF JPY
     avg. forw. differ. 4.40           3.26     1.98     2.19     1.63     0.83     -0.41   -1.58 -2.51
     avg. return         7.23          4.42     3.82     4.11     3.27     1.81     2.85     2.76 1.21
     stand. dev.        12.40         11.88    10.24    10.83    11.31     7.10    10.92    11.82 11.46
     skewness           -0.137        -0.585   -0.374   -0.048   -0.321   -0.331   -0.139   0.109 0.497

carry currencies (JPY, AUD and NOK) do not only have among the highest forward differentials, they also

are the most skewed. The good carry trades essentially remove these currencies and thereby do not worsen

and mostly improve the return-risk properties of the trade. Therefore, this skewness must be idiosyncratic

and not priced, or it must be endogenously generated by carry traders. Why this is the case remains an

important open question for further research, but it surely undermines any explanation of attractive carry

returns based on priced ”crash” risk.


C    Revisiting the factor pricing of currency returns
    We now compare the performance of DC and good carries as pricing factors for the interest rate-sorted

portfolios, discussed in Section C above. Table 10 reports results from pricing tests, which juxtapose DC

the previous month, seasonally adjusted


                                                        32
with the G1-G5 trades, but do not include the RX factor (which only shorts the USD and has correlation

of 0.53 with DC).11 The top panel summarizes, as in previous tables, results from time-series regressions

on individual portfolios, while the bottom panel presents results from cross-sectional tests. (The first-pass

regression results for each individual test asset are shown in the Online Appendix, Table OA-7.)

    DC alone explains reasonably well the time-series behavior of the test assets - none of the intercepts

and all slope coefficients are significant, even at the 5% confidence level, with a relatively high R2 of 21%.

The performance of the good trades alone is similar with respect to the intercepts, while the slopes are

not always significant and the R2 ’s are much lower in three out of five cases. Moving to the cross-section,

however, we observe that the price of risk for DC is significant only with a p-value of 0.07, while three of

the good trades show significance at the 5% level. In addition, the test for the pricing errors being jointly

equal to zero rejects with a p-value of 0.03 for DC, but never rejects for individual good carries, even at

the 10% confidence level.

    We also perform cross-sectional tests which include both DC and a good trade, as reported at the

bottom of Table 10. The price of risk λ is now statistically significant for DC at the 5% level in only two out

of five cases, whereas four out of the five p-values for the good carries are at 2% or below. The p-values for

the SDF coefficients b, which provide the proper horse race test, are all above 0.20 for DC. In contrast, four

of these p-values for the good trades are below or equal to 0.10. The relatively high correlation between

DC and the G5 trade may be the source of insignificant coefficients in this specification. Also note that

the b-coefficients for the good trades are quite stable (see also Table 4), whereas the b-coefficients for DC

switch sign across specifications. While the statistical significance in favor of good trades is borderline,

the conjecture that good trades may be simply reflecting features of DC is thus not supported here.
  11 DC is short the dollar about 70% of the time in our sample, and its profitability is entirely driven by these short dollar

positions. Note that this is not true for the good carry trades, which gain both when the dollar is short and long.




                                                             33
VII      Conclusion
    This paper introduces ”good” and ”bad” carry trades, which are all constructed from subsets of the

G-10 currencies, but exhibit markedly different return properties, in terms of Sharpe ratios and skewness.

Surprisingly, trades that just exclude some of the typical carry trade currencies do perform better than

the benchmark SC trade, while trades that only include the typical carry currencies have inferior return

profiles. These findings challenge the conventional wisdom on the construction of carry trades from an

investor’s view point. Furthermore, the trades from subsets also challenge some of the available conceptual

interpretations of the carry trade. We document that several of these interpretations appear to be mostly

consistent with the bad carry trades, but are less applicable to good trades.

    We find that good carry trades can serve as risk factors, able to explain a cross section of currency

portfolio returns, and in this role can drive out previously suggested risk factors, such as the HMLFX

factor of Lustig et al. (2011). Further, the returns of good carry trades can be explained to a certain extent

with risk factors from the global equity market. While good carry trades are more strongly correlated

with the ”dollar carry” trade of Lustig et al. (2014) than is the standard carry trade, good trades remain

symmetric carry trades, deriving the bulk of their returns from carry (i.e., interest rate differentials), and

offer a distinct return profile.

    The results in this paper, even though largely focused on the statistical properties of carry trade returns,

should impact the study of carry trades in various directions. First, exploring crash risk or differentiating

fundamental risks of commodity producers versus exporters are unlikely fruitful avenues of research.

Second, our reported asset pricing tests can inform further risk-based interpretations of carry trade returns.

Finally, it can be promising to explore, in the spirit of Koijen, Moskowitz, Pedersen, and Vrugt (2015),

the notion of good and bad carry trades from financial assets other than currencies.




                                                      34
References
Adrian, T., Etula, E., Shin, H. S., 2015. Risk appetite and exchange rates. Staff reports. Federal Reserve

  Bank of New York.

Ang, A., Chen, J., 2010. Yield curve predictors of foreign exchange returns. Working paper. Columbia

  University.

Ang, A., Chen, J., Xing, Y., 2006. Downside risk. Review of Financial Studies 19, 1191–1239.

Annaert, J., Van Osselaer, S., Verstraete, B., 2009. Performance evaluation of portfolio insurance strategies

  using stochastic dominance criteria. Journal of Banking and Finance 33, 272–280.

Bakshi, G., Panayotov, G., 2013. Predictability of currency carry trades and asset pricing implications.

  Journal of Financial Economics 110, 139–163.

Barroso, P., Santa-Clara, P., 2014. Beyond the carry trade: Optimal currency portfolios. Journal of Finan-

  cial and Quantitative Analysis 50, 1037–1056.

Bekaert, G., Hodrick, R., 2012. International Financial Management. Prentice Hall.

Bekaert, G., Wei, M., Xing, Y., 2007. Uncovered interest rate parity and the term structure. Journal of

  International Money and Finance 26, 1038–1069.

Brunnermeier, M., Nagel, S., Pedersen, L., 2009. Carry trades and currency crashes. NBER Macroeco-

  nomics Annual 23, 313–347.

Bruno, V., Shin, H. S., 2015b. Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of monetary policy. Journal of

  Monetary Economics 71, 119–132.

Burnside, C., Eichenbaum, M., Kleshchelski, I., Rebelo, S., 2011. Do peso problems explain the returns

  to the carry trade?. Review of Financial Studies 24, 853–891.

Christiansen, C., Ranaldo, A., Söderlind, P., 2011. The time-varying systematic risk of carry trade strate-

  gies. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 1107–1125.


                                                     35
Clarida, R., Davis, J., Pedersen, N., 2009. Currency carry trade regimes: Beyond the Fama regression.

  Journal of International Money and Finance 28, 1375–1389.

Clark, T., West, K., 2007. Approximately normal tests for equal predictive accuracy in nested models.

  Journal of Econometrics 138, 291–311.

Cochrane, J., 2005. Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Daniel, K., Hodrick, R., Lu, Z., 2017. The carry trade: Risks and drawdowns. Critical Finance Review 6,

  211–262.

DeMiguel, V., Nogales, F., Uppal, R., 2014. Stock return serial dependence and out-of-sample portfolio

  performance. Review of Financial Studies 27, 1031–1073.

Hassan, T., 2013. Country size, currency unions, and international asset returns. Journal of Finance 68,

  2269–2308.

Hassan, T., Mano, R., 2015. Forward and spot exchange rates in a multi-currency world. Working paper.

  University of Chicago.

Hodrick, R., 1992. Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Alternative procedures for inference and

  measurement. Review of Financial Studies 5, 357–386.

Jagannathan, R., Wang, Z., 1996. The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of expected returns. The

  Journal of Finance 51, 3–53.

Jobson, J. D., Korkie, B. M., 1981. Performance hypothesis testing with the Sharpe and Treynor measures.

  Journal of Finance 36, 889–908.

Jordá, O., Taylor, A., 2012. The carry trade and fundamentals: Nothing to fear but FEER itself. Journal of

  International Economics 88, 74–90.

Jurek, J., 2014. Crash-neutral currency carry trades. Journal of Financial Economics 113, 325–347.

Koijen, R., Moskowitz, T., Pedersen, L., Vrugt, E., 2015. Carry. Unpublished working paper. London


                                                    36
  Business School.

Ledoit, O., Wolf, M., 2008. Robust performance hypothesis testing with the Sharpe ratio. Journal of

  Empirical Finance 15, 850–859.

Lettau, M., Maggiori, M., Weber, M., 2015. Conditional risk premia in currency markets and other asset

  classes. Journal of Financial Economics 114, 197–225.

Lustig, H., Roussanov, N., Verdelhan, A., 2011. Common risk factors in currency markets. Review of

  Financial Studies 24, 3731–3777.

Lustig, H., Roussanov, N., Verdelhan, A., 2014. Countercyclical currency risk premia. Journal of Financial

  Economics 111, 527–553.

Maggiori, M., 2013. The U.S. Dollar safety premium. Unpublished working paper. Harvard University.

Maurer, T., Tô, T.-D., Tran, N.-K., 2018. Pricing risks across currency denominations. Management Sci-

  ence (forthcoming).

Melvin, M., Taylor, M., 2009. The crisis in the foreign exchange market. Journal of International Money

  and Finance 28, 1317–1330.

Memmel, C., 2003. Performance hypothesis testing with the Sharpe ratio. Finance Letters 1, 21–23.

Menkhoff, L., Sarno, L., Schmeling, M., Schrimpf, A., 2012. Carry trades and global foreign exchange

  volatility. Journal of Finance 67, 681–718.

Ready, R., Roussanov, N., Ward, C., 2017. Commodity trade and the carry trade: A tale of two countries.

  Journal of Finance 72, 2629–2684.




                                                   37
     Table 1
     Some recent approaches to carry trade construction
     This table summarizes three aspects of carry trade constructions, as adopted in recent studies. It shows which currencies are employed in the trade, are
     currencies given equal weights (possibly among other weighting schemes), and whether the total weights of the long and short sides of the trade are
     equal. The bottom part of the table provides similar details on several investable carry trade indexes (source: FX Week (Feb, 2008)).
                                                     Which currencies?            Weights equal?                              Long and short equal?

             Brunnermeier et al. (2009)              G-10                         yes                                          yes
             Clarida et al. (2009)                   G-10                         yes                                          yes
             Jorda and Taylor (2009)                 G-10 ex SEK                  yes                                          no
             Ang and Chen (2010)                     G-10 plus 13 other           yes                                          yes
             Burnside et al. (2011)                  20 developed                 yes                                          no
                                                     
             Lustig et al. (2011)                    
                                                       nine to 34,               yes                                          yes
                                                     
             Lustig et al. (2014)                       plus a smaller            yes                                          no
             Menkhoff et al. (2012)                  
                                                       subset of                 yes                                          yes
                                                     
             Ready et al. (2013)                        15 developed              yes                                          yes
             Bakshi and Panayotov (2013)             G-10                         yes                                          yes




38
             Hassan and Mano (2015)                  nine to 39, plus a smaller   no (deviations of forward                    yes
                                                       subset of 15 developed      differentials from their mean)
             Daniel et al. (2017)                    G-10                         yes and no (various weighting schemes)       yes and no
             Jurek (2014)                            G-10                         yes and no (various weighting schemes)       yes and no
             Barroso and Santa-Clara (2014)          27 developed                 no (vol. scaled deviations of forward        yes
                                                                                   differentials from their mean)

            Some investable carry trade indexes:
            Barclays Capital: Intelligent            G-10                         no (portfolio optimization)                  yes
             Carry Index
            Citigroup: Beta1 range                   G-10                         yes (uses 9 or 13 most                       yes
                                                                                   liquid tradeable pairs)
            Credit Suisse: Rolling                   G-10 and G-18                no (portfolio optimization)                  yes
              Optimised Carry Indices
            Deutsche Bank: G-10 Harvest Index        G-10                         yes (three highest- and lowest-yielding)     yes
            JP Morgan: IncomeFX                      G-10                         yes and no (four pairs selected each         yes
                                                                                   month to optimize the risk-return ratio)
     Table 2
     Carry trades constructed by sequentially excluding G-10 currencies
     Using mid-quotes for spot (St ) and one-month forward (Ft ) exchange rates of the G-10 currencies against the USD (Euro spliced with DEM before 1999)
     from Datastream, we calculate forward differentials as Ft /St − 1. With these we construct carry trades either using all G-10 currencies, or excluding
     one up to seven of these currencies, as explained in Section A. Panel A reports their averages (denoted ”avg. ret.”, annualized an in percent) and SR’s
     (both annualized), as well as skewness (denoted ”skew”). The first column of the table shows how many currencies have been excluded. The columns
     denoted ”p-val” are obtained using bootstrap confidence intervals for the hypothesis that the respective SR or skewness does not exceed the benchmark
     one (see Appendix OA-II). The sample period is 12/1984 to 6/2014 (354 months), and the initial window for calculating SR’s that are used to decide
     which currencies should be excluded is 120 months. Each column in Panel B shows how many months, out of the 234 months in which we search for
     the highest SR’s, was a currency with code displayed in the first row, the first to be excluded (row starting with ”1”), or among the first two excluded
     (row starting with ”2”), etc.

                A. Average returns, Sharpe ratios, skewness                                     B. Frequency and order of exclusion




39
                avg. ret.   SR     p-val    skew      p-val             NZD     AUD      NOK       GBP     SEK    CAD      USD        EUR   CHF    JPY

          SC      1.00      0.32            -0.33

          1       1.05      0.32    0.51    -0.26     0.24                0      135       50        0       0       0      0           0     0     49
          2       1.23      0.41    0.22    -0.57     0.87                0      184      219        0       0       0      0          15     0     50
          3       1.25      0.41    0.25     0.01     0.03                0      192      219        0       0       0      0          74     3    214
          4       1.34      0.46    0.21     0.21     0.01               14      224      234        0       0      82      0         152    10    220
          5       1.56      0.40    0.32    -0.01     0.10              106      224      234       0       41      82      0         230   19     234
          6       1.47      0.44    0.29    -0.35     0.53              171      234      234       36      58     175      0         230   32     234
          7       3.17      0.61    0.10     0.04     0.10              172      234      234       63      58     175      0         234   234    234
     Table 3
     Carry trades constructed with fixed subsets of the G-10 currencies
     This table shows averages (denoted ”avg. ret.”, in percent), standard deviations (”st.dev.”, in percent) and Sharpe ratios (”SR”), all annualized, as well
     as skewness (denoted ”skew”) for the monthly excess returns of several carry trades, all with equal weights. ”SC” denotes the standard carry trade
     constructed with all G-10 currencies. The G1 to G5 trades are constructed using the currencies with the displayed codes, and represent combinations of
     currencies that are less often excluded by the enhancement rule discussed in Section A and Table 2. B1 to B5 are the complementary trades, each using
     the currencies that have been left out of one of the G1-G5 trades. ”GC” denotes the set of 18 carry trades, each constructed from the three least often
     excluded currencies (USD, GBP and SEK), combined with any possible pair of the remaining G-10 currencies that contains none or only one of the
     three most often excluded currencies (AUD, NOK and JPY). ”BC” denotes the set of 18 complementary carry trades, each using the five currencies left
     out of one of the 18 trades in GC. The rows corresponding to the GC and BC trades show averages of the average returns, standard deviations, Sharpe
     ratios and skewness across the respective 18 carry trades. The columns denoted ”p-val” show p-values obtained using bootstrap confidence intervals
     (see Appendix OA-II). The first (second) number in parentheses shows how many of the 18 corresponding individual estimates are significant at the
     5% (10%) confidence level. Where p-values are not in square brackets, the null hypothesis is that the respective SR or skewness does not exceed the
     one of the SC trade. Where p-values are in square brackets, the null is that the SR or skewness of a G1-G5 trade or GC trade does not exceed that of the
     corresponding B1-B5 trade or BC trade. The sample period is 12/1984 to 6/2014 (354 months).


                                                                              avg. ret.   st.dev.    SR       p-val      skew       p-val




40
                         SC                                                     1.02       3.30     0.31                 -0.22

                         G1    NZD, GBP, SEK, CAD, USD, EUR, CHF                1.67       3.29     0.51       0.02       0.07      0.02
                         G2    GBP, SEK, CAD, USD, CHF                          1.70       3.47     0.49       0.13      -0.17      0.41
                         G3    NZD, GBP, SEK, USD, CHF                          2.49       4.09     0.61       0.01      -0.21      0.48
                         G4    NZD, GBP, SEK, CAD, USD                          2.22       4.39     0.51       0.12      -0.01      0.19
                         G5    GBP, SEK, USD                                    3.97       5.71     0.69       0.03      -0.23      0.50

                         B1   AUD, NOK, JPY                                     0.68       7.50     0.09      [0.01]     -0.92     [0.01]
                         B2   NZD, AUD, NOK, EUR, JPY                           0.98       5.54     0.18      [0.07]     -0.60     [0.06]
                         B3   AUD, NOK, CAD, EUR, JPY                           0.21       4.91     0.04      [0.01]     -0.85     [0.04]
                         B4   AUD, NOK, EUR, CHF, JPY                           0.28       4.96     0.06      [0.02]     -0.87     [0.04]
                         B5   NZD, AUD, NOK, CAD, EUR, CHF, JPY                 0.61       4.66     0.13      [0.01]     -0.63     [0.17]

                         GC                                                     1.96       4.11     0.47       (6/7)     -0.33      (0/0)
                         BC                                                     0.66       5.13     0.13     [(8/12)]    -0.66    [(5/11)]
     Table 4
     Currency HML vs. good carry trades as currency market pricing factors
     Several factor pricing models are estimated with GMM, as described in Section IV, over 12/1984 to 12/2013. The 11 test assets (six ”All” and five
     ”Developed” interest-rate sorted currency portfolios (net returns)) and the RX (dollar) and currency HML (denoted ”HMLFX ”) factors (”All” version,
     net) are as in Lustig et al. (2011), and kindly made available at Adrian Verdelhan’s website. The good carry trades G1-G5 are as in Table 3. All models
     include the RX factor, and either the HMLFX or a good carry trade (as indicated in the first column), or both. The top panel reports averages of the
     11 annualized average returns, time-series regression coefficients and adjusted R2 ’s (in percent). Standard errors are estimated with GMM and account
     for one Newey-West lag. The first (second) number in parentheses shows how many of the 11 corresponding estimates are significant at the 5% (10%)
     confidence level. The bottom panel shows, for the same models, factor risk prices λ and SDF coefficients b with p-values, as well as p-values for the
     χ2 statistic testing that the pricing errors are jointly equal to zero. Average returns, α’s and λ’s are reported annualized and in percent. βGood , λGood and
     bGood refer to the good carries G1-G5, as shown in the first column.


                     avg. ret.    p-val                  α       p-val     βRX       p-val     βHMLFX       p-val      βGood      p-val       R2

                       2.33       (3/4)                0.21      (1/2)     1.12     (11/11)      -0.05      (8/8)                            81.1
           G1                                          0.06      (1/1)     1.11     (11/11)                            -0.01     (10/10)     78.3
           G2                                          0.06      (1/1)     1.11     (11/11)                            -0.01      (9/10)     75.9
           G3                                          0.06      (0/1)     1.12     (11/11)                            -0.01       (9/9)     77.3




41
           G4                                          0.01      (1/1)     1.11     (11/11)                             0.02       (8/9)     75.3
           G5                                          -0.01     (0/3)     1.11     (11/11)                             0.02       (7/7)     74.0
           G1                                          0.15      (0/1)     1.12     (11/11)      -0.06      (5/6)       0.08       (6/8)     83.0
           G2                                          0.16      (0/1)     1.12     (11/11)      -0.05      (8/8)       0.05     (10/10)     81.9
           G3                                          0.12      (0/1)     1.11     (11/11)      -0.06      (7/8)       0.07       (5/5)     82.2
           G4                                          0.15      (0/1)      1.1     (11/11)      -0.05      (8/8)       0.06       (5/6)     82.1
           G5                                          0.13      (0/0)     1.11     (11/11)      -0.05      (8/8)       0.03       (7/7)     81.6

                       λRX        p-val    λHMLFX      p-val    λGood     p-val       bRX        p-val     bHMLFX      p-val      bGood     p-val     χ2pr.err.

                       2.29       0.08       4.24      0.03                           4.03       0.18        4.75      0.06                            0.00
           G1          2.13       0.10                           2.09      0.02      3.43        0.24                            17.80       0.03      0.17
           G2          2.13       0.10                           2.90      0.03      3.08        0.30                            22.47       0.04      0.50
           G3          2.12       0.10                           2.91      0.02      1.70        0.59                            15.91       0.03      0.09
           G4          2.03       0.12                           4.29      0.01      -4.38       0.35                            24.98       0.02      0.22
           G5          1.99       0.13                           8.64      0.01      -8.54       0.13                            29.83       0.01      0.47
           G1          2.13       0.11       3.23      0.08      2.10      0.01      3.42        0.25       -0.08      0.98      18.03       0.03      0.27
           G2          2.17       0.10       3.68      0.05      2.46      0.05      3.24        0.27       1.11       0.71      18.10       0.12      0.27
           G3          2.11       0.11       3.29      0.07      3.03      0.01      1.49        0.64       -0.55      0.86      17.45       0.06      0.05
           G4          2.09       0.11       3.31      0.07      3.74      0.00      -2.85       0.50       1.31       0.60      20.26       0.02      0.24
           G5          2.13       0.10       3.88      0.04      6.18      0.01      -4.57       0.30       2.66       0.25      20.05       0.01      0.97
     Table 5
     Carry return predictability
     This table shows results from univariate predictive regressions for the log returns of the SC trade, the G1-G5 and B1-B5 trades, and the GC and BC
     trades as described in Table 3. The three predictors shown in the first row of the table have been found to predict carry trade returns in Bakshi and
     Panayotov (2013, Table 2) and Ready, Roussanov, and Ward (2017, Table 10), and are designed as in those studies (see also Section D). The table
     displays the in-sample estimates of the predictive slope coefficients β, two-sided p-values, based on the Hodrick (1992) 1B covariance matrix estimator,
     and adjusted R2 ’s (in percent). Next are shown one-sided p-values (denoted ”MS”) for the MSPE-adjusted statistic (Clark and West (2007), see also
     footnote 6), obtained with an expanding window with initial length of 120 months. The columns denoted ”∆ SR” report a measure of the economic
     significance of predictability, based on a prediction-based trading strategy, which enters into a carry trade at the end of month t only if the trade’s return
     predicted for month t + 1 is positive (if a negative return is predicted, the carry trade return for month t + 1 is zero). Specifically, the measure equals the
     difference between the Sharpe ratio of the prediction-based strategy, implemented with the respective subset of G-10 currencies, and the corresponding
     unconditional carry trade (using an expanding window with initial length of 120 months). For the GC and BC trades the table shows averages of the
     respective 18 predictive slope coefficients β, adjusted R2 ’s, and changes in Sharpe ratios. The first (second) number in parentheses shows how many of
     the 18 corresponding individual estimates are significant at the 5% (10%) confidence level. The sample period is 12/1984 to 6/2014.
                           Commodity returns                          Change in exchange rate volatility                           Change in BDI

                  β       p-val     R2     MS      ∆ SR           β        p-val     R2      MS        ∆ SR           β       p-val      R2      MS       ∆ SR




42
        SC      0.015     0.12     0.8    0.45     -0.04       -0.005      0.00      2.4     0.01      0.10        0.003       0.15     1.0      0.18      0.08

        G1     0.006      0.53     0.1    0.99     -0.04       -0.003      0.12      0.8     0.22      -0.04       0.003       0.16     0.9      0.21     0.10
        G2     0.013      0.19     0.5    0.85     -0.05       -0.003      0.21      0.6     0.30      0.00        0.002       0.39     0.3      0.79     0.00
        G3     0.008      0.50     0.1    0.82      0.01       -0.005      0.05      1.6     0.13      -0.05       0.005       0.02     2.3      0.02     0.09
        G4     0.012      0.52     0.3    0.88     -0.03       -0.006      0.04      1.9     0.21      -0.03       0.002       0.48     0.4      0.71     -0.01
        G5     -0.005     0.82     0.0    0.94      0.00       -0.003      0.35      0.4     0.60      0.03        -0.002      0.68     0.1      0.97     -0.05

        B1      0.069     0.01     3.3    0.02      0.29       -0.010      0.02      1.7     0.01      0.22        0.010       0.05     2.3      0.04     -0.14
        B2      0.043     0.04     2.3    0.06      0.15       -0.008      0.01      2.1     0.01      0.13        0.010       0.01     4.2      0.01     0.09
        B3      0.032     0.04     1.6    0.10     -0.02       -0.007      0.01      2.3     0.01      0.32        0.004       0.15     1.0      0.13     -0.15
        B4      0.040     0.03     2.5    0.06      0.12       -0.007      0.02      1.9     0.02      0.23        0.007       0.06     2.3      0.05     0.09
        B5      0.029     0.05     1.4    0.12     -0.01       -0.006      0.01      1.9     0.01      0.14        0.007       0.02     2.8      0.01     0.06

        GC      0.010      (0/3)   0.5    (0/0)    -0.04       -0.005    (11/14)     1.4    (3/5)      0.00        0.002      (2/3)     0.8     (2/3)     -0.02
        BC      0.033     (7/14)   1.7    (1/9)     0.03       -0.007    (15/17)     1.8   (17/18)     0.17        0.008     (12/14)    2.9    (12/15)    0.07
     Table 6
     Carry components in carry trade returns
     This table shows the average returns, and the components of these returns due to carry and exchange rate changes, for the standard (SC)
     trade, the good and bad carry trades G1 to G5 and B1 to B5, and the dollar carry trade (DC) of Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2014),
     which we consider in more detail in Section B. The respective values are shown annualized and in percent. Also shown are in curly brackets
     p-values from a test for equality of the respective average carry component to that of the SC and DC trades (Newey-West standard errors,
     with 12 lags).


                              SC        B1         B2         B3         B4         B5           G1          G2        G3        G4         G5          DC

       avg. total ret.       1.02       0.68      0.98       0.21       0.28       0.61          1.67        1.70      2.49     2.22       3.97         4.19
       avg. deprec.          -0.37     -2.02      -1.25      -1.58      -1.65      -1.28         0.26        0.50      0.78     1.01       2.76         3.27
       avg. carry            1.38       2.70      2.23       1.78       1.92       1.88          1.40        1.20      1.70     1.20       1.20         0.92
       carry to total ret.   1.36       3.98      2.27       8.46       6.96       3.08          0.84        0.70      0.68     0.54       0.30         0.22

       comparing carry components (p-values)




43
         to that of SC             {0.00}    {0.00}          {0.00}    {0.00}     {0.00}       {0.63}       {0.08}    {0.00}   {0.04}     {0.32}       {0.01}
         to that of DC             {0.00}    {0.00}          {0.00}    {0.00}     {0.00}       {0.01}       {0.04}    {0.00}   {0.04}     {0.01}



     Table 7
     Unbiasedness hypothesis regressions for pairs of prototypical carry trade currencies
     For each of the six currency pairs NZD/CHF, AUD/CHF, NOK/CHF, NZD/JPY, AUD/JPY and NOK/JPY monthly log changes in spot rates
     are regressed against the corresponding forward differentials (all mid-quotes): ln(St+1 /St ) = α + β ln(Ft /St ) + εt+1 . Estimates of α and β
     are shown, together with two-sided p-values, based on the Hodrick (1992) 1B covariance matrix estimator, for the null hypotheses α = 0
     and β = 1. The sample period is 12/1984 - 6/2014, and the data source is Barclays Bank, via Datastream.


                                                            CHF                                             JPY

                                             α       p-val        β     p-val              α        p-val         β    p-val

                             NZD         0.001       0.74      0.46     0.31             0.003      0.45      0.63     0.49
                             AUD         -0.002      0.58      0.15     0.30             0.002      0.57      0.92     0.92
                             NOK         -0.001      0.72      0.43     0.17             0.007      0.03      2.22     0.10
Table 8
Dynamic nature of carry trades
The table characterizes the dynamic behavior of the the standard carry trade (SC), the G1 to G5 and B1
to B5 trades, and, in the last row, the dollar carry trade (DC) of Lustig et al. (2014), which we consider
in more detail in Section B. The first column of the table shows, for each trade, the time-series average
of the proportion of currencies that change (switch) position, from long to short or vice versa, at each
point of time. The average proportion is given in percent. The next two columns show bootstrapped 95%
confidence intervals for these average proportions. The column denoted ”days w/o switch” shows the
proportion of dates in the sample when not a single currency changed position from short to long or vice
versa. Next the table shows the correlation between the proportions for the G1 to G5 and B1 to B5 trades,
and those for standard carry (SC). The last three columns aim to compare static and dynamic versions
of our various trades. Static trades have been defined in Hassan and Mano (2015), and, to keep close to
their setup, we use as weights the average forward differentials of the respective currencies over 12/1984-
12/1994, demeaned and normalized to have absolute values that sum to one. These weights are kept fixed
for the rest of the sample period for the static trades, without ever re-balancing. Dynamic trades are the
usual (dynamically re-balanced) trades, as considered throughout this paper, but with weights again equal
to the cross-sectionally demeaned forward differentials, normalized to have absolute values that sum to
one. Shown are the ratios between the average returns of the respective static and dynamic carry trade, and
the corresponding Sharpe ratios. Average returns and Sharpe ratios are calculated for the period 12/1994
to 6/2014.



         switch (%)     95% conf. int.     days w/o        correl.       ratio of static to    Sharpe ratios:
                                            switch         with SC      dynamic avg. ret.     dynamic static

 SC         8.22        [5.72    11.05]      0.68                              0.45            0.41      0.21

 G1         12.75       [9.27    16.47]      0.66           0.82              0.23             0.51      0.14
 G2         12.97       [9.35    16.88]      0.73           0.75              -0.23            0.34      -0.10
 G3         11.90       [8.73    15.18]      0.75           0.59              0.24             0.55      0.14
 G4         17.22      [13.20    21.25]      0.63           0.63              0.28             0.50      0.13
 G5         16.34      [11.99    20.96]      0.78           0.49              -0.01            0.69      -0.01

 B1          9.82       [5.67    14.64]      0.86           0.53               1.07            0.21      0.23
 B2          9.97       [6.35    13.94]      0.78           0.56               1.16            0.22      0.29
 B3         12.18       [8.44    16.60]      0.73           0.59               0.75            0.25      0.22
 B4         10.14       [7.25    13.20]      0.78           0.50               0.61            0.24      0.16
 B5         10.12       [6.92    13.60]      0.71           0.65               0.82            0.27      0.24

 DC         6.80        [3.40    11.05]      0.93           0.47




                                                      44
     Table 9
     Correlations and spanning
     Panel A shows return correlations between SC and DC and the G1 to G5 and B1 to B5 carry trades. In Panel B, ”Good” refers to the good
     carries G1-G5 shown in the first column, the LHS variable is that for which no regression coefficient is reported on the respective row.
     Intercepts are reported annualized and in percent.

              A. Correlations
                                         DC       G1       G2      G3       G4      G5        B1       B2      B3      B4       B5

              SC                        0.40      0.87    0.63     0.77    0.62     0.41     0.72     0.84     0.84    0.78    0.88
              DC                                  0.41    0.42     0.48    0.61     0.68     0.17     0.15     0.15    0.07    0.09


              B. Return regressions
                                       interc.    p-val    βSC    p-val    βDC     p-val    βGood     p-val    R2

              G1                        -0.50     0.10                     0.03     0.05     0.85     0.00     0.75




45
              G2                        -0.20     0.67                     0.07     0.00     0.54     0.00     0.42
              G3                        -0.56     0.16                     0.02     0.36     0.61     0.00     0.59
              G4                        -0.03     0.94                     0.01     0.56     0.45     0.00     0.37
              G5                        0.02      0.97                     0.10     0.00     0.14     0.00     0.18


              G1                        2.91      0.02    0.42     0.05                      0.51     0.01     0.16
              G2                        2.71      0.02    0.47     0.00                      0.59     0.00     0.20
              G3                        2.18      0.07    0.15     0.36                      0.75     0.00     0.22
              G4                        1.97      0.06    0.07     0.56                      0.97     0.00     0.37
              G5                        0.74      0.44    0.31     0.00                      0.79     0.00     0.48


              G1                        0.69      0.03    0.84     0.00    0.03     0.02                       0.75
              G2                        0.70      0.15    0.58     0.00    0.10     0.00                       0.43
              G3                        1.13      0.02    0.86     0.00    0.12     0.00                       0.63
              G4                        0.50      0.37    0.59     0.00    0.27     0.00                       0.53
              G5                        1.63      0.03    0.27     0.00    0.49     0.00                       0.48
     Table 10
     Dollar carry vs. good carry trades as currency market pricing factors
     This table differs from Table 4 only in one aspect: instead of the RX and HMLFX factors, we now use the dollar carry factor (denoted
     ”DC”), as in Lustig et al. (2014) and Hassan and Mano (2015), calculated for the G-10 currencies. The test assets are again the 11 interest
     rate-sorted portfolios as in Lustig et al. (2011). ”Good” refers to the good carries G1-G5.


                                 avg. ret.   p-val              α      p-val    βDC      p-val     βGood      p-val      R2

                                   2.33      (3/4)            -0.04    (0/0)    0.56    (11/11)                          21.2
                        G1                                     1.88    (0/0)                       0.26       (9/9)       5.3
                        G2                                     1.89    (0/2)                       0.25       (7/7)       3.1
                        G3                                     1.02    (0/0)                       0.52       (7/7)       8.6
                        G4                                     0.26    (0/0)                       0.93      (11/11)     21.9
                        G5                                    -0.41    (0/0)                       0.67      (11/11)     18.8
                        G1                                     0.21    (0/0)    0.55    (11/11)    -0.27      (7/7)      26.8
                        G2                                     0.23    (0/0)    0.56    (11/11)    -0.29      (5/6)      24.5




46
                        G3                                    -0.12    (0/0)    0.49    (11/11)    0.06       (7/8)      24.7
                        G4                                    -0.43    (0/0)    0.31     (8/9)     0.58      (10/10)     27.2
                        G5                                    -0.67    (0/0)    0.34    (10/11)    0.34       (7/9)      23.8

                                   λDC       p-val    λGC     p-val    bDC     p-val     bGood     p-val     χ2pr.err.

                                   0.45      0.07                       8.3     0.07                          0.03
                        G1                            0.32    0.01                        28.4      0.01      0.99
                        G2                            0.46    0.03                        37.0      0.02      0.32
                        G3                            0.35    0.04                        21.6      0.02      0.13
                        G4                            0.27    0.07                        13.7      0.06      0.14
                        G5                            0.37    0.07                        11.1      0.06      0.95
                        G1         4.85      0.05     2.27    0.01     6.3      0.21      14.5      0.09      0.77
                        G2         5.19      0.04     2.93    0.02     5.8      0.27      18.1      0.10      0.99
                        G3         4.04      0.12     2.95    0.01     3.7      0.52      13.6      0.09      0.15
                        G4         1.15      0.75     3.49    0.01     -6.8     0.53      24.5      0.10      1.00
                        G5         3.12      0.31     3.88    0.13     -3.4     0.81      15.5      0.37      0.16
                Figure 1: Good and bad carry trades from sets of five G-10 currencies
Large black dots plot skewness versus Sharpe ratio of all possible 21 carry trades constructed from five G-
10 currencies, which include the AUD, CHF and JPY, together with any possible pair from the remaining
seven currencies. Circles with no fill plot similarly skewness versus Sharpe ratio for the complementary
trades, each including the five currencies left out of one of the previous 21 trades. For each trade, curren-
cies are sorted on their forward differentials (against the USD) at the end of each month over the period
12/1984 to 6/2014, and the two currencies with highest differentials are held long over the next month,
while the two with the lowest premiums are shorted, all with equal weights. A vertical and horizontal
lines indicate the Sharpe ratio and return skewness of the standard carry trade (denoted SC), constructed
with all G-10 currencies. Percentage carry trade returns are calculated with spot and forward quotes from
Barclays Bank, available via Datastream, and with transaction costs taken into account.




                              0.2




                               0




                             −0.2



                                                      SC


                             −0.4
                  skewness




                             −0.6




                             −0.8




                              −1




                             −1.2
                               −0.1   0   0.1   0.2         0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6    0.7
                                                 Sharpe ratio




                                                           47
         Figure 2: Sharpe ratios versus skewness for the GC and BC sets of 18 carry trades

Circles with no fill plot skewness versus Sharpe ratio for 18 carry trades, each constructed from five of the
G-10 currencies, with equal weights. Each of these trades uses the three currencies (GBP, SEK and USD)
which are least often excluded by the enhancement rule in Section A and Table 2. These three currencies
are combined with any possible pair of the remaining G-10 currencies, which contains none or only one
of the three most often excluded currencies (AUD, NOK and JPY). Large black dots plot similarly the
skewness versus Sharpe ratio for the complementary carry trades, which use the five currencies left out
of one of the previous 18 trades. These two sets of 18 trades are denoted in Section D and Table 3 and
others as GC and BC. Shown also is the standard carry trade (SC), denoted by a star. The sample period
is 12/1984 to 6/2014.




                                0




                              −0.2




                              −0.4
                   skewness




                              −0.6




                              −0.8




                               −1




                                     0   0.1   0.2   0.3        0.4   0.5   0.6      0.7
                                                      Sharpe ratio




                                                           48
                                                 Figure 3: Decomposing carry trade returns
For all trades considered in this paper (18 GC trades, 18 BC trades, as well as G1 and G5, and B1 and
B5) the figure plots total average returns (horizontal axis) versus the ratios of average carry to total return
(vertical axis). As previously, white (black) dots correspond to good (bad) trades. For visual clarity,
four outlier points (all referring to bad carry trades) are not shown on this plot, but their coordinates
are displayed in the top left corner. Also plotted are the standard and dollar carry trades (SC and DC).
Horizontal lines correspond to carry-to-return ratio of one (all average return comes from carry alone),
and one half (return comes equally from carry and exchange rate changes).




                                  5
                                                        (0.05,    28.94
                                                         0.21,    8.46
                                                         0.20,    7.02
                                                          0.27,    6.96)
                                 4.5




                                  4




                                 3.5




                                  3
         carry to return ratio




                                                                                                          G1, G5 and GC
                                 2.5                                                                      B1, B5 and BC
                                                                                                          Standard carry
                                                                                                          Dollar carry


                                  2




                                 1.5




                                  1




                                 0.5




                                  0

                                       0   0.5      1             1.5           2       2.5     3   3.5          4
                                                                           carry trade return


                                                                              49
Good Carry, Bad Carry




Online Appendix: Not for Publication
OA-I          Symmetry and numeraire neutrality of currency trades
    This Appendix explains in detail the distinction between several designs of carry trades. Start with

a set of N currencies, e.g. the G-10 currencies in our case. A currency trading strategy is a mapping

between signals at time t and currency positions taken at this time, whereby positions are defined in terms

of the weights of individual currencies. A trading strategy is formulated relative to a benchmark currency,

i.e. positions are taken relative to a certain currency in the forward market. From this perspective, two

properties seem important:


   1. Symmetry: the number of short and long positions and their total weights are equal. A stronger

       version of symmetry would also require equal weights of the individual short or long positions.1


   2. Numeraire independence: the positions taken in the various currencies are the same, regardless of

       which benchmark currency is considered. As a result, only one currency strategy must be defined

       for the world at large.


Symmetry and numeraire independence are well-established features of carry trades, and have been both

adopted by recent academic studies, and implemented in investable products (see Table 1). Together, these

properties imply that the trade’s returns will be very similar from any currency perspective. This invariance

follows from the fact that the translation of returns from one currency to another simply introduces cross-

currency risk on currency returns, which is a second order effect. Conversely, if the ranking of a currency

or the signal depends in any way on the identity of the benchmark currency, then defining the same strategy

from another currency perspective will yield different currency positions and different currency weights,

and this can result in quite different returns. A well-known example is the asymmetric carry strategy in

Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2011), which has been shown in Daniel, Hodrick, and

   1 However,  if weights are defined relative to a benchmark currency (e.g., based on forward differentials), they may differ on
the long and short end, creating weight asymmetry. This would cause the trade to be numeraire-dependent.

                                                               1
Lu (2017) to produce very different (and worse) returns from other, non-USD currency perspectives. In

fact, the USD-based version of this strategy is successful (at least partly) due to is its implicit exposure to

a dollar-centric currency strategy, the ”dollar carry” trade of Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2014).2

      We now formally show that symmetric, numeraire-independent strategies have largely equivalent re-

turns across the world. Suppose first that the USD is the benchmark currency and define the weight of

currency i as wi . Spot and forward exchange rates are quoted here as USD per one unit of a foreign cur-

rency (reversing the notation from Section II above), and denoted as Sti and Fti . The return of a US-based

currency trading strategy over the interval t to t + 1 is:

                                                         N
                                                 USD          i
(OA-1)                                          rt+1 = ∑ wi [St+1 /Fti − 1].
                                                         i=1

If the strategy is numeraire independent, the weights wi are identical for all currency perspectives. For

example, if the trading strategy is based on interest rate signals, these signals should be independent of the

benchmark currency.
                                                                                                                         i
      Defining such a strategy relative, say, to the Japanese yen, with yen exchange rates denoted by St and
  i
F t (JPY per one unit of currency i), its return (in yen) is:

                                          N                          N                   N
                                 JPY               i      i                 i       i
(OA-2)                          rt+1 = ∑ wi [St+1 /F t − 1] = ∑ wi St+1 /F t − ∑ wi
                                          i=1                        i=1                i=1

With symmetric strategies the weights sum to zero, hence the last term cancels, and we are left with

 JPY = N w S       i      i
rt+1  ∑i=1 i t+1 /F t . By triangular arbitrage and symmetry, we can further derive:

                                                   N
                            JPY     USD                        USD   USD      USD
(OA-3)                     rt+1 = [rt+1 + ∑ wi ] ∗ St+1 /F t               = rt+1 ∗ FtJPY /St+1
                                                                                            JPY
                                                                                                .
                                                  i=1

      2 The
          dollar carry weights are 1/(N-1) and are all either positive or negative depending on the average interest rate of the
USD relative to other currencies. The weight on the USD itself is zero. The strategy is thus very asymmetric and yields entirely
different results for other currency perspectives. That is, a ”British pound carry” or ”Swiss franc carry” need not be anything
like dollar carry. Of course, dollar-centric strategies are of interest because of the importance of the dollar in international
finance.



                                                                2
Cross-currency risk could drive, in principle, a wedge between the two currency perspectives, but in

practice the returns and their properties will be rather similar (barring significant differences in transaction

costs), because the forward to spot ratio in (OA-3) is close to one, and applies to returns. We have verified

that standard carry strategies (as per our definition in Section II) yield very similar returns from any

currency perspective.

   It is instructive to repeat the previous calculation, but for log returns. In this case:
                                                                                     USD
                                                                                           !
                                    N                 N                    i
                                                                          St+1
                         JPY
                                         
                                           i      i
                                                                              St+1
                        rt+1   = ∑ wi log St+1 /F t = ∑ wi log               i
                                   i=1                      i=1            Ft F USD
                                                                                t
                                    N                      N
                                             i                          USD    USD
                               =   ∑ wi log(St+1 /Fti ) + ∑ wi log(St+1 /F t         )
                                   i=1                     i=1
                                    N                                          N
                                             i                    USD   USD
                               =   ∑ wi log(St+1 /Fti ) + log(St+1 /F t       ) ∑ wi
                                   i=1                                         i=1
                                    N
                                             i
(OA-4)                         =   ∑ wi log(St+1 /Fti ) + 0 = rt+1
                                                               USD
                                                                   ,
                                   i=1

and therefore the log returns of symmetric, numeraire-independent trades are identical from any perspec-

tive; the differences between their percentage returns from different perspectives are of second order.

   In sum, a symmetric carry trade, for any benchmark currency has similar returns for investors across

the world. However, symmetry is not a sufficient condition for numeraire independence. It is important to

emphasize this point, because a number of recent articles have considered ”currency-neutral” symmetric

strategies, where no position is taken with respect the benchmark currency itself, or in other words, the

weight assigned to the benchmark currency is always zero (this is implicitly true also for dollar carry).

Let’s examine, following Daniel, Hodrick, and Lu (2017), a ”dollar-neutral” carry trade with weights

wi = 1/(N − 1) if the interest rate of currency i is in top half of the interest rates of the given set of

currencies, and wi = −1/(N − 1) otherwise (if N-1 is odd, the currency with the median interest rate is left

out of the trade). This strategy is clearly symmetric. However, it is not numeraire independent because if



                                                       3
we define it relative to another benchmark currency, say the yen, the weight function of this ”yen-neutral”

trade will change, with now non-zero weights on the USD and zero weights on the JPY. Therefore, such

”currency-neutral” trades will produce different returns for different benchmark currencies, going beyond

the differences induced by cross-currency risk.

   We recognize that some numeraire-dependent strategies are of obvious interest, but care must be taken

to define them in an international context. For example, the HML factor, introduced by Lustig, Roussanov,

and Verdelhan (2011, 2014) is a carry trade which is symmetric, but not numeraire-independent as it goes

long (short) an extreme portfolio based on an interest rate ranking (as the DB strategy does), but excludes

the USD from any portfolio. This dollar neutrality makes the trade numeraire-dependent. Of course,

when such a trade is defined for benchmark currencies with non-extreme interest rates, it should often

yield similar returns across the different country perspectives.

   Our preference for using symmetric, numeraire-independent carry trades is consistent with the best

known investable indices, such as the Deutsche Bank (DB) Harvest Indexes. The DB strategy goes long

(short) the G-10 currencies with the three highest (lowest) interest rates. Importantly, when the USD

interest rate is among the top or bottom three, part of the trade automatically gets a zero return, because a

position in the benchmark currency itself is taken, and hence the trade is not dollar-neutral. However, it is

symmetric and numeraire-independent, which is an advantage for a global currency trading strategy, and

may also be an advantage for a global risk pricing factor. In the trades that we consider, all participating

currencies are given a non-zero weight, including the benchmark currency, which by design yields a zero

return, whether it is held long or short.

   Another way to see the fundamental difference between asymmetric, numeraire-dependent trades on

the one hand, and numeraire-independent strategies on the other is to examine what would happen if, say, a

yen-based investor would try to mimic, for example, dollar carry by taking exactly the same positions, but


                                                     4
relative to the yen. That is, she will go long or short in all the currencies (including the yen) as dollar carry

does, thus keeping the same weight function as in the original dollar trade, but for a different benchmark

currency. This strategy would yield quite different returns as it would face full cross-currency risk, and

not just profit and loss currency risk.

                                JPY = [rUSD + N w ] ∗ S          USD    USD
   With the previous notation: rt+1     t+1  ∑i=1 i    t+1 /F t               − ∑N
                                                                                 i=1 wi . Since for dollar carry

these weights add up to one, and not zero as in a symmetric trade, the yen-based return is now:

                 JPY     USD           USD    USD          USD JPY  JPY
(OA-5)          rt+1 = [rt+1 + 1] ∗ St+1 /F t       − 1 = rt+1 Ft /St+1 + [FtJPY /St+1
                                                                                   JPY
                                                                                       − 1],


which, compared to the expression in (OA-3), adds a second return term that can well be of similar or

even larger magnitude than the first term.



OA-II        Tests for differences in Sharpe ratios and return skewness
   Sharpe ratios

   The statistical significance of the differences between the Sharpe ratio or skewness of the SC trade

and those of trades from subsets is evaluated using bootstrap tests that follow Ledoit and Wolf (2008) or

Annaert, Van Osselaer, and Verstraete (2009). Skewness difference can be tested in a ”direct” bootstrap

that resamples from a distribution which respects the null hypothesis of no difference. In the case of

Sharpe ratios, their difference does not easily admit such a distribution, hence the approach followed is

”indirect” and resamples from the observed data. A version of this approach to comparing Sharpe ratios

has been applied recently, among others, in DeMiguel, Nogales, and Uppal (2014).

   In implementing the test for a difference between Sharpe ratios, we depart in two minor ways from

Ledoit and Wolf (2008). First, we only consider the i.i.d. case (their Section 3.2.1). We have verified

that our carry trade return series have insignificant autocorrelations for lags up to 10. Furthermore, the

suggested block size selection procedure (their Algorithm 3.1) results consistently in a selected block

                                                        5
length of one, when using our data. Second, we consider one-sided bootstrap confidence intervals and

p-values, since our null hypothesis is that carry trades obtained with the enhancement rule do not improve

on the Sharpe ratio of the SC trade. We modify accordingly their equation (7).

    Following the notation in Ledoit and Wolf (2008), let b
                                                          µS and b
                                                                 µB denote the sample average returns of

a carry trade from some subset of the G-10 currencies and the SC trade, respectively, while bγS and bγB are

the sample second moments (uncentered) of the returns of these trades. Let also vb = (b
                                                                                      µS ,b
                                                                                          µB , bγS , bγB ), and
              √          d
assume that       v − v) → (0, Ψ), where v is the population counterpart, T is sample length and Ψ is some
               T (b

symmetric positive-definite matrix. The latter assumption holds under mild conditions. For the sample

difference ∆
           b between the Sharpe ratios of the carry trade from a subset of the G-10 currencies and the SC

trade, and the deviation of this sample difference from the population value ∆, one can write

                               µS          µB                             √              d
                                     −                                            b − ∆) → (0, ∇0 f (v)Ψ∇ f (v)),
                b = f (b       b           b
(OA-6)          ∆      v) =        2           2
                                                            and              T (∆
                           bγS − bµS bγB − b  µB
                                                                                 
       0                         c           d               a             b
where ∇ f ((a, b, c, d)) = (c−a2 )1.5 , − (d−b2 )1.5 , − 2(c−a2 )1.5 , 2(d−b2 )1.5 and (a, b, c, d) represent the ele-

ments in vb. If Ψ
                b is a consistent estimator of Ψ, then the standard error of ∆
                                                                             b is given by
                                                  s
                                                      0 v)Ψ∇
                                            b = ∇ f (b
                                                            b f (bv)
(OA-7)                                    s(∆)                       .
                                                            T

    To test the null hypothesis ∆ ≤ 0, we bootstrap the returns of the two carry trades that are compared,
                                                        ∗
and consider the studentized random variable L = ∆s(∆−∗∆) , where ∆∗ is a difference in Sharpe ratios computed
                                                            b



with bootstrapped returns, and s(∆∗ ) is the corresponding standard error. Even though we bootstrap ”under

the alternative”, this procedure generates meaningful sampling variation under the null of no difference

between Sharpe ratios. Given the lack of autocorrelation in the carry trade return series, as noted above,

we use an i.i.d. bootstrap (5000 samples, with replacement and pairwise, to preserve a possible cross-

sectional correlation between the returns of the two carry trades). A p-value for the null is calculated as




                                                            6
the proportion of bootstrapped series for which:

                                                      ∗
                                            b + ∆ − ∆ s(∆)
                                                b
(OA-8)                                b−L = ∆
                                      ∆                 b ≤ 0,
                                                s(∆∗ )

similar to equation (7) in Ledoit and Wolf (2008). These p-values are reported in Tables 2 and 3.


   Skewness

   To test for a difference in skewness, Annaert, Van Osselaer, and Verstraete (2009, page 277) first ”sym-

metrize” the compared return series, by appending to them the mirror images of the original observations

in terms of distance to the average return. The skewness (as well as any odd central moment) of these

modified returns is thus zero, and a bootstrap that resamples from them conforms to the null of no differ-

ence in skewness. Given that autocorrelation does not seem to be an issue in our series, we draw pairwise

from the modified series of the compared returns, and compute the p-value as the percentage of draws that

yield higher improvement on the benchmark skewness than that observed in the data. All bootstraps are

performed with 5000 draws.



OA-III        Differences in Sharpe ratios - accommodating the selection
   The enhancement procedure described in Section III introduces a possible selection bias, which is not

accounted for by the bootstrap-based test described above, following Ledoit and Wolf (2008). To address

this issue, we suggest an alternative approach, and instead of bootstrapping the actual carry returns, we

adopt the following randomization procedure:

   • at the end of month t keep the interest rate differentials as in the data, but assign to each of them at

      random any of the ten returns for the following month t + 1.


   • to each of these ten returns for month t + 1 add the same constant ct+1 . We call the returns obtained

      in this way ”randomized” returns.

                                                     7
   • the constant ct+1 can be positive or negative, and is chosen so that a carry trade that uses all ten

      ”randomized” returns would have exactly the same return as the actual SC trade for month t + 1.

      Such a carry trade would choose the currencies to be long or short exactly as the SC trade, based on

      sorting the same interest rate differentials.


   • do this for all months in the sample, and repeat 1000 times, to obtain 1000 sets of ten ”random-

      ized” return series, that correspond to the actual interest rate differentials. Given the large number

      permutations of ten numbers, we do not bootstrap in addition the interest rate differentials.


   • note that the constants ct+1 are different for different months, and that each ”randomized” return

      corresponding to a particular interest rate differential is potentially very different from the actual

      one. This approach may associate, for example, the JPY returns predominantly with the highest

      interest rates in some randomization trials. However, the returns for each month, and hence the

      Sharpe ratios of the carry trades with ten currencies (all 1000 with ”randomized” returns and the

      actual SC trade) are exactly the same.


   • on each of the 1000 sets of 10 time series reproduce the enhancement procedure described in Section

      B. Based on the order of exclusion obtained from this procedure, identify for each of the 1000 sets

      the currencies that would enter ”good” and ”bad” carry trades.


   • in the full sample period construct trades with the least excluded three, five or seven currencies,

      corresponding to our G1-G5 trades, and similarly with the most often excluded three, five or seven

      currencies, corresponding to our B1-B5 trades.


   For each of 1000 sets of 10 series of randomized carry trade returns, ∆∗ denotes the difference between

the annualized Sharpe ratio of a good carry trade (from three, five or seven currencies), constructed from

this set following the enhancement procedure, and the SC trade or the corresponding bad trade. As in

                                                      8
Appendix OA-II, ∆
                b denotes the sample difference between the annualized Sharpe ratio of a good carry

trade and the SC trade or the corresponding bad trade. We now show ∆
                                                                   b for each good carry trade, the

average of the 1000 ∆∗ ’s for trades from as many currencies as the good trade on the same line, and the

proportion of such ∆∗ ’s exceeding ∆.
                                   b


                                      Good trades vs. SC                 Good vs. bad trades

                                  ∆
                                  b     avg. ∆∗   % ∆∗ > ∆
                                                         b           ∆
                                                                     b      avg. ∆∗   % ∆∗ > ∆
                                                                                             b

             G1                 0.20     0.14        0.21           0.42     0.42       0.50

             G2                 0.18     0.16        0.43           0.31     0.41       0.71

             G3                 0.30     0.16        0.09           0.57     0.41       0.19

             G4                 0.20     0.16        0.37           0.45     0.41       0.41

             G5                 0.39     0.14        0.02           0.56     0.32       0.05

   There is substantial bias in the comparison between the G1-G5 carry trades with the SC trade, with

the selection procedure adding 14% (for G1 and G5) or 16% (for G2 to G4) to the annualized Sharpe

ratio. Yet, in every case the observed increases in the Sharpe ratio (denoted by ∆)
                                                                                 b are even higher, and for

two out of the five good trades the observed Sharpe ratio is in the 10% right tail of the distribution of the

Sharpe ratios obtained under the selection procedure using the randomized (scrambled) currency returns.

When comparing the G1-G5 carry trades to the corresponding B1-B5 trades, the bias is relatively more

important, and in fact at least as large as the observed difference in Sharpe ratios for the G1 and G2 trades.

Only the G5 versus B5 comparison yields a Sharpe ratio of a good trade in the right tail (5.3%) of the

corresponding distribution under scrambled currency returns.

   Of course, these observations alone do not constitute a proper test, since the randomization procedure

also can change the variability of the returns, and proper testing requires the use of a pivotal test statis-

tic, such as a t-statistic. To create a proper test statistic, we modify the procedure in Ledoit and Wolf


                                                      9
(2008) by bias-correcting our sample Sharpe ratios, and using t-statistics from the empirical distribution

as in Appendix OA-II. The results, which also reproduce the relevant portion from Table 3, to facilitate

comparison are as follows:


                        Good trades vs. SC                                    Good vs. bad trades

               av.ret   std.   SR     bstrp.   rand.                 av.ret   std.   SR     bstrp.   rand.

 SC            1.02     3.30   0.31

 G1            1.67     3.29   0.51   0.02     0.18            B1    0.68     7.50   0.09   [0.01]   [0.50]

 G2            1.70     3.47   0.49   0.13     0.44            B2    0.98     5.54   0.18   [0.07]   [0.72]

 G3            2.49     4.09   0.61   0.01     0.06            B3    0.21     4.91   0.04   [0.01]   [0.16]

 G4            2.22     4.39   0.51   0.12     0.39            B4    0.28     4.96   0.06   [0.02]   [0.42]

 G5            3.97     5.71   0.69   0.03     0.04            B5    0.61     4.66   0.13   [0.01]   [0.09]

   Let’s first focus on the G1 trade. The t-statistic for its Sharpe ratio (0.51) being different from the

benchmark Sharpe ratio (0.31) has a p-value of 0.02. When we do the test using the randomized samples,

correcting for selection bias, the p-value increases to 0.18, and the difference is no longer statistically

significant. The p-values invariably increase for all carry trades, but remain significant at the 5% level

for G5, and at the 10% level for G3. For the good vs. bad carry trade comparison, the p-values increase

dramatically and only the G5 trade has a significantly higher Sharpe ratio than B5 (at the 10% level).



OA-IV         Factor models explaining good and bad carry trades
   Tables OA-2 to OA-4 present the results separately for the standard carry trade (SC), the G1-G5 and

B1-B5 trades, and the GC and BC trades on average. The first column in Table OA-2 also shows the

respective average returns that are to be explained. For the G1-G5 trades these range between 1.7 and 4%

(annualized), and are all significantly different from zero at the 1% confidence level (with GMM standard


                                                       10
errors); for the GC trades they are on average 2%, and all but two out of 18 are significant at the 5% level.

In contrast, the average returns for the bad carry trades never exceed 1%, and are never significant, even

at the 10% level.

   A. Model with equity volatility

   The market factor (denoted MKT) in the model is proxied by the total return of the MSCI-World equity

index, in excess of the risk-free rate and expressed in USD. The equity volatility factor (EqVol) reflects

innovations in global equity volatilities, as constructed in Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011), and

is taken from Verdelhan’s website (data until 12/2013). The interaction term (product of MKT and EqVol)

is denoted ”prod”, and exhibits highly negative skewness (-7.6).

   The top panel of Table OA-2 reports results from time-series regressions of carry trade returns on

the three risk factors. The market betas are significant for both good and bad trades, and of comparable

magnitudes. However, the slope coefficient estimates on the product factor are typically negative, albeit

rarely significant for good trades, while they are positive, mostly much larger in magnitude, and almost

always significant at the 5% significance level for the bad trades. The F-test for no difference between

the average slope coefficients across the GC and BC trades rejects only for β prod . Given the high negative

skewness of the product factor, the large positive value of β prod implies that the market risk exposure of

the bad trades increases substantially in highly volatile times, helping to explain the negative skewness of

the bad trades as shown in Table 3.

   From the perspective of a time-varying market beta, the large β prod implies, for example, that the

effective market beta for bad carry trades ranges between 0.025 and 0.083 for the 10-th and 90-th percentile

observations of EqVol (which are -0.67 and 0.59, respectively). This regime dependence is much weaker

for good carry trades, due to their smaller β prod estimates. The SC trade resembles the bad trades in this

respect, with a β prod that is positive and marginally significant (at the 10% level). Given that increases in


                                                     11
volatility tend to characterize periods of market downturns (the correlation between MKT and EqVol is

-0.24 in our sample), our findings attribute the under-performance in times of crisis mostly to bad carry

trades, while good trades are less affected.

   The alpha’s obtained in the time-series regressions are difficult to interpret in the presence of non-

traded factors. Therefore, we also perform GMM-based cross-sectional tests on the GC and BC return

cross sections, and show the results in the last two rows of the table. For the GC trades, the risk price for

the MKT factor is significant at the 5% level, while for the BC trades no risk price is significant. However,

the joint test does not reject for either of the two cross sections, delivering large p-values.

   For further clarification, Panels A and B in Figure 4 plot model-predicted vs. actual average returns for

the GC and BC trades, where we see practically no relation for the BC trades, but a much better fit for the

GC trades, albeit with a few outliers. When we run a simple OLS regression of actual average returns on

a constant and the model-based expected returns, we obtain an R2 of 0.67 for the GC trades, and 0.29 for

the BC trades. The combined evidence suggests that this three-factor model does not adequately describe

the returns of the bad carry trades, but still saliently reveals the high exposure of these trades to the equity

market during high-volatility periods. In contrast, a significant price of risk for the market factor and

Figure 4 show the promise of the model to provide a risk-based interpretation of good carry trades.


   B. Model with Up and Down equity market factors

   Our interest in such a model is motivated both by the asymmetric patterns in carry trade returns docu-

mented above, and the recent work of Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2015), who find support for a similar

model pricing the joint cross section of several asset classes, including the returns of interest-rate-sorted

currency portfolios. Note that their model employs the market factor itself, together with a separate down-

market factor, whereas we use uncorrelated down- and up-market factors, which help sharpen the focus

on the asymmetric return behavior across good and bad carry trades (see also Ang, Chen, and Xing (2006,

                                                      12
Table 2)). Keeping the notation MKT for the total return of the MSCI-World equity index, in excess of

the risk-free rate and expressed in USD, the Down factor is taken to be min(MKT, 0), and the Up factor is

max(MKT, 0).

   Table OA-3 shows that in the time-series regressions the slope coefficient estimates on the Down factor

are not statistically significant for about 70% of the good carry trades, but are significant for all but one

of the bad carry trades. The pattern is reversed for the Up factor, where the estimates are significant for

most of the good trades, but are in fact never significant for the bad trades, even at the 10% confidence

level. The magnitudes of the respective slope coefficients for good versus bad trades also differ largely, by

a factor of three or four, and these differences are highly significant, as evidenced by the reported p-values

from GMM tests for the equality of the average βDown or βU p across the 18 GC and BC trades. Additional

joint tests for pairwise equality between the corresponding coefficients for the GC and BC trades reject

with even smaller p-values. As above, the SC trade exhibits mixed features, with both slope coefficients

being significant.

   The cross-sectional test results resemble those from Table OA-2, in that both risk prices λDown and λU p

are statistically significant for good trades, and highly insignificant for bad trades, while the tests for the

pricing errors being jointly equal to zero fail to reject, with high p-values. Moreover, the plots of model-

based versus actual average returns, similar to those in Figure 4) again reveal a reasonable fit for good

trades, but no apparent relation for bad trades, indicating that the model with down- and up-market factors

more adequately describes the returns of good carry trades. The important additional insight from this

model, however, is the striking dichotomy between the returns of good carry trades, which have relatively

high Up-market betas but decouple in bad times, and the returns of bad carry trades, which have relatively

high Down-market betas.


   C. Fama-French three-factor model

                                                      13
   Similar to Table OA-2 and in the same format, Table OA-4 illustrates the ability of the Fama-French

three-factor model to explain the returns of good and bad carry trades, and the main finding is that the

model does not perform well with respect to good carry trades.

   The top panel of this table refers to time-series tests, and shows that the betas on the market factor

are economically small for these trades (0.05 on average), albeit often significant, while those on the

other two factors typically are not significantly different from zero. The adjusted R2 ’s in the time-series

regressions are relatively low, even sometimes negative, whereas the alphas are only about 5 to 30% lower

than the unconditional average carry trade returns, and still statistically significant for all G1-G5 trades

and 14 of the GC trades. On the other hand, for bad carry trades the betas on all three factors are higher and

statistically significant in most cases, and the R2 ’s are on average 0.12. A test for no difference between the

average slope coefficients across the 18 GC and BC trades rejects for βMKT and βSMB , at the 5% confidence

level. Interestingly, the model renders all alphas much lower than the respective average returns for the

bad carry trades, so that these trades can be qualified as ”negative alpha trades”, from the perspective

of this model. The model also explains a large part of the SC trade’s average returns, with statistically

significant factor loadings and a high R2 . The time-series tests therefore suggest that the good carry trades

pose a problem for this model, whereas the SC trade and the bad trades at least are meaningfully exposed

to standard risk factors. In addition, a test for alphas being jointly equal to zero does not reject for both

the GC and BC sets of carry trades, with p-values above 0.30.

   The last two lines of the table show results from GMM-based cross-sectional tests, using the GC and

BC trades as test assets. The estimates of the risk prices λ are all statistically insignificant, except for

λMKT for the GC trades, while the tests for the pricing errors being jointly equal to zero exhibit p-values

above 0.70. The results for the risk prices thus cast doubt on the explanatory power of the Fama-French

three-factor model for the BC trades as well, whereas the joint test results may reflect power issues.


                                                      14
     Table OA-1
     Currency volatility vs. good carry trades as currency market pricing factors
     This table differs from Table 4 only in one aspect: instead of the HMLFX factor, we now use the currency volatility factor as in Menkhoff,
     Sarno, Schmeling, and Schrimpf (2012) and denote it ”FXVol”. To obtain this factor, our monthly exchange rate volatility proxy is the
     average across currencies and days in the month of the absolute daily log changes of the exchange rates of the G-10 currencies against the
     USD, using mid-quotes. Next, we take first differences of the volatility proxy. Finally, we regress these first differences on the percentage
     monthly returns (in USD) of long positions in the G-10 currencies (except the USD), calculated as in equation (1), but using mid-quotes.
     The factor we use is the fitted value from this regression (multiplied by 100).


                 avg. ret.   p-val                α      p-val     βRX       p-val     βFXVol     p-val     βGood     p-val     R2

                   2.33      (3/4)              0.04      (5/6)    1.11     (11/11)    0.0000     (6/6)                         77.6
        G1                                       0.06     (0/1)    1.11     (11/11)    0.0001     (6/6)     -0.01     (9/9)     80.8




15
        G2                                       0.06     (1/2)    1.11     (11/11)    0.0004     (5/5)     -0.01     (9/9)     78.9
        G3                                       0.06     (0/1)    1.12     (11/11)    0.0003     (6/7)     -0.01     (8/8)     79.7
        G4                                       0.01     (1/3)    1.11     (11/11)    0.001      (6/6)     0.02     (8/10)     79.4
        G5                                      -0.01     (1/4)    1.11     (11/11)    0.001      (6/6)     0.02      (7/7)     78.3

                   λRX       p-val    λFXVol    p-val    λGood     p-val     bRX        p-val    bFXVol     p-val     bGood    p-val    χ2pr.err.

                   2.14      0.10     -0.75      0.06                         3.0       0.33       -3.0     0.15                         0.00
        G1         2.13      0.10     -1.74      0.65     2.43     0.00      4.0        0.17        1.7     0.37      23.6      0.01     0.30
        G2         2.14      0.10     -0.04      0.99     4.36     0.00      3.8        0.22        3.1     0.18      37.7      0.00     0.54
        G3         2.12      0.10     -1.87      0.63     3.61     0.00      1.6        0.60        2.6     0.21      24.1      0.01     0.08
        G4         2.03      0.12     -1.27      0.74     4.34     0.00      -4.5       0.31        0.1     0.94      25.5      0.01     0.00
        G5         2.01      0.12     -3.45      0.40     7.44     0.00      -7.4       0.12       -0.9     0.62      26.1      0.00     0.50
     Table OA-2
     Good and bad carry trades and a three-factor model with market and equity volatility factors
     This table reports test results for a three-factor model with a market factor (denoted MKT), an equity volatility factor (EqVol) and the product of MKT
     and EqVol. MKT is the return of the MSCI-World equity index (total returns in excess of the risk-free rate, in USD). EqVol is the equity volatility
     factor, used in Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) and available at Verdelhan’s website until 12/2013, and the product of MKT and EqVol is
     denoted ”prod”. The test assets are the SC and good and bad carry trades. For the GC and BC trades the ”avg. ret.” column shows the average of
     their average returns, and the remaining columns show similarly averages of the regression coefficients and adjusted R2 ’s (in percent). Standard errors
     are estimated with GMM and account for one Newey-West lag. The first (second) number in parentheses shows how many of the 18 corresponding
     individual estimates are significant at the 5% (10%) confidence level. For example, none of the average returns for the 18 BC trades is significant even
     at the 10% level. In curly brackets are shown p-values for a test of equality of the respective average slope coefficients across the GC vs. BC trades,
     accounting for heteroskedasticity and one Newey-West lag. The last two lines show, similar to Table 4, results from cross-sectional GMM estimations
     of the model on the GC and BC carry trades. The sample period is 12/1984 to 12/2013. The reported average returns, α’s and λ’s are annualized and in
     percent.


                               avg. ret.     p-val          α       p-val     βMKT       p-vals     βEqVol    p-val      β prod      p-val       R2

            SC                   1.02        0.10          0.81     0.19       0.06       0.00      -0.001     0.35      0.02        0.01       10.2




16
            G1                   1.67        0.01          1.46     0.02       0.05       0.00       0.000     0.51      0.01        0.28       5.6
            G2                   1.70        0.01          1.30     0.05       0.05       0.00       0.000     0.84      -0.01       0.18       3.2
            G3                   2.49        0.00          1.79     0.02       0.09       0.00      -0.001     0.33      -0.01       0.49       10.4
            G4                   2.22        0.01          1.47     0.10       0.07       0.00      -0.001     0.37      -0.03       0.15       4.8
            G5                   3.97        0.00          2.63     0.02       0.11       0.00       0.000     0.99      -0.07       0.00       8.4

            B1                   0.68        0.65          0.51     0.72       0.07       0.06       0.000     0.94      0.04        0.18       3.8
            B2                   0.98        0.39          0.88     0.40       0.06       0.01      -0.001     0.29      0.04        0.00       7.2
            B3                   0.21        0.83          0.40     0.66       0.04       0.07       0.000     0.82      0.05        0.00       8.1
            B4                   0.28        0.78          0.25     0.78       0.07       0.00      -0.001     0.46      0.05        0.01       12.2
            B5                   0.61        0.52          0.71     0.40       0.05       0.01      -0.001     0.49      0.05        0.00       12.4

            GC                   1.96       (16/17)        1.37    (6/10)     0.07      (18/18)     -0.001     (0/1)     -0.02       (3/4)       5.8
            BC                   0.66        (0/0)         0.69     (0/0)     0.06      (14/17)     -0.001     (0/0)      0.05      (17/17)      9.3
            GC vs. BC                                                        {0.49}                 {0.42}              {0.000}

                                                                              λMKT       p-val      λEqVol    p-val      λ prod      p-val     χ2pr.err.

            GC                                                                 31.1       0.04       22.0      0.97      7.93        0.74       0.97
            BC                                                                 6.54       0.57      -289.0     0.48      1.17        0.93       0.76
     Table OA-3
     Good and bad carry trades and a model with Down- and Up-market factors
     This table differs from Table OA-2 only in one aspect: instead of the global market and equity volatility factors we use a Down and Up
     equity market factors. If MKT denotes the total return of the MSCI-World equity index, in excess of the risk-free rate, the Down factor is
     taken to be min(MKT, 0), and the Up factor is taken to be max(MKT, 0). The average returns and their p-values are omitted.


                                                     α     p-val    βDown      p-val     βU p      p-val      R2

                                 SC                 1.21    0.22     0.08      0.00      0.05      0.04       9.4

                                 G1                 1.68    0.08    0.06       0.00      0.04      0.06      5.5
                                 G2                 0.42    0.67    0.02       0.21      0.07      0.00      3.5
                                 G3                 1.49    0.20    0.08       0.00      0.10      0.00      10.4
                                 G4                 0.56    0.66    0.03       0.28      0.09      0.00      4.2
                                 G5                -1.91    0.25    -0.05      0.20      0.21      0.00      7.9




17
                                 B1                 1.37    0.58     0.13      0.11      0.06      0.36       3.4
                                 B2                 2.47    0.15     0.13      0.00      0.03      0.45       5.8
                                 B3                 1.73    0.28     0.12      0.03      0.02      0.64       5.3
                                 B4                 1.83    0.26     0.15      0.01      0.04      0.32       9.8
                                 B5                 2.76    0.06     0.15      0.00      0.01      0.69       9.3

                                 GC                 0.49    (0/1)    0.04     (5/6)      0.09     (15/16)     5.9
                                 BC                 2.49    (6/8)    0.14    (17/18)     0.02      (0/0)      7.2
                                 GC vs. BC                          {0.02}              {0.02}


                                                                    λDown      p-val     λU p      p-val    χ2pr.err.

                                 GC                                  14.0      0.05      15.5      0.02      0.96
                                 BC                                  3.83      0.50      5.35      0.56      0.74
     Table OA-4
     Good and bad carry trades and the three-factor Fama-French model
     This table differs from Table OA-2 only in one aspect: instead of the global market and equity volatility factors we use the three-factor
     Fama-French factors. The average returns and their p-values are omitted.


                                       α       p-val      βMKT      p-vals     βSMB       p-val     βHML       p-val       R2

                   SC                 0.36      0.55      0.07       0.00      0.03       0.10       0.03      0.09       10.4

                   G1                 1.24      0.04      0.05       0.00      0.01       0.58      0.01       0.61       4.5
                   G2                 1.44      0.03      0.03       0.01      0.00       0.86      -0.01      0.81       1.6
                   G3                 1.76      0.02      0.07       0.00      0.01       0.79      0.03       0.16       6.4
                   G4                 1.95      0.02      0.02       0.24      0.00       0.94      0.02       0.49       -0.2
                   G5                 3.79      0.00      0.01       0.59      -0.03      0.36      0.00       0.93       -0.4

                   B1                -0.97      0.51      0.14       0.00      0.08       0.04       0.13      0.00        9.5




18
                   B2                -0.21      0.84      0.11       0.00      0.06       0.02       0.08      0.01       10.9
                   B3                -0.69      0.48      0.09       0.00      0.07       0.00       0.05      0.08       10.6
                   B4                -0.93      0.34      0.13       0.00      0.05       0.05       0.05      0.09       15.8
                   B5                -0.43      0.61      0.11       0.00      0.06       0.01       0.05      0.04       14.6

                   GC                 1.45    (11/14)     0.05     (14/15)     0.00       (0/0)     0.03       (3/4)       2.9
                   BC                -0.40     (0/0)      0.11     (18/18)     0.06      (13/16)    0.05      (10/14)     12.0
                   GC vs. BC                             {0.02}               {0.02}               {0.25}

                                                          λMKT       p-val     λSMB       p-val     λHML       p-val     χ2pr.err.

                   GC                                     37.2       0.01      -15.5      0.62       2.81      0.89       0.98
                   BC                                     0.43       0.96      8.49       0.55       1.43      0.89       0.73
     Table OA-5
     Economic regressions
     The table shows results from multivariate regressions of various carry trade returns on three macro variables: global equity volatility, as in
     LRV (2011), industrial production growth in the OECD countries, and the residual from regressing the US industrial production growth on
     that of the OECD. The last three columns show the change in the dependent variable for one standard deviation change in each regressor,
     all else equal. Intercepts and sensitivities are reported annualized and in percent, and adjusted R2 ’s are in percent.


                       interc.   p-val     βEQV     p-val     βIP     p-val    βUSres    p-val      R2             sensitivity to:
                                                                                                                EQV     IP       USres

               SC       0.71      0.30     -2.23     0.03    0.17     0.08      -0.09     0.51      2.56        -1.72    1.22     -0.55
               DC       3.70      0.01     -0.86     0.64    0.27     0.21       0.00     0.99     -0.21        -0.67    1.96     -0.02




19
               G1       1.33      0.05     -1.67     0.08    0.18     0.06      -0.09     0.48     1.84         -1.29    1.34     -0.56
               G2       1.28      0.06     -0.50     0.50    0.26     0.00      -0.09     0.47     1.77         -0.39    1.86     -0.54
               G3       1.91      0.02     -2.40     0.02    0.32     0.00      -0.25     0.11     4.25         -1.85    2.29     -1.46
               G4       1.77      0.05     -1.78     0.16    0.24     0.08      -0.11     0.55     1.26         -1.38    1.71     -0.65
               G5       3.69      0.00     0.38      0.78    0.22     0.23      -0.24     0.29     0.30          0.29    1.57     -1.41

               B1       -0.05     0.97     -2.85     0.13    0.38     0.13      -0.01     0.98     0.79         -2.20    2.72     -0.04
               B2       0.15      0.89     -3.82     0.01    0.40     0.02      -0.14     0.47     3.26         -2.95    2.91     -0.81
               B3       -0.21     0.84     -2.69     0.09    0.22     0.17      -0.07     0.74     1.35         -2.07    1.56     -0.42
               B4       -0.23     0.83     -3.64     0.03    0.27     0.12      -0.14     0.46     3.07         -2.81    1.92     -0.86
               B5       0.04      0.97     -3.45     0.03    0.28     0.04      -0.11     0.52     3.29         -2.66    2.02     -0.68
                           Table OA-6: Detailed version of the top panel of Table 4

Good   port.   avg. ret.      p-val      α      p-val    βRX    p-val   βHMLFX   p-val   βGood   p-val   R2

       1        -1.63         0.25      -1.74   0.00     1.02   0.00     -0.39   0.00                    90.3
       2        -0.19         0.88      -1.15   0.08     0.88   0.00     -0.13   0.00                    75.8
       3         0.79         0.54      -0.28   0.65     0.95   0.00     -0.13   0.00                    78.4
       4         2.80         0.05       1.12   0.10     1.01   0.00     0.00    0.94                    78.4
       5         3.68         0.02       1.62   0.03     1.11   0.00     0.05    0.11                    80.0
       6         4.65         0.01       0.43   0.35     1.03   0.00     0.61    0.00                    93.8
       7        -0.18         0.92      -0.38   0.67     1.24   0.00     -0.46   0.00                    80.5
       8         1.04         0.57      -0.14   0.87     1.27   0.00     -0.23   0.00                    77.6
       9         2.76         0.12       1.16   0.14     1.28   0.00     -0.14   0.00                    81.7
       10        2.77         0.14       0.39   0.66     1.28   0.00     0.05    0.19                    79.7
       11        4.79         0.02       1.55   0.13     1.27   0.00     0.27    0.00                    75.2

G1     1                                -2.27   0.00     0.99   0.00                     -0.61   0.00    76.5
       2                                -0.85   0.15     0.89   0.00                     -0.50   0.00    78.8
       3                                -0.29   0.63     0.94   0.00                     -0.30   0.00    77.7
       4                                 0.87   0.18     1.00   0.00                     0.16    0.03    78.9
       5                                 1.15   0.10     1.10   0.00                     0.41    0.00    82.3
       6                                 1.40   0.16     1.08   0.00                     0.85    0.00    71.0
       7                                -0.97   0.38     1.21   0.00                     -0.75   0.00    69.4
       8                                 0.34   0.66     1.28   0.00                     -0.87   0.00    81.7
       9                                 0.71   0.38     1.26   0.00                     -0.05   0.62    80.1
       10                               -0.06   0.94     1.27   0.00                     0.41    0.00    81.4
       11                                0.78   0.36     1.25   0.00                     1.14    0.00    82.4

G2     1                                -2.34   0.00     0.99   0.00                     -0.56   0.00    76.0
       2                                -1.10   0.08     0.88   0.00                     -0.34   0.00    76.0
       3                                -0.57   0.37     0.93   0.00                     -0.13   0.08    76.2
       4                                 0.72   0.25     0.99   0.00                     0.24    0.00    79.6
       5                                 1.34   0.06     1.10   0.00                     0.28    0.00    81.1
       6                                 1.94   0.07     1.10   0.00                     0.50    0.00    65.9
       7                                -1.09   0.33     1.20   0.00                     -0.66   0.00    68.6
       8                                -0.31   0.73     1.25   0.00                     -0.45   0.00    75.6
       9                                 0.59   0.47     1.26   0.00                     0.03    0.74    80.1
       10                               -0.09   0.92     1.27   0.00                     0.42    0.00    81.7
       11                                1.67   0.12     1.28   0.00                     0.56    0.00    73.5

G3     1                                -2.14   0.00     1.04   0.00                     -0.50   0.00    76.2
       2                                -0.88   0.16     0.92   0.00                     -0.34   0.00    76.9
       3                                -0.35   0.57     0.96   0.00                     -0.19   0.00    76.9
       4                                 0.97   0.14     0.99   0.00                     0.06    0.30    78.5
       5                                 1.21   0.09     1.07   0.00                     0.27    0.00    81.4
       6                                 1.19   0.23     1.01   0.00                     0.70    0.00    70.8
       7                                -0.80   0.47     1.27   0.00                     -0.61   0.00    69.2
       8                                 0.11   0.89     1.31   0.00                     -0.52   0.00    77.5
       9                                 0.87   0.28     1.28   0.00                     -0.11   0.16    80.3
       10                               -0.02   0.98     1.24   0.00                     0.28    0.00    80.7
       11                                0.59   0.52     1.16   0.00                     0.90    0.00    81.2

G4     1                                -2.80   0.00     1.05   0.00                     -0.26   0.00    71.4
       2                                -1.10   0.09     0.98   0.00                     -0.33   0.00    76.3
       3                                -0.48   0.44     0.99   0.00                     -0.18   0.00    76.7
       4                                 0.91   0.17     0.96   0.00                     0.13    0.04    78.8
       5                                 1.35   0.05     1.03   0.00                     0.27    0.00    81.2
       6                                 2.12   0.06     1.00   0.00                     0.38    0.00    64.8
       7                                -1.83   0.10     1.23   0.00                     -0.19   0.19    63.8
       8                                -0.23   0.80     1.39   0.00                     -0.49   0.00    76.6


                                                        20
     9    0.72    0.37    1.28   0.00                  -0.05   0.55   80.1
     10   0.31    0.72    1.23   0.00                  0.17    0.08   79.9
     11   1.26    0.19    1.04   0.00                  0.80    0.00   78.0

G5   1    -2.68   0.00    1.03   0.00                  -0.17   0.00   71.0
     2    -0.93   0.16    0.95   0.00                  -0.22   0.00   75.5
     3    -0.83   0.19    0.92   0.00                  0.02    0.66   75.8
     4     0.57   0.37    0.94   0.00                  0.16    0.00   79.6
     5     1.33   0.06    1.06   0.00                  0.14    0.00   80.5
     6     2.53   0.03    1.11   0.00                  0.06    0.48   62.8
     7    -1.96   0.07    1.19   0.00                  -0.05   0.64   63.3
     8    -0.41   0.65    1.30   0.00                  -0.19   0.00   74.0
     9     0.40   0.63    1.23   0.00                  0.07    0.22   80.2
     10   -0.03   0.97    1.21   0.00                  0.19    0.02   80.4
     11    1.99   0.07    1.24   0.00                  0.18    0.05   70.8

G1   1    -1.69   0.00    1.02   0.00   -0.38   0.00   -0.06   0.39   90.3
     2    -0.79   0.19    0.89   0.00   -0.04   0.15   -0.44   0.00   79.0
     3    -0.15   0.81    0.95   0.00   -0.10   0.00   -0.16   0.06   78.7
     4     0.94   0.15    1.00   0.00   -0.05   0.18   0.22    0.01   79.0
     5     1.23   0.08    1.10   0.00   -0.05   0.11   0.48    0.00   82.5
     6     0.47   0.31    1.03   0.00   0.61    0.00   -0.04   0.49   93.8
     7    -0.30   0.74    1.25   0.00   -0.44   0.00   -0.11   0.34   80.6
     8     0.47   0.55    1.28   0.00   -0.09   0.04   -0.75   0.00   82.1
     9     0.99   0.21    1.28   0.00   -0.18   0.00   0.21    0.05   82.1
     10    0.00   1.00    1.27   0.00   -0.04   0.33   0.47    0.00   81.4
     11    0.69   0.42    1.24   0.00   0.06    0.16   1.05    0.00   82.6

G2   1    -1.57   0.00    1.03   0.00   -0.36   0.00   -0.17   0.00   90.8
     2    -0.91   0.15    0.89   0.00   -0.09   0.00   -0.25   0.00   77.0
     3    -0.29   0.64    0.95   0.00   -0.13   0.00   0.01    0.88   78.3
     4     0.83   0.20    1.00   0.00   -0.05   0.16   0.29    0.00   79.8
     5     1.34   0.07    1.10   0.00   0.00    0.98   0.28    0.00   81.1
     6     0.60   0.19    1.03   0.00   0.63    0.00   -0.17   0.00   94.1
     7    -0.18   0.84    1.25   0.00   -0.43   0.00   -0.21   0.02   80.9
     8     0.10   0.90    1.27   0.00   -0.19   0.00   -0.25   0.02   78.2
     9     0.95   0.22    1.28   0.00   -0.17   0.00   0.21    0.03   82.2
     10   -0.05   0.96    1.27   0.00   -0.02   0.65   0.44    0.00   81.6
     11    1.21   0.23    1.26   0.00   0.21    0.00   0.34    0.00   76.1

G3   1    -1.69   0.00    1.03   0.00   -0.38   0.00   -0.04   0.41   90.3
     2    -0.80   0.20    0.92   0.00   -0.07   0.02   -0.27   0.00   77.4
     3    -0.21   0.73    0.96   0.00   -0.12   0.00   -0.05   0.39   78.3
     4     1.00   0.14    0.99   0.00   -0.02   0.51   0.09    0.22   78.5
     5     1.23   0.09    1.07   0.00   -0.02   0.42   0.30    0.00   81.3
     6     0.47   0.31    1.03   0.00   0.61    0.00   -0.03   0.52   93.8
     7    -0.27   0.76    1.26   0.00   -0.44   0.00   -0.08   0.44   80.6
     8     0.30   0.72    1.31   0.00   -0.15   0.00   -0.33   0.00   78.9
     9     1.05   0.18    1.27   0.00   -0.16   0.00   0.08    0.34   81.8
     10    0.00   1.00    1.24   0.00   -0.02   0.69   0.30    0.00   80.7
     11    0.49   0.59    1.16   0.00   0.08    0.09   0.80    0.00   81.5

G4   1    -1.72   0.00    1.03   0.00   -0.39   0.00   -0.02   0.75   90.3
     2    -0.83   0.18    0.97   0.00   -0.10   0.00   -0.27   0.00   77.8
     3    -0.15   0.80    0.98   0.00   -0.12   0.00   -0.10   0.06   78.6
     4     0.95   0.15    0.96   0.00   -0.02   0.57   0.14    0.04   78.8
     5     1.31   0.07    1.03   0.00   0.02    0.54   0.26    0.00   81.2
     6     0.44   0.34    1.03   0.00   0.61    0.00   -0.01   0.90   93.8
     7    -0.52   0.55    1.21   0.00   -0.47   0.00   0.11    0.38   80.6
     8     0.30   0.72    1.38   0.00   -0.19   0.00   -0.37   0.00   79.4
     9     1.11   0.15    1.27   0.00   -0.14   0.00   0.04    0.65   81.7


                         21
     10   0.21    0.81    1.23   0.00   0.03    0.41   0.15    0.15   79.9
     11   0.73    0.43    1.05   0.00   0.19    0.00   0.68    0.00   80.3

G5   1    -1.49   0.00    1.06   0.00   -0.39   0.00   -0.08   0.01   90.5
     2    -0.58   0.36    0.96   0.00   -0.11   0.00   -0.19   0.00   77.6
     3    -0.42   0.49    0.93   0.00   -0.13   0.00   0.05    0.19   78.4
     4     0.62   0.35    0.94   0.00   -0.01   0.64   0.17    0.00   79.5
     5     1.22   0.09    1.06   0.00   0.04    0.18   0.13    0.01   80.6
     6     0.65   0.16    1.06   0.00   0.61    0.00   -0.07   0.02   93.9
     7    -0.53   0.53    1.22   0.00   -0.46   0.00   0.05    0.53   80.5
     8     0.27   0.74    1.32   0.00   -0.22   0.00   -0.14   0.03   78.0
     9     0.85   0.29    1.24   0.00   -0.14   0.00   0.10    0.11   82.0
     10   -0.15   0.86    1.21   0.00   0.04    0.34   0.18    0.02   80.5
     11    1.19   0.25    1.22   0.00   0.26    0.00   0.12    0.12   75.4




                         22
                     Table OA-7: Detailed version of the top panel of Table 10


Good   port. avg. ret.   p-val             α        p-val   βDC     p-val    βGood   p-val   R2

       1                 -1.63   0.25    -3.23      0.02    0.38    0.00                     12.6
       2                 -0.19   0.88    -1.37      0.27    0.28    0.00                      8.7
       3                  0.79   0.54    -0.98      0.41    0.42    0.00                     17.6
       4                  2.80   0.05    0.18       0.88    0.63    0.00                     34.3
       5                  3.68   0.02    0.81       0.54    0.69    0.00                     33.8
       6                  4.65   0.01    2.27       0.18    0.57    0.00                     17.7
       7                 -0.18   0.92    -2.64      0.12    0.59    0.00                     18.1
       8                  1.04   0.57    -1.24      0.45    0.54    0.00                     16.1
       9                  2.76   0.12    0.17       0.91    0.62    0.00                     21.7
       10                 2.77   0.14    -0.18      0.91    0.70    0.00                     26.5
       11                 4.79   0.02    1.53       0.35    0.78    0.00                     27.5

G1     1                 -1.63   0.25    -1.02      0.48                     -0.36   0.04    2.1
       2                 -0.19   0.88     0.28      0.83                     -0.28   0.04     1.6
       3                  0.79   0.54     0.90      0.50                     -0.07   0.66    -0.2
       4                  2.80   0.05     2.13      0.15                     0.40    0.01     2.7
       5                  3.68   0.02     2.54      0.11                     0.69    0.00     6.8
       6                  4.65   0.01     2.77      0.12                     1.12    0.00    14.4
       7                 -0.18   0.92    0.56       0.76                     -0.45   0.03     1.9
       8                  1.04   0.57    1.96       0.30                     -0.55   0.00     3.2
       9                  2.76   0.12    2.31       0.20                     0.27    0.26     0.6
       10                 2.77   0.14    1.55       0.41                     0.73    0.00     5.7
       11                 4.79   0.02    2.36       0.20                     1.45    0.00    20.0

G2     1                 -1.63   0.25    -1.07      0.46                     -0.33   0.02    1.9
       2                 -0.19   0.88     0.04      0.98                     -0.13   0.33     0.2
       3                  0.79   0.54     0.64      0.63                     0.09    0.51    -0.1
       4                  2.80   0.05     2.00      0.17                     0.47    0.00     4.3
       5                  3.68   0.02     2.76      0.08                     0.54    0.00     4.6
       6                  4.65   0.01     3.36      0.07                     0.76    0.00     7.2
       7                 -0.18   0.92     0.46      0.80                     -0.38   0.05     1.5
       8                  1.04   0.57    1.31       0.49                     -0.16   0.41     0.0
       9                  2.76   0.12    2.21       0.22                     0.32    0.11     1.1
       10                 2.77   0.14    1.54       0.39                     0.72    0.00     6.2
       11                 4.79   0.02    3.32       0.09                     0.86    0.00     7.7

G3     1                 -1.63   0.25    -1.61      0.28                     -0.01   0.95    -0.3
       2                 -0.19   0.88    -0.41      0.76                     0.09    0.37     0.0
       3                  0.79   0.54     0.14      0.92                     0.26    0.02     2.0
       4                  2.80   0.05     1.48      0.31                     0.53    0.00     7.7
       5                  3.68   0.02     1.76      0.26                     0.77    0.00    13.7
       6                  4.65   0.01     1.71      0.29                     1.18    0.00    24.7
       7                 -0.18   0.92    -0.15      0.94                     -0.01   0.93    -0.3
       8                  1.04   0.57     0.79      0.68                     0.10    0.50    -0.1
       9                  2.76   0.12     1.52      0.40                     0.50    0.00     4.3


                                               23
     10   2.77    0.14   0.61    0.73                 0.86    0.00   12.8
     11   4.79    0.02   1.18    0.49                 1.45    0.00   30.9

G4   1    -1.63   0.25   -2.94   0.03                 0.59    0.00   11.1
     2    -0.19   0.88   -1.22   0.33                 0.47    0.00    8.8
     3     0.79   0.54   -0.61   0.62                 0.63    0.00   14.6
     4     2.80   0.05    0.78   0.53                 0.91    0.00   27.1
     5     3.68   0.02    1.22   0.38                 1.11    0.00   33.0
     6     4.65   0.01    1.99   0.21                 1.20    0.00   29.6
     7    -0.18   0.92   -1.99   0.25                 0.82    0.00   12.9
     8     1.04   0.57   -0.41   0.82                 0.65    0.00    8.6
     9     2.76   0.12    0.55   0.73                 1.00    0.00   20.9
     10    2.77   0.14    0.15   0.93                 1.18    0.00   27.9
     11    4.79   0.02    1.13   0.44                 1.65    0.00   46.5

G5   1    -1.63   0.25   -3.33   0.01                 0.43    0.00   9.9
     2    -0.19   0.88   -1.54   0.23                 0.34    0.00    7.9
     3     0.79   0.54   -1.41   0.23                 0.56    0.00   19.3
     4     2.80   0.05   -0.02   0.98                 0.71    0.00   28.0
     5     3.68   0.02    0.65   0.65                 0.76    0.00   26.2
     6     4.65   0.01    1.83   0.27                 0.71    0.00   17.4
     7    -0.18   0.92   -2.72   0.12                 0.64    0.00   13.5
     8     1.04   0.57   -1.24   0.47                 0.57    0.00   11.3
     9     2.76   0.12   -0.38   0.81                 0.79    0.00   22.4
     10    2.77   0.14   -0.81   0.60                 0.90    0.00   27.4
     11    4.79   0.02    1.20   0.49                 0.90    0.00   23.4

G1   1    -1.63   0.25   -2.48   0.05   0.54   0.00   -0.83   0.00   23.0
     2    -0.19   0.88   -0.81   0.50   0.40   0.00   -0.63   0.00   16.2
     3     0.79   0.54   -0.51   0.66   0.52   0.00   -0.52   0.00   22.1
     4     2.80   0.05    0.34   0.78   0.66   0.00   -0.17   0.19   34.6
     5     3.68   0.02    0.72   0.59   0.67   0.00   0.10    0.54   33.7
     6     4.65   0.01    1.59   0.34   0.43   0.00   0.75    0.00   22.9
     7    -0.18   0.92   -1.61   0.31   0.80   0.00   -1.14   0.00   30.0
     8     1.04   0.57   -0.14   0.93   0.77   0.00   -1.22   0.00   30.5
     9     2.76   0.12    0.47   0.77   0.68   0.00   -0.33   0.13   22.5
     10    2.77   0.14   -0.31   0.85   0.68   0.00   0.14    0.51   26.5
     11    4.79   0.02    0.70   0.66   0.61   0.00   0.92    0.00   34.2

G2   1    -1.63   0.25   -2.55   0.04   0.55   0.00   -0.80   0.00   23.1
     2    -0.19   0.88   -0.98   0.43   0.38   0.00   -0.46   0.00   13.0
     3     0.79   0.54   -0.69   0.56   0.49   0.00   -0.33   0.01   19.5
     4     2.80   0.05    0.25   0.84   0.64   0.00   -0.08   0.46   34.2
     5     3.68   0.02    0.86   0.51   0.70   0.00   -0.07   0.64   33.7
     6     4.65   0.01    1.99   0.24   0.50   0.00   0.32    0.06   18.6
     7    -0.18   0.92   -1.72   0.29   0.81   0.00   -1.08   0.00   29.7
     8     1.04   0.57   -0.59   0.72   0.70   0.00   -0.76   0.00   22.1
     9     2.76   0.12    0.39   0.80   0.67   0.00   -0.26   0.16   22.2
     10    2.77   0.14   -0.29   0.85   0.68   0.00   0.13    0.48   26.5
     11    4.79   0.02    1.34   0.42   0.73   0.00   0.23    0.20   27.8


                            24
G3   1    -1.63   0.25   -2.66   0.05   0.50   0.00   -0.43   0.00   16.3
     2    -0.19   0.88   -1.11   0.38   0.33   0.00   -0.19   0.07    9.4
     3     0.79   0.54   -0.82   0.49   0.45   0.00   -0.12   0.30   17.7
     4     2.80   0.05    0.17   0.89   0.62   0.00   0.01    0.95   34.1
     5     3.68   0.02    0.46   0.73   0.62   0.00   0.26    0.04   34.8
     6     4.65   0.01    1.04   0.51   0.32   0.01   0.91    0.00   29.0
     7    -0.18   0.92   -1.75   0.30   0.76   0.00   -0.65   0.00   23.5
     8     1.04   0.57   -0.62   0.70   0.67   0.00   -0.46   0.00   18.8
     9     2.76   0.12    0.21   0.90   0.63   0.00   -0.03   0.87   21.4
     10    2.77   0.14   -0.66   0.68   0.61   0.00   0.35    0.04   28.0
     11    4.79   0.02    0.14   0.93   0.50   0.00   1.03    0.00   39.6

G4   1    -1.63   0.25   -3.45   0.01   0.26   0.03   0.33    0.02   14.6
     2    -0.19   0.88   -1.57   0.21   0.17   0.11   0.29    0.01   10.7
     3     0.79   0.54   -1.20   0.31   0.30   0.01   0.33    0.01   20.0
     4     2.80   0.05   -0.12   0.92   0.46   0.00   0.46    0.00   38.5
     5     3.68   0.02    0.36   0.78   0.43   0.00   0.68    0.00   41.4
     6     4.65   0.01    1.60   0.30   0.19   0.13   1.01    0.00   30.7
     7    -0.18   0.92   -2.88   0.09   0.45   0.00   0.37    0.03   19.5
     8     1.04   0.57   -1.36   0.41   0.48   0.00   0.18    0.31   16.3
     9     2.76   0.12   -0.23   0.88   0.39   0.01   0.60    0.00   26.3
     10    2.77   0.14   -0.68   0.64   0.42   0.00   0.76    0.00   33.7
     11    4.79   0.02    0.62   0.66   0.26   0.08   1.39    0.00   48.3

G5   1    -1.63   0.25   -3.55   0.01   0.28   0.02   0.19    0.13   13.4
     2    -0.19   0.88   -1.68   0.18   0.18   0.08   0.18    0.08    9.7
     3     0.79   0.54   -1.59   0.17   0.23   0.03   0.36    0.00   21.8
     4     2.80   0.05   -0.37   0.75   0.45   0.00   0.33    0.00   37.3
     5     3.68   0.02    0.26   0.84   0.51   0.00   0.32    0.00   36.2
     6     4.65   0.01    1.56   0.33   0.34   0.01   0.42    0.00   20.7
     7    -0.18   0.92   -3.07   0.07   0.45   0.00   0.25    0.06   19.0
     8     1.04   0.57   -1.58   0.34   0.44   0.00   0.20    0.15   16.7
     9     2.76   0.12   -0.66   0.67   0.35   0.01   0.49    0.00   26.0
     10    2.77   0.14   -1.12   0.44   0.40   0.00   0.55    0.00   31.9
     11    4.79   0.02    0.78   0.63   0.54   0.00   0.44    0.00   30.3




                            25
                                                   Figure 4: Average vs. model-based expected returns

Circles with no fill (large black dots) plot model-based expected monthly returns versus average monthly
returns (annualized and in percent) for the GC (BC) set of 18 carry trades, as described in Table 3. The
model based returns refer to the three-factor model with a market factor (MKT), an equity volatility factor
(EqVol) and the product of MKT and EqVol, and are estimated, for each trade, as the product of its time-
series slope estimates (β) with respect to the factors in the model, and the corresponding estimates of the
factor risk prices λ, as shown in Table OA-2. The bottom right corner of each plot shows the R2 obtained
in regressing average returns on model-based returns (with a constant). The sample period is 12/1984 to
12/2013.




                                                             GC                                                            BC
                                                                                                       1




                                         2.6
                                                                                                      0.9




                                         2.4                                                          0.8




                                         2.2                                                          0.7
                   model−based returns




                                                                                model−based returns




                                                                                                      0.6
                                          2



                                                                                                      0.5
                                         1.8



                                                                                                      0.4

                                         1.6


                                                                                                      0.3


                                         1.4

                                                                                                      0.2


                                         1.2

                                                                                                      0.1
                                                                   2
                                                               R =0.67                                                      R2=0.29
                                          1

                                               1       1.5     2         2.5                                0.2      0.4    0.6   0.8   1
                                                       average returns                                            average returns




                                                                               26
