                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FROM IMMIGRANTS TO ROBOTS:
               THE CHANGING LOCUS OF SUBSTITUTES FOR WORKERS

                                      George J. Borjas
                                     Richard B. Freeman

                                     Working Paper 25438
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25438


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2019




This work is part of the NBER Science and Engineering Workforce Projects (SEWP), and was
supported by the NBER Sloan Foundation Grant, The Job Market for Older Workers as
Retirement Recedes and Robots Do More Work (OWRR). This paper was presented at the
Russell Sage Foundation Conference “Improving Employment and Earnings in Twenty-First
Century Labor Markets”, September 20-21, 2018, and is expected to be forthcoming in RSF: The
Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
From Immigrants to Robots: The Changing Locus of Substitutes for Workers
George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 25438
January 2019
JEL No. J20,J61,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

Increased use of robots has roused concern about how robots and other new technologies change
the world of work. Using numbers of robots shipped to primarily manufacturing industries as a
supply shock to an industry labor market, we estimate that an additional robot reduces
employment and wages in an industry by roughly as much as an additional 2 to 3 workers and by
3 to 4 workers in particular groups, which far exceed estimated effects of an additional immigrant
on employment and wages. While the growth of robots in the 1996-2016 period of our data was
too modest to be a major determinant of wages and employment, the estimated coefficients
suggest that continued exponential growth of robots could disrupt job markets in the foreseeable
future and thus merit attention from labor analysts.


George J. Borjas
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu

Richard B. Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
freeman@nber.org
    From Immigrants to Robots: The Changing Locus of Substitutes for Workers

                         George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman

        Every week, the media reports on new developments in robotics or artificial
intelligence (AI) that expands the ability of robots or computers to perform work
traditionally done by humans. Diverse organizations ranging from academic think tanks
to business consultants to national and international agencies have estimated the number
of workers whose jobs are potentially at risk from advances in digitalization and
robotization.1 While the estimated numbers vary with occupation, forecast period, and
methodology, the headline message is clear, “Robots are coming and they are going to
massively transform the world of work.”

        Reacting to the headlines, researchers who look for clues to the future in past and
recent labor statistics dismiss the forecasts of a job cataclysm as media hype rather than
as plausible scenarios of the future (Mishel and Bivens, 2017). Some note that all past
automation scares failed to materialize. Historically, new technologies have invariably
obsolesced some jobs but they have also opened the door for new jobs, usually at higher
pay and with better conditions. The occupational structure has shifted toward more
skilled work, from farm laborers to factory workers to white collar jobs in offices. Why
should the most recent robotics technology differ drastically from past technological
shocks?

        Others note that the modest growth of productivity, high level of employment to
population, and the low unemployment rate after the recovery from the Great Recession
are the opposite of what one would expect if technology was upending the world of work.
To paraphrase Solow's (1987) observation about computers everywhere but in the
productivity statistics, today we see robots taking jobs from humans in the media but not
in real world labor markets. The reports of “the robots are coming” are not, however,
about today's labor market but about whether robotics technology has the potential to
shake the world of work in the foreseeable future.

        Our analysis addresses this question by examining whether the past two decades'
exponential growth in the number of robots has left a sufficient footprint on labor
outcomes to support the concerns behind the media headlines or has had such a small
impact as to validate the views of skeptical analysts. We treat the rapid deployment of
robots in US industries at the turn of the 21st century as a supply shock to the US labor
market and compare its effects on employment and wages to the effects of a more widely
studied supply shock that also generates social concern – the entry of millions of
immigrants over the same period.

       Specifically, we combined data on the number of industrial robots shipped to each
industry in the United States and other countries compiled by the International Federation
of Robotics (IFR), with data on the number of immigrant workers by industry and state,

1
       In January 2018 Winick (2018) reviewed over a dozen projections of the impact of technology on
employment, nearly all which focused on occupations as the unit of study.

                                                 -2-
and on employment and earnings of all workers, from the American Community Survey
(ACS). Since 1993, the IFR has collected data on the shipments of industrial robots from
the firms that produced those robots. The data are reported at the level of the industry that
purchased the robots. We use the ACS to calculate the analogous influx of immigrants
into those industries by state. Our analysis of employment and earnings outcomes rests
on 19.5 million observations of individual workers, spanning the 2004-2016 period for
which the IFR reports sufficiently detailed industry figures to allow for a cross industry-
time series analysis.

        Because a firm's decision to purchase robots and an immigrant's decision where to
locate are likely to be influenced by labor market conditions, we face a potential
simultaneity bias in using ordinary least squares to estimate the impact of robots or
immigrants on employment and wages. On the firm side, a higher wage should increase
the firm’s incentive to invest in robots, imparting an upward bias in OLS estimates of the
effect of the demand shock. To deal with this problem we instrument US purchases of
robots using the number of robots shipped in the same industry and year in Japan and
Germany in the IFR data. Ideally, this isolates the part of the growth of robots due to
exogenous technological change that affects all countries similarly.

        Immigrant choice of location and sector will also depend on labor market
conditions. We deal with the endogeneity of immigrant choice of working in a particular
state and industry by using the 1970 distribution of immigrants from different sending
countries by area and industry to create an instrument for current flows – a period
sufficiently far from the 1990s-2000s to provide a reasonably valid exogenous
instrument.

       We have three findings:

           1. The influx of industrial robots into an industry over time is associated with
              a substantial fall in employment and earnings that is concentrated on lower
              educated workers and on those in occupations that experts view as
              “automatable”.
           2. The entry of an additional robot reduces employment and wages by more
              than the entry of an additional immigrant, suggesting that one industrial
              robot is comparable to 2 to 3 human workers and upwards of 3 to 4 in
              particular groups.
           3. While the number of robots per worker is too modest to be a major
              determinant of wages and employment patterns in the period covered by
              our study, our estimates suggest that continued exponential growth of
              robots could disrupt job markets in the next decade or so and thus merits
              monitoring and analysis by labor analysts.

        Our empirical analysis has some weaknesses. Our measure of robotics
technology is limited to industrial robots reported by the IFR, which follows the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) definition of robots to be described
shortly. The vast majority of industrial robots are found in manufacturing. We do not
have data on other machines in manufacturing or elsewhere that may substitute for
workers in the same way as robots but fall outside the ISO industrial robot classification

                                             -3-
nor of service robots nor of software that can substitute for human workers in office or
other digital settings. This biases our results toward finding robot effects on blue collar
workers but not on white collar or service sector workers.

        In addition, the IFR data on the robot supply shock relates to units shipped to
industries nationally and thus lacks geographic detail on the deployment of robots. It also
does not record the particular types of robots that different sectors purchase. The lack of
this information creates measurement error in the robot variable in calculations across
states and sectors, which likely biases downward our estimated coefficients on the impact
of robots on labor market outcomes. Finally, our modeling technique treats each industry-
area as a separate market, ignoring general equilibrium spillovers. These weaknesses
notwithstanding, our analysis gives a hopefully informative first-order approximation to
the effects of the robot supply shock compared to the immigrant supply shock that allows
us to assess the extent to which robots substitute for given groups of workers.

       The paper has three sections. The first section presents the model we use to
analyze the robot and immigrant supply shocks and documents the dimensions of the
aggregate shocks in the 2001-2016 period. The second section presents ordinary least
squares and two stage instrumental variable estimates of the effect of robot and
immigrant supply shocks on employment and earnings. The third section concludes.

Modeling Robot and Immigrant Supply Shocks

       Changes in the number of robots or immigrants who substitute for workers can be
analyzed as a supply shock that shifts the supply curve of labor by the productivity
equivalence between the robots or immigrants and the workers in the impacted labor
market. Figure 1 displays this point in a simple supply-demand framework in which a
supply shock adds Z efficiency units to the workforce without affecting the demand for
labor.

        If immigrants M have the productivity of θ existing workers, an increase in the
number of immigrants by ΔM shifts the supply curve to the right by θ ΔM efficiency units
so that Z = θ ΔM. This lowers the wage in the market and increases overall employment
while reducing the number of workers exclusive of the new immigrants below the pre-
shock employment level.

        Similarly, if a single robot R has the productivity of γ workers, the supply shock
due to a ΔR change in robots would change the number of efficiency units in the labor
market by γ ΔR, so that Z = γ ΔR. The increased “employment” of efficiency units forces
wages to fall to clear the market and reduces the employment of workers below its pre-
shock level.2 If γ > θ, the increase of one robot has a larger impact on wages and
employment of pre-shock workers than the increase in one immigrant.



2
        We can also use the supply-demand framework in Figure 1 to model the influx of robots or
immigrants as an inward shift in the demand for existing workers by Z efficiency units, with equivalent
impacts on wages and employment.

                                                    -4-
         Given that immigrants in a job market are likely to resemble existing workers in
terms of their work skills reflected by education, age, or occupation, the equivalence
parameter θ between new immigrants and existing workers is likely to be close to 1 (or
modestly lower than 1 if the negative estimated coefficient on an immigrant dummy
variable in a log earnings equation reflects productivity differences between immigrants
and natives rather than discrimination against immigrants). By contrast, the equivalence
parameter γ between robots and existing workers could differ greatly from 1 as
technological change improves robot efficiency more than human efficiency. Implicit in
the diverse forecasts of AI robots greatly displacing human workers are an assumption
that g is substantially greater than one, because a robot can do far more work than a
human if only because they can operate 24 hours a day.

         With the number of robots and immigrants measured in efficiency units, the
impact of the two shocks on the employment and earnings of pre-existing workers in
Figure 1 has a simple algebraic structure that guides our analysis. Measured as a vertical
shift in the supply curve, the robot shock increases the “labor” supply as a percentage
relative to the initial stock of workers L by γ (ΔR)/L while the immigrant shock increases
labor supply relative to L by θ (ΔM)/L. Let w be the wage of workers, s be the elasticity
of supply, and d be the absolute value of the elasticity of demand. Then the impact of the
two supply shocks on the total percent change in wages will be:




        Equation 1 shows that the impact of the two shocks is proportionate to their
equivalent increase in the number of efficiency units relative to the size of the pre-
existing workforce. A regression of the change in wages on the change in the number of
immigrants relative to base employment and on the change in the number of robots
relative to base employment will yield a larger coefficient on robots than on immigrants
if γ > θ and conversely if θ > γ. The contribution of the two shocks to the change in
wages will also depend on the magnitude of the shocks. If, as turns out to be the case, the
change in the number of immigrants exceeds the change in the number of robots in a
particular period, θ ΔM could make a greater contribution to the change in the wage than
g ΔR even if γ > θ.

       The effect on the size of the pre-existing work force is given by:




Both supply shocks reduce the number of current workers employed while increasing the
total number of efficiency units and output in the industry. As with the wage impact, the
difference between the two coefficients in equation (2) reflect the difference in the
equivalence value of robots and immigrants with the pre-existing workforce.



                                            -5-
       Our empirical analysis below will measure what happens to total employment
(including immigrants) as a result of the robot and immigration supply shocks. The
equation relating the change in the total number of workers to the supply shocks is:




Note that the impact of immigration on total employment will have a coefficient equal to
one if the labor supply curve is inelastic (s = 0), and will have a coefficient less than one
if some of the preexisting workers (typically called “natives”) are displaced from their
jobs.

        This simple model provides the analytical framework for our empirical work. It is
a schematic model that uses the equivalence framework to provide a clear interpretation
of the calculations in terms of supply shocks, leaving aside factors that may further
differentiate robot effects from immigrant effects (i.e. different elasticities of substitution
with existing workers across tasks; different complementarities with physical capital or
R&D that also enter the production function; and constraints imposed by labor relations
practices). The virtue of the supply shock framework is that it offers a way to examine
the potential of robotic technologies to affect work compared to the benchmark of a shift
in supply of workers captured by immigrants.

Measuring the robot shock

        The key variable in our analysis of the labor market impact of the robot shock
uses data compiled by the International Federation of Robotics on the number of
industrial robots shipped to firms by the producers of robots in a given year. About 90
percent of the machines in 2016 were purchased by manufacturing firms, with the
automobile sector being the lead industry (accounting for about half of the shipments).3

       The IFR uses the International Standard Organization definition of a robot (ISO
8373:2012) in its request for information from manufacturers
(www.iso.org/standards.html). ISO defines an industrial robot as an automatically
controlled, reprogrammable, multipurpose manipulator, programmable in three or more
axes, which can be either fixed in place or mobile for use in industrial automation
applications.4 The IFR reports shipments of robots for enough US industries from 2004
to 2016 to allow us to estimate the impact of changes on employment and earnings using


3
         The IFR also has a separate data set on the number of service sector robots (World Robotics -
Service Robots) which shows that number to be growing rapidly (https://ifr.org/ifr-press-
releases/news/why-service-robots-are-booming-worldwide). But these data are limited over time and lack
sufficient sectoral detail to be added to our current data base. The IFR does not have any data on software
purchases that are also likely to impact the work force.
4
          Reprogrammable means a machine whose motions or functions can be changed without physical
alteration. Multipurpose means a machine that can be applied to different applications. Physical alteration
is alteration of the mechanical system as opposed to storage media, ROMs, etc. Axis: direction specifies
the robot motion in a linear or rotary mode.

                                                    -6-
a time series/cross section design that exploits the variation in robot supply over time and
across industries.

       To get a sense of the types of machines included in the industrial robot category,
the annual report of the IFR lists categories of applications that the robots perform.5
These include:
       Handling operations;
       Machine tending assistant processes for the primary operation;
       Welding and soldering;
       Dispensing;
       Processing (where the robot leads the workplace or the tool in material removal;
       Assembling and disassembling enduring positioning of elements.

        These applications make it clear that industrial robots are likely to be direct
substitutes for manual workers in factories – both skilled workers, such as welders, and
less skilled workers along an assembly line but should have little direct impact on office
workers or professionals, though impacts may spill over: a machine that reduces factory
employment could, for example, shift white collar employment from human resources to
engineering.

        The IFR survey collects data on the number of units shipped with no information
on the price of robots or the value of shipments that could be used to generate an average
price. The survey also does not provide any information on the specific attributes of the
shipped products over time. The absence of value and attributes data rules out using the
IFR survey to develop a hedonic price index that would transform the number of shipped
units into a measure of effective units of fixed quality. Assuming that technological
change improves the quality of robots over time, a fixed quality measure of the number of
robots would presumably grow more rapidly than the number of units reported by the
IFR. If, for example, technological change improved the quality of each robot unit by 10
percent per year, the fixed quality measure would increase by 10 percent more per year
than the number of units. The number of robots sold is thus almost certainly a downward
biased estimate of the effective supply of labor embodied in the machine.

        The industry coverage of the IFR data varies over time. In the early years of the
survey the IFR reported a large “unspecified” category in its industry classification.
Beginning in 2004, the IFR gathered shipments by detailed industries for the US that
shrank the unspecified category substantially. We deal with the missing data problem by
allocating the unspecified shipments in earlier years according to the 2004 industry share.

       Since robots are a form of capital stock comparable to the capital stock of plant
and equipment that enter standard production functions, the annual shipments have to be
cumulated into a stock to measure their impact on output, wages, and employment.6 The

5
        IFR World of Robots 2017.
6
        Indeed, expenditures on robots are included in surveys that ask for spending on plant and
equipment as part of equipment. What differentiates robots from other plant and equipment is that robots
are assumed to be more substitutable for human labor than other forms of capital. This assumption is the

                                                   -7-
IFR also produces an estimated “operational stock” of robots in a given year by summing
shipments over the preceding twelve years with a depreciation assumption that “the
average service life is 12 years and that there is an immediate withdrawal of the robots
after 12 years”.7 Under this assumption, it requires 12 years of shipments data to obtain
an estimate of the stock of robots in a given industry, which implies that a larger
proportion of the estimated stock fits into the “non-specified” category than of the
estimated shipments, which substantially reduces the time series for analysis.

        We deal with this problem by calculating our own estimates of the stock S of
robots in an industry from the shipments data, applying the standard capital stock
accumulation formula to the annual shipments. In particular, we write the stock of
operating robots in year t, S(t), in terms of the depreciated pre-existing stock and the
volume of new shipments, R(t), as:

(3)               S(t) = (1 - δ) S(t - 1) + R(t),

where δ is the depreciation rate, which could perhaps be on the order of 10 to 15 percent.

        Equation (3), however, has a major problem. It ignores the likely improvement in
the quality of robots over time. If robot manufacturers improve their product regularly,
say by ψ percent per year, the number of quality-adjusted robots shipped in year t would
be larger than the number shipped in year 0 even if the reported number of robot
shipments were the same. Let R*(t) be the “effective” number of robots shipped in year t.
The effective number of robots shipped in year t, relative to the number of robots shipped
in year 0, would then be R*(t) = (1 + ψ)t R(t).

        Taking account of both the depreciation of robot capital over time and its
appreciation due to technological change yields the following equation defining the robot
stock at time t:

      (4) S*(t) = (1 - δ) S*(t - 1) + (1 + ψ)t R(t)

        If depreciation were due solely to obsolescence, δ would be a function of ψ and
the stock would depreciate/appreciate depending on the difference between the two
values and the rate of investment in robots relative to the stock. Absent information on
the rate of depreciation of robots and of the rate of appreciation of robot efficacy over
time, we calculated the effects of robots under the simplifying “neutrality” assumption
that the rate of depreciation and rate of appreciation roughly balance each other out.8 This
makes our stock measure equal to the simple sum of the shipments to industries over
time. We replicated our empirical analysis using alternative measures of a net

starting point for analyzing their impact on employment and wages separately from other inanimate factors
of production.

7
         IFR, World Robotics 2017, ch. 1, p 28.
8
        Barañano and Romero-Ávila (2015) provide some macro-economic evidence of a positive relation
between growth and depreciation. Fisher and Pry (1971) develop a model in which technological change
obsolesces older capital.

                                                    -8-
depreciation rate (such as 10 percent) and obtained results that are similar to those
reported below. The trend in the adjusted measures of the stock, regardless of the
depreciation/appreciation rate assumed, is mainly driven by the rapid increase in the
number of robots deployed by firms in the period studied.

        Finally, the IFR data has no regional breakdown of shipments of robots within the
United States. The lack of regional information is an important difference between our
measures of the robot supply shock and the immigrant supply shock. Our econometric
specification effectively assumes that robots are distributed across areas within an
industry proportional to employment in that industry.9

Measuring the immigrant shock

         Our data on the number of immigrants and on the employment and earnings of
workers are drawn from the 2004-2016 American Community Surveys (ACS). We
restrict our analysis to the sample of persons who worked at some point during the
calendar year of each survey. We use the sampling weights reported in the ACS
throughout the analysis, so that the weighted number of observations in our ACS
sample estimates the size of the workforce.

        Analyzing the link between the IFR’s reported number of robots in an industry
and the ACS’s information on an industry’s employment and earnings requires a
crosswalk between the industry classifications in the two data sources.10 Comparing the
classifications, we developed a crosswalk that matches 26 industries, encompassing the
entire workforce. Table 1 lists the 26 industries and reports the total employment in each
in the latest (2016) ACS cross-section. Because industrial robots are used primarily in
manufacturing, the IFR distinguishes manufacturing industries in some detail and places
most other workers in a residual category labeled as “all other non-manufacturing
branches”. This residual category composed almost 70 percent of the workforce in 2016.
Given this uneven distribution of workers across industries, we performed the regression
analysis reported below both including and excluding the residual category from our
calculations. Despite its size, the exclusion of this industry from the analysis does not
change the key results, primarily because this industry has effectively no data on robots
and thus adds little information about how robots impact labor market outcomes.

        We define our measure of robot intensity in an industry-year cell as the ratio of
the stock of robots to the number of workers in the industry. In particular, let Si(t) be the
stock of robots in industry i in year t; and Li(t) be the number of workers in that industry.
We define the robot intensity index as:



9
          The U.S. Census Bureau developed a set of experimental questions on robots in its 2017 Census of
Manufacturing that could be used to apportion robots within an industry by geographic location but the
results are not yet publicly available.
10
          The matching uses the industry variable in the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS)
version of the ACS, IND1990, which reports a worker’s industry of employment based on the 1990 Census
Bureau industrial classification scheme.

                                                   -9-
     (5) ri(t) = Si(t)/ Li(t)

        Table 1 shows that robot intensity varied substantially among industries in 2016.
The industries with the highest intensity are “computers and peripheral equipment,”
which has a robot intensity index of 15.9 percent, and “automotive,” with a robot
intensity index of 12.3 percent. In contrast, the robot intensity measure in many other
industries, ranging from “agriculture, forestry, and fishing,” to “textiles” to
“construction” is near zero.

       We measure the immigrant supply shock by defining an immigrant as a person
residing in the United States who is either a naturalized citizen or a non-citizen. The
ACS also reports the immigrant’s year of arrival in the US, which allows us to define the
number of immigrant workers who arrived in a particular year, an annual flow
comparable to the IFR data on the annual shipments of robots. We define the number of
new immigrants in the ACS survey in year t as the number of immigrant workers who
reported they arrived in year t - 1.11 The immigrant stock is the total number of
immigrants working in that year and reflects the most recent year’s flow of immigrant
workers and any changes in the number who came earlier.

       Our measure of the immigrant shock is the immigrant share of workers in a state-
industry-year cell. In particular, let Mis(t) be the number of immigrants in industry i, state
s, and year t; and let Lis(t) be the corresponding number of workers in that cell. The
immigrant share is defined by:

              (6) mis (t) = Mis (t)/Lis (t)

        The third column of table 1 reports the immigrant share at the national level. It
shows that the immigrant supply shock ranges from about 10 percent in “mining and
quarrying,” “basic metals,” and “automotive,” to about 25 percent in “construction,”
“computers and peripheral equipment,” and “food and beverages and peaks at 30 percent
in agriculture and nearly 35 percent in textiles.

       We also use the ACS data to measure the number of workers and the earnings of
workers in each industry-state-year cell. The employment measure is the total number of
workers adjusted by hours of work.12 The earnings measure is the ratio of a worker's wage
and salary income to annual hours worked, which we will refer to as “hourly earnings”.
To better approximate changes in the price of skills, the earnings analysis is restricted to

11
       Because the annual file of the ACS is obtained from a series of monthly samples, the number of
immigrants in survey year t who report arriving in that calendar year does not correctly estimate of the total
number of immigrants who arrived in that calendar year.
12
     In particular, a worker’s sampling weight is multiplied by the fraction of the year that the person
     worked (defined as annual hours of work divided by 2000). The ACS only reports the number of weeks
     worked for a small number of bracketed categories. Our calculation of the hourly earnings assigns a
     value of 7.4 to those who report working between 1 and 13 weeks, 21.3 to those who report 14 to 26
     weeks, 33.1 to those who report working 27 to 39 weeks, 42.4 to those who report 40 to 47 weeks, 48.2
     to those who report 48 to 49 weeks, and 51.9 to those who report 51 to 52 weeks.

                                                    -10-
workers aged 25-59 who are not in school. Further, to avoid the contamination of hourly
earnings trends by changes in sample composition between immigrant and native-born
workers, the earnings analysis uses only the sample of native-born workers. Finally,
because of potential measurement error, we excluded from the earnings analysis all
persons who report hourly earnings in the bottom 1 or top 1 percentile or hourly earnings
below $2.60 or above $154.70 in 2016 dollars).

Estimating Effects of Robot and Immigration Shocks

        We used the merged IFR and ACS data on robots, immigration, employment and
wages to estimate the impact of the two supply shocks on labor market outcomes. We
begin with OLS estimates of the wage and employment equations and then turn to IV
estimates that seek to identify the effect of robots and immigrants on wages and
employment corrected for the simultaneous decision of firms to deploy robots and
immigrants to supply labor to an area-industry. We exclude the (large) residual industry
of “all other non-manufacturing branches” defined by the IFR in the regressions as
providing little insight into the effect of the industrial robots in the IFR data.13
Throughout the analysis, we estimate the regression models for all workers, for workers
divided into three education groups, and for men and women separately.

OLS estimates

        To estimate the impact of the two supply shocks on the hourly earnings of
workers, we aggregated the individual-level data in the ACS to the level of an industry-
state-year cell, and calculated the mean skill-adjusted log hourly earnings in each cell.
We first estimated earnings regressions at the individual level on a vector of variables
giving the worker’s age, gender, and educational attainment. The residual from this
regression gives the worker’s skill-adjusted wage. The mean skill-adjusted wage in a
state-industry-year cell is then given by the average residual among workers in that cell.
The second-stage regression model is given by:

(7)                 log w (t) = a r (t) + a m (t) + q + q + q + e,
                           is       0 i         1   is          i       s   t

where q gives a vector of industry fixed effects; q gives the vector of state fixed effects,
            i                                                       s
q gives a vector of year fixed effects. The coefficients of the robot and immigrant
 t
intensity variable capture the impact of the supply shocks on the “average” worker after
standardizing for socioeconomic characteristics. To avoid composition effects due to the
changing immigrant population, the earnings regression uses only the sample of native
workers. The standard errors in the regression are clustered at the state-industry level.14

13
      We also estimated all regressions including the residual industry and the results were similar to those
      reported below.
14
      We also estimated regression models that include two-way interactions between industry and state, as
      well as between state and year. These models, however, tend to saturate the information in the data
      because we have no state variation in our measure of robot intensity and have much less time variation
      in the size of the immigrant supply shock in the post-2004 ACS data than in the immigration studies

                                                         -11-
         Table 2 presents OLS regression estimates of the impact of robots and immigrants
on log of hourly earnings. The first column's estimates for the full sample of workers
shows a markedly larger and statistically more significant negative impact of robots per
worker on earnings than of immigrants. This pattern replicates with differing magnitudes
in all of our regressions with hourly earnings as the dependent variable. Interpreted as
indicating the differing equivalence of robots and immigrants for existing workers in our
model, the larger coefficient in the regressions on the number of robots than on the
number of immigrants implies a larger equivalence parameter for robots, or γ > θ.

        The estimates in the next three columns present the coefficients and standard
errors from regressions for workers in specified education groups. They also show a
pattern that will replicate with differing magnitudes in ensuing calculations – a larger
estimated impact of robots on the least educated group than on the more educated groups
and a negative estimated impact of immigrants on the wages of the least-skilled workers
with a positive impact on the most skilled. This pattern of coefficients likely reflects the
extent of substitution and complementarity between the different skill groups of natives
and the typical immigrant. The immigrant population in the past two decades has been
disproportionately low-skill, hence the reduction in the wage of the least skilled natives
and the modest positive impact on the wage of the most skilled natives. The OLS results
are broadly consistent with the modest negative effect of immigration on the average
worker and larger negative effect on the least-skilled found in many immigration studies
(Blau and Mackie 2016).

        The final two columns present the results for women and men separately. They
show modest gender differences in the relation of robots to earnings and a larger impact
of immigrants on female earnings than on male earnings—a pattern that does not
replicate in other calculations.

        To estimate the impact of robots and immigrants on employment, we again
aggregate the individual ACS data to calculate the size of the work force in an industry-
state-year cell as described earlier. The analogous regression model is then given by:

(8)                log Lis(t) = b0 ri(t) + b1 mis(t) + qi + qs + qt + n

where Lis(t) gives the total number of workers (both natives and immigrants) employed in
industry i, state s, at time t. We also conducted the aggregation separately for three
education groups, and we use these as alternative dependent variables. The regressions
are weighted by the number of observations in the state-industry-year cell and the
standard errors are again clustered at the state-industry level.15


     that use information spanning several decades beginning in 1960 and that thus compare periods of high
     immigration with periods of low immigration. Despite these data issues, the inclusion of two-way
     interactions leads to estimates for the robot effect that resemble those reported here.
15
     Note that there is potential division bias because the denominator of the robot and immigrant intensity
     variables gives employment in the industry-year cell (for the robot intensity variable) or in the industry-
     state-year cell (for the immigrant intensity variable). To avoid the bias, we redefined the two regressors

                                                      -12-
        Table 3 reports the estimated coefficients and standard errors for the robot and
immigrant shock variables on employment. Note that because the dependent variable
gives total employment in the industry-state-year cell, and includes immigrants, the
“baseline” value of the coefficient of the immigrant supply shock is equal to one. Thus it
is deviations from 1.0 in the estimated regression coefficient that tells us whether
immigration led to a crowding out of the pre-existing “native” workers.

        The estimated regression coefficient in Table 3 linking employment to robot
intensity is negative, which in conjunction with the negative estimated coefficients of
robots on wages in table 2 supports our schematic model that treats robots as shifting the
supply curve of equivalent labor. Viewing the estimated coefficient on robots as
estimates of the human worker equivalence of robots, the column 1 regression suggests
that one robot does the work of about two workers. The estimates for the different
education groups show a slightly larger negative effect of robots on less educated than on
more educated workers, though the differences are not statistically significant. The
estimates by gender show a larger impact on female workers than on male workers.

        The estimated coefficient of the immigrant intensity variable on employment of
all workers is +0.80, which is modestly below the “no change” baseline of 1.0. It suggests
that an additional immigrant increases the total number of workers by 0.80 persons,
which effectively reduces the number of “native” workers by 0.20 persons.

        The regressions for education groups yield smaller coefficients for persons with
12-15 years of schooling and 16 or more years of schooling that imply larger
displacement of existing workers. But the large positive coefficient of the immigration
variable for the least educated workers is anomalous. The anomaly arises partly because
the small samples for this low-skill group in many of the state-industry-year cells forces
us to exclude many of the cells from the log employment regressions, while small
numbers in non-empty cells adds substantial measurement error to those cells. The small
sample size reported in the regression for the least-educated workers reflects the fact that
over 15 percent of the potential cells are empty (yielding an estimate of zero measured
employment), as compared to only 5.8 percent for workers with 12-15 years of education.
The small sample problem persists even in the cells that have a positive number of
observations. In half of the cells for the least-educated workers, our estimate of total
employment is based on a sample of fewer than 11 persons. In contrast, the median
number of observations in the non-empty cells for workers with 12-15 years of education
is 74.

       The small sample size in many cells, therefore, introduce a great deal of volatility
in measured employment both within and across state-industry groups, particularly for
the low-skill workforce. Moreover, this sampling issue also partially affects the
calculation of the immigration intensity variable for the state-industry-year cell, as the
immigrant share is also calculated from the ACS data. In short, measurement error
contaminates both the dependent variable (log employment in a state-industry-year-
education cell) and the regressor measuring the immigration supply shock, generating a

   by using the average level of employment in the industry or in the state-industry cell in 2001-2003 prior
   to the sample in estimating the regressions.

                                                   -13-
potentially severe bias because the number of working immigrants in a cell appears on
both sides of the employment regression equation.

        One way to reduce the spurious correlation is to estimate the regressions using the
log number of working natives as the dependent variable. Although this specification
does not measure the impact of robot intensity on total employment (after all, robots
affect the employment of both immigrants and natives), the measured impact of
immigration on low-skill employment should be less contaminated by the measurement
error. Appendix Table A1 reports the regression results using this alternative dependent
variable. The coefficients of the robot intensity variable resemble those obtained when
using total employment as the dependent variable, but the OLS coefficient of the
immigration intensity variable for the least-educated workforce, while still positive, falls
dramatically, indicating that the anomalously high coefficient for that group reported in
Table 3 reflects measurement error due to sample size.


Dealing with simultaneity

        Treating robots and immigrants as exogenous factors that shift the equivalent
supply of labor in a market ignores the likely impact of labor market conditions on the
firms' introduction of robots to an industry and on immigrants seeking work in a
particular area and industry. The decisions of firms should produce a positive relation
between wages and the number of robots as high wages induce firms to substitute more
robots for workers.16 Similarly, high earnings in an industry-area is likely to attract
immigrants to the industry-area. In both cases the endogenous decisions to purchase
robots or to immigrate will create a positive relation between the numbers of robots or
immigrants and wages, biasing downward OLS estimates of the negative effects of the
shocks along a given demand curve we seek to identify.

        We deal with the simultaneity problem through a two-stage instrumental variable
analysis. We instrument shipments of robots on the number of robots shipped in the
same industry and year in Japan and Germany as reported by the IFR. Ideally, this
isolates the part of the growth of robots due to exogenous technological change and
economic conditions that affects the same industry in all advanced countries similarly.
Given that Germany and Japan are leaders in robot technologies and top exporters of




16
          A firm will substitute a robot for a worker whenever the unit cost of having the robot do the work
falls below the unit cost of the worker doing it, which will depend on the wage and the cost of the robot as
well as their relative productivity. Technological change that produces more effective robots at a given
cost or lowers the price of robots will induce firms to shift to robots unless wages fall commensurately.
Robotworx estimates the cost of a robot: “Complete with controllers and teach pendants, new industrial
robotics cost from $50,000 to $80,000. Once application-specific peripherals are added, the robot system
costs anywhere from $100,000 to $150,000” (https://www.robots.com/faq/how-much-do-industrial-robots-
cost). If it costs $50,000 per year to run a system, including depreciation, the robot cost would rise to
$150,000 to $200,000. At the average US wage and salary of about $50,000, and benefits raising labor
costs by 50%, the average worker costs the firm about $75,000. If the robot replaces two people, the robot
would pay off in less than two years. Hence, the exponential growth of robots.

                                                    -14-
robots in the world17, including to the US18, the instrument seems well-suited to identify
the part of US purchases due to the supply shift of robots globally.

        We deal with the endogeneity of immigrant choice with a variant of the “shift-
share” instrument that is widely used in the immigration literature. We first calculated
the state-industry distribution of immigrants who originated in a specific country in the
1970 Census of Population. The key assumption is that this initial placement influences
the state-industry distribution of later waves of immigrants from that same country,
perhaps because of network effects. We allocate current immigrants from each country
across the state-industry cells according to the country's 1970 state-industry distribution.
We then obtain the predicted number of current immigrants in each state-industry cell as
the sum of the predicted number across all national origin groups. To the extent that the
conditions that encouraged immigrants in 1970 to “settle” in particular cells persist over
time the instrument does not fully address the endogeneity problem. Jaeger, Ruist, and
Stuhler (2018) examine the resulting biases and propose alternative methods of
addressing the persistent endogeneity.19

        Table 4 presents the IV estimates of the impact of the robot and immigration
supply shocks on the log hourly wage. Consistent with the notion that simultaneity
produces a positive bias on estimates of the impact of robots on earnings, the table 4
estimated coefficients are almost all more negative than the comparable table 2 OLS
estimates. The IV estimated impact of an increase in robot intensity for all workers, for
example, increases the effect on wages from -0.98 in table 2 to -1.21 in table 4. The sole
exception is the coefficient on robots for college graduate workers, which becomes more
positive, indicative of complementarity rather than substitution between the robots and
the most highly educated group. The estimated coefficient on immigrants in the table 4
IV regression also becomes more negative than in the corresponding table 2 OLS
regression. In the sample of all workers, the insignificant OLS effect of -0.05 turns into a
-0.39 significant effect.

         Finally, replicating the OLS finding, the estimated IV coefficients on robots are
substantially larger than those on immigrants, which in the context of our supply-shock
model suggests that γ > θ – the efficiency value of a robot exceeds that of an immigrant.
For all workers, the effect of robots on the wage is about 3 times larger than the effect of
immigrants on the wage, so that if an immigrant has approximately the same productivity
of a native worker, a robot is equivalent to 3 workers.


17
         In 2017 about half of world exports in robots came from Japan (36.6 percent of total industrial
robot exports) and Germany (14.2 percent) with the US in fifth place with 5% of exports, behind Italy and
France. http://www.worldstopexports.com/top-industrial-robots-exporters.
18
         Over half of robot sales in US are imports, with Germany, Japan, and Switzerland, being major
sources of industrial robots. https://www.exportusa.eu/export-industrial-robots-unitedstates.php
19
         The first-stage regressions show that the robot intensity measure in the United States is strongly
predicted by the robot stocks in Japan and Germany, and that the number of immigrant workers in each
state-industry cell in the ACS is strongly predicted by the presence of immigrants in those cells in the 1970
Census.

                                                    -15-
         Table 5 presents IV estimates of the impact of robots and immigrants on
employment. The estimated coefficients for all workers are more negative compared to
the corresponding estimates in table 3. The estimated negative coefficient on robots
increased in absolute value for all workers from about -2.2 to -2.5 and increased a bit
more in some of the least-skilled groups. The IV estimate of the immigrant shock on
total employment changes from the 0.80 found in the OLS regression to a coefficient of -
0.19, which implies a more sizable displacement of the current workforce from the 1.0
neutrality (although the standard error is large). But as in the OLS regressions, we get an
anomalous result for the least educated group of workers with an estimated coefficient
that is larger than one (though not statistically different from one). Per the earlier
discussion we attribute this to the measurement error that arises from the large number of
industry-state-year cells that were excluded from the analysis and to the small sample
size in many other cells. As Appendix Table A1 shows, the use of the log of native
employment as the dependent variable shows a crowding-out effect of immigration on
native workers in all education groups, with the adverse effect being larger for natives
with less than a college education.


Bringing occupations in

        The media reports and projections of robot effects on jobs focus on how robots
substitute for people in particular occupations or work tasks – ranging from assembling
items along an assembly line, or spraying paint, or conducting surgery, and so on. The
Frey-Osborne (2013; 2017) projections that gained widespread attention for the claim
that 47 percent of total US employment was at risk of being computerized was, for
example, based on an analysis of the probability that work would be computerized in 702
detailed occupations. Most other projection studies have similarly built their analysis on
the basis of how technology is expected to affect occupations, not on industry purchases
of robots as in our tables 2-5.

        Since firms in any given industry hire workers in many occupations, some of
whom may be affected by robots or other technological changes, while others may not
affected, there is a disconnect between the occupations/work tasks analysis and the
industry analysis. The occupation data have an occupation subscript regardless of
industry while our robot sales data have an industry subscript but no occupation
subscript. To some extent the limitation of the IFR data to industrial robots that primarily
affect blue collar workers and our exclusion of the “all other non-manufacturing
branches” part of the IFR data bounds the occupation-industry problem by focusing on
manufacturing. Still, our estimate of employment and earnings at the industry level
almost surely understates the impact of robots on the subset of occupations within an
industry whose work the robots are designed to perform. For instance, industrial robots
could replace nearly all the welders in automobile production but have no effect on office
workers in the industry, so that the effect on total employment would understate the
impact on the workers actually given the “robot treatment”.

       To bring occupations into our analysis, we examined measures of the
characteristics of occupations from the Department of Labor's Occupational Information
Network (O*NET) data set, which measures the attributes of hundreds of occupations

                                           -16-
along diverse dimensions.20 From the huge array of O*NET measures of occupational
attributes, we selected one statistic as being most likely connected to robotization. This is
the "degree of automation" of occupations that scores the extent of automation in an
occupation on a scale from zero (no automation) to 100 (most automated).21 An industry
with a large influx of robots is more likely to have a supply shock for occupations with
greater degrees of automation than occupations the O*NET data views as relatively
immune from automation. Similarly, the high automation occupation should have a
greater supply shock in an industry with a large robot shock than in one with a modest
increase in robots.

       To incorporate the automation variable in our data, we attached to every worker in
the ACS file the score of their occupation on the O*NET automation scale and then
divided the occupations into three groups: those in the top quartile of the index (high
automation); those between the 25th and 75th percentile of the index (medium
automation); and those in the bottom quartile (low automation) of the O*NET index.

        To the extent that the O*NET categories correctly identify the proneness of
occupations to automation and that the robots contribute to automation, the regression of
wages and employment on robot intensity should give large coefficients on robots for
occupations in the top automation quartile and small coefficients on robots for
occupations in the bottom quartile. This is effectively a double difference methodology
to identify robot effects on the notion that the impact on wages and employment should
be greater in occupations more likely to face robot substitutes in industries that purchased
large numbers of robots than in occupations viewed as less automatable compared to
industries which purchased few robots. By contrast, we expect no clear pattern of
differences in coefficients on the immigrant supply shock.

        Table 6 summarizes the results from this analysis. It shows larger estimated
negative effects of robots on hourly earnings and employment for workers in the top
automation quartile group than in the lowest automation quartile. Estimates of robot
effects for the middle group are closer to those of the top quartile group: a bit larger in the
wage regressions but a bit lower in the employment regression. Both the earnings and
employment regressions show a larger negative effect of immigrants for the high
automation group, suggesting that some occupations experienced both a technology and
immigrant shock. 22


20
          https://www.onetonline.org/ O*NET contains on the order of 100 measures of the skills and
knowledge required in every occupation, the abilities, interests and values needed to perform the work, the
training and level of licensing and experience needed for the work; the work activities and the physical,
social, and organizational factors involved in the work
21
          We took the index for occupations on O*NET and transformed them into the OCC1990
occupation code available in the ACS available at IPUMS.
22
           We also examined the relation between two other variables that same analysts view as indicating
the likelihood of an occupation being prone to automation by robots and other technology – the routineness
of cognitive work and the routineness of manual work (Autor, et al 2003). These measures were largely
independent of the automation variable and did not differentiate the effect of robots well.

                                                   -17-
        Given the attention given to Frey and Osborne's (2013) analysis of the likelihood
of computerization of work on the future of jobs, we also examined the relation between
their probability of computerization (which they derived making extensive use of O*NET
data) on earnings and employment. We transformed their 702 occupations into a smaller
grouping consistent with the ACS occupational category and found that their measure
was positively correlated at 0.30 with the O*NET automation variable, suggesting that
the two variables were capturing somewhat similar attributes of occupations. Some of
the difference between the measures is presumably due to automation having primarily
impacted manual jobs in the past while the impact of computerization extends to white
collar jobs. We then categorized occupations into the upper quartile, middle two
quartiles, and lowest quartile of the probability of computerization of work.

        Table 7 presents the OLS and IV regression coefficients on wage and employment
equations for the three groups of occupations. As in our other calculations, the estimated
robot effects are considerably larger than the estimated immigrant effects and become
more negative with the IV analyses. There is one notable difference between the
estimated effects of robots between the O*NET automation variable and the Frey and
Osborne probability of computerization. The table 7 estimates show that increased robot
intensity reduced employment and wages even for workers in occupations having low
probability of computerization.

        In short, dividing the data by attributes of occupations confirms our basic findings
that an increase in robots reduces wages and employment more than does an increase in
immigration and gives reasonably plausible patterns across the groupings. But there is
sufficient variation in measures of occupational characteristics beyond the automation
and computability measures to suggest the value of more detailed investigation of the link
between occupational attributes and impact of industrial robots.

Conclusion

        Treating the deployment of industrial robots as a supply shock in a demand-
supply model that includes the influx of immigrants as a separate measure of changes in
supply offers a unique perspective on the development of technological substitutes for
labor. It highlights the critical importance of the displacement parameter that connects
the numbers of robots to the shift in supply of equivalent workers and provides a natural
comparison metric in terms of the shift in supply due to immigrants. In our calculations
robots had a negative impact on wages and employment overall and in most groups, with
the negative impact of robots substantially larger than the negative impacts of immigrants
on wages and employment. Taking the table 4 and 5 IV calculations for all workers as
the best estimate of the overall impacts, the displacement effects of robots are on the
order of 2-3 times the effects of immigrants. Honing down to narrower groups suggests
that the impacts are larger for less educated workers, for female workers, and for workers
in occupations viewed as more automatable, ranging upward to robot displacement
effects of 3-4 times.

        Our estimated effects on wages and employment in the US are close in magnitude
to the estimates of Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017), who examined the IFR data in a
shorter time period with a different methodology. They organized the data into

                                           -18-
commuting zone areas with the robot shock dependent on the industry mix in the area
rather than on effects within impacted industries. That two different empirical approaches
yield qualitatively comparable results, with robots reducing both employment and wages
for the most highly impacted groups suggests that the finding is “in the data” rather than
in any particular modeling structure. By focusing our analysis on workers in directly
impacted industries, education groups, and occupations, we obtain generally larger effects
of robots on employment than Acemoglu-Restrepo report for impacted areas.23 This
reflects the fact that our analysis focuses on employment in affected industries while
theirs relates to area labor markets where most workers are in other industries and
presumably includes employment of workers displaced from robot-intensive sectors. To
pin down the more general equilibrium aspects of the impact of robots on employment
and wages requires analysis of what happens to workers displaced by robots and the
“spillover” adjustment of wages and employment in industries and occupations not
subject to robot shocks that goes beyond our analysis in this paper.

        Finally, our analysis provides a useful way to bridge the disagreement between
the skepticism of traditional labor market analysts, who regard fears of robot or other
technologies impacting the job market as speculation with no evidentiary backing, and
the analysis and projections by more technologically oriented researchers that warn of
future labor market dislocation.

        On the one side, our comparison of the magnitude of the robot shock and the
immigrant shock in figure 2 supports the skepticism of labor analysts. Despite the media
uproar about robots, the robot supply shock has been too modest through the mid-2010s
to disrupt the labor market.

       On the other side, the evidence that the increased supply of industrial robots has
depressed employment and wages in affected industries, with a robot adding the
equivalent of 2 to 3 workers to labor supply on average and 3-4 workers in particular
groups, suggests that it would be foolhardy to dismiss the concerns about the future of
work. Reasonably large supply shock effects of technology and exponential growth of
robots and related technologies have the potential to shake up the world of work in the
foreseeable future.




23

     The estimated coefficients of the impact of robots on employment in Acemoglu and Restropo (2017,
     Table 3) are in the range of -0.6 and -1.4 using Census employment data and in the range of -1.7 to -2.5
     using employment data from County Business Patterns. Our corresponding estimates for “all workers”
     in Table 5 is -2.5, with a higher estimated impact for the least educated of -4.3. Their estimated effects
     of robots on log weekly earnings are much higher than our effects on log hourly earnings (and also
     higher than their estimated effects on log hourly earnings as it includes the impact on hours worked).

                                                      -19-
REFERENCES


Acemoglu, Daron. and Pascal Restrepo. 2017. “Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor
       markets”, NBER Working Paper No. 23285 (March). Cambridge, MA.
Autor, David, Frank Levy and Richard Murnane, “The Skill Content of Recent
       Technological Chane: an empirical exploration” Quarterly Journal of Economics
       November 2003

Barañano, Ilaski, and Diego Romero-Ávila. 2015. “Long-term Growth and Persistence
      with Obsolescence.” Economic Modelling 51(C): 328-339.

Blau, Francine D., and Christopher Mackie (editors). 2016. The Economic and Fiscal
       Consequences of Immigration. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Fisher, John C., and Robert H. Pry. 1971. “A Simple Substitution Model of
        Technological Change.” Technological Forecasting and Social Change 3: 75-88.

Frey, C. B., and M. A. Osborne. 2013. The Future of Employment: How susceptible are
       jobs to computerization.” (17 September). Online at:
       https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employ
       ment.pdf (accessed 11 November 2018). also published as Frey C. B., and M. A.
       Osborne. 2017. “The future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to
       computerization.” Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 114(C): 254-
       280.
Grace, K., J. Salvatier, A. Dafoe, B. Zhang, O. Evans. 2017. “When will AI exceed
       human performance? Evidence from AI experts.” Online at:
       arXiv:1705.08807 [cs.AI] (accessed 4 June 2018).
International Federation of Robotics (IFR). 2017. World Robotics 2017.

International Federation of Robotics (IFR). 2017. Executive Summary World Robotics
       2017 Industrial Robots. Available at:
       https://ifr.org/downloads/press/Executive_Summary_WR_2017_Industrial_Robot
       s.pdf (Accessed December 9, 2018).

Jaeger, David A., Joakim Ruist, and Jan Stuhler. 2018. “Shift-Share Instruments and the
        Impact of Immigration.” Working Paper No. 24285. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
        National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mishel, L. and J. Bivens. 2017. “The zombie robot argument lurches on: There is no
       evidence that automation leads to joblessness or inequality.” Economic Policy


                                          -20-
       Institute, Report 126750 (24 May). Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
       Online at: https://www.epi.org/files/pdf/126750.pdf (accessed 11 November
       2018).
Robotworx. https://www.robots.com

Solow, Robert. 1987. "We'd Better Watch Out." New York Times Book Review, July 12,
       1987, p. 36.

United States Census Bureau. 2017. Annual Survey of Manufacturers. Available at:
       https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/asm/data/tables.html


Winick, E. 2018. “Every study we could find on what automation will do to jobs, in one
       chart: There are about as many opinions as there are experts.” MIT Technology
       Review (25 January). Online at:
       https://www.technologyreview.com/s/610005/every-study-we-could-find-on-
       what-automation-will-do-to-jobs-in-one-chart/ (accessed 11 November 2018).




                                         -21-
Figure 1. Impact of a Robot or Immigration Supply Shock that Adds Z Efficiency Units
                                  to the Workforce




                                        -22-
                                                                            Number of robots shipped                                                                                      Number of robots shipped
                                                                  5000   10000 15000 20000 25000                   30000                                                         10000    15000   20000      25000   30000




                                                           2000
                                                                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               All industries, Flows




                                                                                                                             Manufacturing, Flows




                                                           2005
                                                                                                                                                                         2005




                                      Robots
                                                                                                                                                    Robots




       Source: Authors’ tabulations
                                                    Year
                                                                                                                                                                  Year




                                                           2010
                                                                                                                                                                         2010




                                      Immigrants
                                                                                                                                                    Immigrants




                                                           2015
                                                                                                                                                                         2015




                                                              40000            60000         80000                 100000                                                  300000        400000   500000    600000    700000




-23-
                                                                             Number of new immigrants                                                                                     Number of new immigrants




                                                                                    Stock of robots                                                                                            Stock of robots
                                                                    100000         200000       300000             400000                                                       100000       200000        300000     400000




                                                           2000
                                                                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               All Industries, Stock




                                                                                                                             Manufacturing, Stock




                                                           2005
                                                                                                                                                                         2005




                                       Robots
                                                                                                                                                     Robots




                                                    Year
                                                                                                                                                                  Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 2. The Robots and Immigration Supply Shocks, 2004-2016




                                                           2010
                                                                                                                                                                         2010




                                       Immigrants
                                                                                                                                                     Immigrants




                                                           2015
                                                                                                                                                                         2015




                                                              2900000    3000000    3100000   3200000    3300000   3400000
                                                                                                                                                                         18000000 20000000 22000000 24000000 26000000
                                                                                   Stock of immigrants                                                                                 Stock of immigrants
                          Table 1. Summary statistics in 2016, by industry
                                     (ranked by robot intensity)


                                                        Total
                                                      employm      Robot     Immigrant
                                                         ent     Intensity    Intensity   13+ years of   Log hourly
Industry                                               (1000s)      (%)          (%)       school (%)      wage

Computers and peripheral equipment                       163.6     15.9        25.9          84.1          3.536
Automotive                                              1536.9     12.3        11.3          55.1          3.018
Rubber and plastic products (non-auto)                   668.2      3.2        14.7          47.9          2.924
Metal products (non-auto)                               1025.9      2.2        14.0          48.0          2.966
Electrical machinery n.e.c. (non-auto)                  1051.4      2.2        25.5          71.6          3.272
Basic metals                                              547       1.1        11.1          49.0          3.066
Pharmaceuticals, cosmetics                               724.1      1.0        23.3          78.4          3.442
Food and beverages                                       1961       0.8        26.1          43.7          2.899
All other manufacturing branches                        1247.6      0.8        21.8          51.0          2.909
Household/domestic appliances                             80.1      0.6        15.4          56.0          2.987
Info communication equipment                             161.9      0.6        26.7          77.8          3.416
Industrial machinery                                     595.3      0.5        11.8          60.0          3.132
Medical, precision, optical instruments                  935.3      0.2        20.9          73.3          3.324
Glass, ceramics, stone, mineral products (non-auto)      472.6      0.1        16.1          45.6          2.967
Other vehicles                                          1116.2      0.1        14.1          70.8          3.372
Agriculture, forestry, fishing                          3822.5      0.0        30.2          38.1          2.683
Mining and quarrying                                     925.1      0.0        10.3          55.2          3.288
Textiles                                                 530.9      0.0        34.9          42.7          2.827
Wood and furniture                                      1033.2      0.0        15.7          37.3          2.780
Paper                                                    1504       0.0        13.0          61.9          3.035
Other chemical products                                  998.1      0.0        11.8          63.7          3.282
Metal, unspecified                                       1206       0.0        15.4          56.0          3.063
Electricity, gas, water supply                          1989.2      0.0        10.8          60.7          3.265
Construction                                           10550.8      0.0        24.0          40.4          3.016
Education/research/development                         13389.1      0.0        11.0          85.7          3.000
All other non-manufacturing branches                  104145.2      0.0        16.7          66.9          2.974


Source: Authors’ tabulations




                                                      -24-
   Table 2. OLS Estimates of the Impact of Robots and Immigration on the log Hourly
                                  Earnings, 2004-2016


                           All Workers, by Education Group                               By Gender
                      All   Less than 12 12-15         16 or more                      Male    Female
                   workers     years of    years of       years
                                school      school
Robots              -0.976      -1.586       -1.706      0.538                         -1.268         -0.600
                   (0.327)     (0.399)      (0.401)     (0.147)                       (0.331)         (0.377)
Immigrants          -0.046      -0.263       -0.093      0.140                         -0.081          0.100
                   (0.043)     (0.062)      (0.048)     (0.053)                       (0.048)         (0.045)

No. of             15,996          12,215          15,746            14,921           15,802          15,098
observations
R-squared           0.842           0.378           0.808            0.805             0.804           0.805

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. The log earnings regressions are estimated at
the grouped state-industry-year level. The dependent variable is the skill-adjusted mean log hourly wage in
a state-industry-year cell, where the skill adjustment controls for individual differences in age, gender, and
educational attainment. All regressions include vectors of fixed effects giving the worker’s state of
residence, industry of employment, and survey year. The number of cells varies between the groups due to
the absence of workers with the specified characteristics in small cells. The regressions are weighted by the
number of observations used to calculate the dependent variable.

Source: Authors’ tabulations




                                                    -25-
  Table 3. OLS Estimates of the Impact of Robots and Immigration on log Employment,
                               OLS estimates, 2004-2016

                   All Workers, by Education Group                                 By Gender
           All workers Less than 12-15 years 16 or more                          Males Females
                        12 years of of school     years
                          school
Robots        -2.223       -3.476    -2.484      -1.265                          -1.268          - (
             (0.717)      (1.119)    (0.867)    (0.885)                         (0.331)         , ,
Immigrants     0.797        1.917     0.339      0.372                           -0.081
             (0.194)      (0.412)    (0.127)    (0.169)                         (0.048)       (0.208)

No. of             16,125          13,770         15,942          15,351        15,802        )( )
observations
R-squared           0.926          0.914           0.914          0.934          0.804           -

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. The log employment regressions are
estimated at the grouped state-industry-year level, with a vector of fixed effects for states, industries, and
year but without any other measures of the attributes of workers within a cell. The number of cells varies
between the groups due to the absence of workers with the specified characteristics in small cells. All
regressions are weighted by the number of observations in the state-industry-year cell.

Source: Authors’ tabulations




                                                     -26-
     Table 4. IV Estimates of the Impact of Robots and Immigration on the log Hourly
                                   Earnings, 2004-2016

                                All Workers, by Education Group              Gender
                       All       Less than 12 12-15 years of 16 or more Male     Female
                    workers     years of school    school         years
Robots               -1.209          -1.876         -2.025        1.136 -1.628       -
                    (0.347)         (0.431)        (0.404)      (0.322) (0.321)      ,,
Immigrants           -0.392          -0.714         -0.464       -0.363 -0.537   -0.204
                    (0.098)         (0.133)        (0.121)      (0.120) (0.136) (0.076)

No. of                0.829           0.365                0.795           0.790         0.784         .797
observations
R-squared            15,996          12,215              15,746           14,921        15,802       15,098

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. The log wage regressions are estimated at
the grouped state-industry-year level. The dependent variable is the skill-adjusted mean log hourly wage in
a state-industry-year cell, where the skill adjustment controls for individual differences in age, gender, and
educational attainment. All regressions include vectors of fixed effects giving the worker’s state of
residence, industry of employment, and survey year. The number of cells varies between the groups due to
the absence of workers with the specified characteristics in small cells. The regressions are weighted by the
number of observations used to calculate the dependent variable.

Source: Authors’ tabulations




                                                    -27-
   Table 5. IV Estimates of the Impact of Robots and Immigration on log Employment,
                                       2004-2016

                                      All Workers, by Education Group                                     Gender
                            All workers     Less than 12 12-15 years 16 or more                        Male   Female
                                              years of     of school    years
                                               school
Robots                         -2.480          -4.341        -2.865    -1.389                          -1.693    ( ,
                              (0.955)          (1.287)      (1.114)   (1.163)                         (1.098)     -
Immigrants                     -0.188           1.646        -1.344    -0.551                          -0.316       ,)
                              (0.580)          (0.592)      (0.622)   (0.476)                         (0.678)     )

No. of                         16,114                13,768           15,934           15,346         15,986     )(
observations
R-squared                       0.923                 0.914            0.900            0.932          0.903     0.959

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. The log employment regressions are
estimated at the grouped state-industry-year level, with a vector of fixed effects for states, industries, and
year but without any other measures of the attributes of workers within a cell. The number of cells varies
between the groups due to the absence of workers with the specified characteristics in small cells. All
regressions are weighted by the number of observations in the state-industry-year cell.

Source: Authors’ tabulations




                                                     -28-
               Table 6. Estimates of the Impact of Robots and Immigration,
          by O*Net Degree of Automation in the Worker’s Occupation, 2004-2016

                                   Jobs are automated      Medium automation                      Jobs not automated
                                    OLS           IV         OLS         IV                        OLS          IV
                                                 Log hourly wage
Robots                             -1.069       -1.274      -1.301     -1.721                     0.059           0.352
                                  (0.285)      (0.301)     (0.349)    (0.335)                    (0.347)        (0.420)
Immigrants                         -0.065       -0.424      -0.060     -0.416                    -0.096          -0.140
                                  (0.046)      (0.106)     (0.042)    (0.107)                    (0.054)        (0.088)

No. of observations                15,111         15,271          15,111          15,794          12,236        12,236
R-squared                          0.607           0.621          0.793            0.778           0.769         0.769

                                                    Log employment
Robots                             -2.311          -3.096     -2.282               -2.419        -0.446           0.480
                                  (0.813)         (1.109)    (0.883)              (1.136)        (1.155)        (1.603)
Immigrants                         0.610           -1.722     1.179                0.375          0.168          -0.025
                                 (0.1902)         (0.913)    (0.299)              (0.802)        (0.133)        (0.224)

No. of observations                15496          14,494          15,981          15,970          13,124        13,123
R-squared                          0.869           0.843           0.899           0.897           0.972         0.984

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. The jobs that are automated include workers
whose occupation is in the top quartile of the O*NET index of automation. The jobs that are not automated
include workers whose occupation is in the bottom quartile of the index. The jobs with medium automation
include workers whose index is between the 25th and 75th percentile. All regressions are estimated at the
grouped state-industry-year level, with a vector of fixed effects for states, industry, and year. The wage
regressions are weighted by the number of observations used to calculate the skill-adjusted mean wage of a
state-industry-year cell, and the employment regressions are weighted by the number of observations in the
cell.

Source: Authors’ tabulations




                                                    -29-
            Table 7. Estimates of the Impact of Robots and Immigration, by
  Frey-Osborne Probability of Computerization in the Worker’s Occupation, 2004-2016

                                    High probability      Medium probability                       Low probability
                                    OLS          IV         OLS        IV                          OLS         IV
                                                Log hourly wage
Robots                             -0.883      -1.148      -1.817    -2.149                      -0.411          -0.607
                                  (0.359)     (0.431)     (0.398)   (0.398)                      (0.147)        (0.206)
Immigrants                         -0.094      -0.465      -0.181    -0.181                       0.053          -0.234
                                  (0.048)     (0.118)     (0.052)   (0.052)                      (0.037)        (0.111)

No. of observations               15,434          15,434          15,192          15,192          15,108        15,108
R-squared                          0.739           0.726           0.751           0.736           0.801         0.796

                                                    Log employment
Robots                             -2.680          -3.000     -1.895               -2.295        -2.373          -1.878
                                  (0.782)         (1.041)    (0.914)              (1.280)        (0.765)        (0.985)
Immigrants                          0.765          -0.438     1.037                -1.339         0.647           0.550
                                  (0.199)         (0.555)    (0.302)              (0.930)        (0.193)        (0.568)

No. of observations               15,713          15,706          15,575          15,569          15,451        15,447
R-squared                          0.952           0.947           0.924           0.908           0.858         0.858

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. The jobs that are automated include workers
whose occupation is in the top quartile of the Frey-Osborne estimated probability of computerization in the
worker’s occupation. The jobs that are not automated include workers whose occupation is in the bottom
quartile of the index. The jobs with medium automation include workers whose index is between the 25th
and 75th percentile. All regressions are estimated at the grouped state-industry-year level, with a vector of
fixed effects for states, industry, and year. The wage regressions are weighted by the number of
observations used to calculate the skill-adjusted mean wage of a state-industry-year cell, and the
employment regressions are weighted by the number of observations in the cell.

Source: Authors’ tabulations




                                                    -30-
   Appendix Table A1. The Impact of Robots and Immigration on Native Employment,
                                     2004-2016

                                                         All Native Workers, by Education Group
                                              All         Less than 12 years 12-15 years of     16 or more
                                                               of school           school          years
   A. OLS
Robots                                       -2.223                -2.947                   -2.350                -1.993
                                            (0.717)               (1.352)                  (0.928)               (0.898)
Immigrants                                   0.797                 0.388                    -0.096                 0.095
                                            (0.196)               (0.153)                  (0.129)               (0.158)

No. of observations                         16,125                13,229                   15,906                15,257
R-squared                                    0.926                 0.888                    0.908                 0.935

   B. IV
Robots                                       -2.480                -4.366                   -2.935                -2.132
                                            (0.955)               (1.544)                  (1.229)               (1.160)
Immigrants                                   -0.188                -1.595                   -2.276                -0.897
                                            (0.580)               (0.710)                  (0.724)               (0.471)

No. of observations                         16,114                13,229                   15,898                15,252
R-squared                                   0.923                  0.873                    0.884                 0.932

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. The log employment regressions are
estimated at the grouped state-industry-year level, with a vector of fixed effects for states, industries, and
year but without any other measures of the attributes of workers within a cell. The number of cells varies
between the groups due to the absence of workers with the specified characteristics in small cells. All
regressions are weighted by the number of observations in the state-industry-year cell.

Source: Authors’ tabulations.




                                                      -31-
