                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   COMPOSITIONAL EFFECTS OF GOVERNMENT SPENDING
                   IN A TWO-COUNTRY TWO-SECTOR PRODUCTION MODEL




                                Steven N. Durlauf

                                Robert W. Staiger




                              Working Paper No. 2543




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 1988




We thank Robert Lipsey, Ron McKinnon, Lars E.O. Svensson, and John Taylor for helpful
corrinents, Tam Bayoumi for research assistance, and CEPR for financial support.
The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program in International
Studies.    Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.    Support from The Lynde and Harry Bradley
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #2543
                                                       March 1988




                     Compositional Effects of Government Spending
                     in a Two-Country Two-Sector Production Model




                                          ABSTRACT



       This paper explores the impact of changes in the composition of government spending
   on the level of relative prices, interest rates and the current account in a two country,
   two period Heckscher-Ohlin model. We show that shifting the composition of government

   spending affects macroeconomic variables according to the relative factor intensities of
   tradeable and non-tradeable goods. Adjustments of composition towards non-tradeables
   will raise (lower) world interest rates if non-tradeables are capital (labor) intensive. The
   announcement of a future shift towards non-tradeables will induce a current account deficit

   (surplus) if future interest rates are expected to increase (decrease). The introduction of
   production thus places restrictions on the co- movements of fiscal policy and macroeco-
   nomic variables beyond those generated by preferences.




Steven N. Durlauf                                       Robert 14. Staiger
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
Stanford University                                     Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305                                      Stanford, CA 94305
I. INTRODUCTION
     The sectoral makeup of governmentspending patterns is by no means constant over
time. In the U.S., for example,    the percentage of federal expenditures going to services
fell from approximately 77% in 1973 to 66% in 1987. If governmentservices are viewed
as primarily non-tradeable, this represents roughly a 10 percentage point swing in federal
expenditures from the non-tradeable to the tradeable sector. The purpose of this paper
is to study the effects of shifts in the composition of governmentspending in an open
economy. We explore this issue within the context of a two country two sector two period
Heckscher-Ohlin model, and thus focus on the production-side channelsthrough which the

composition of government spending can affect important macroeconomic variables.
     With one traded good and one non-traded good, and with capital traded but labor
immobile, we show that a compositional shift in home governmentspending toward the
non-traded good will lead to an appreciationof the real exchange rate in both countries, and
if production of the non-traded good is relatively capital (labor) intensive, to a rise (fall) in
world real interest rates and an accompanyingdomesticcurrent account deficit (surplus).
Accordingly, the composition of governmentspending is shown to         be an important and
predictable determinant of the effects of fiscal policy on key macroeconomic variablesof the
model. Moreover, the sign of the co-movements in real exchange rates and trade balances
induced by the compositional shift is a function of factor intensities in production, and
will differ across countries. Co-movements in real exchange rates and real interest rates

also depend on factor intensities,but are not country-specific. Finally, the sign of the
co-movements in the real interest rate and trade balances induced by the compositional
shift is country-specific, but predictable independent of factor intensity data.
    Several earlier authors have emphasizedthe importanceof the composition          of govern-
ment spending in determining the impact of fiscal policy in an open economy. Helpman

(1976) demonstrates a differentialemployment effect from governmentspendingon traded



                                               2
versus non-traded goods in a one period two sector small open economy    that faces a min-
imum wage restriction and as8ociated unemployment. Helpman (1977) adds a restriction
on intersectoral capital mobility to the minimum wage restriction and examines the real

exchange    rate consequences of a shift in governmentspendingtoward the non-traded good.
Barry (1987) extends Helpman's analysis to allow for anticipated and unanticipated short
term and permanent fiscal policy changes. While motivatedby similar concerns, these mm-
imum wage models have been used to ask somewhat different questions than and provide
answers which are quite different from the equilibrium,full employment model considered

below. Papers by Greenwood (1984) and Frenkel and Razin (1986), while similarly inter-

ested in the compositional effects of government spending, analyze this question within
the context of endowment economies in which the production-sideissues which are the
focus of this paper do not arise. Finally, Razin (1984) explores the compositional effects

of governmentspending in a model with international financial but not physical capital
mobility where again, production-sideissues are absent.'
    We exploit the notion of an integrated economy (Helprnan and Krugman, 1985) to

derive ina simple way the impact of domesticgovernmentspending composition changes
on real exchange rates. With the real exchange rate results, the impact on world real
interest rates follows directly from the Stolper-Samuelson theorem. Finally, Rybczynski
effects determine the way in which the world capital stock must reallocate across coun-

tries to reproducethe integrated equilibriumafter the government spendingcompositional
shift. The required international capital movements show up as temporary current account

    There is also a large literature on the transfer problem and the relative price changes
that must accompany an international transfer of purchasing power. See Jones (1985)
for a recent review. However, this literature's primary focus on international movements
of purchasingpower as opposed to productiveresources differentiates it from the present

paper, since the production-sideissues we explore are largely absent.
                                             3
imbalances. Thus, the structure of the neoclassical production model is exploited fully in
our analysis of the compositionaleffects of government spending.
      The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the integrated
equilibriumand derives the effect of a compositional shift on relative prices and real interest
rates. Section III considers a two country trading world that replicates the integrated
equilibrium of Section II, and examines the impact of the compositional shift on real
exchange rates and world real interest rates. Section III also derives the international

capital movements that occur in response to the compositional shift. Section IV relates
the results to others in the literature. Section V presents a summary and conclusions.



IL    THE INTEGRATED ECONOMY
      We consider in this section a two-period, two-good, two-factor integrated world econ-

omy. Within        the integrated economy, there is no restriction on the movement of goods
or factors. Periods are labeled by i = (1,2) and the two goods are labeled       n and t. The
economy is endowed with stocks of capital          K and labor L that remain fixed over time.
Technology is also unchanging over         the two periods of the model, and is linearly hotno-
geneous. Define   F(K, L) as the set of feasible output vectors for this economy. Facing
prices P,"   and F, competitiveproducers will maximize the value of GNP in each period.
Nominal GNP is then given by the revenue function



(1)          R(P,',P,t,K,L)E max{PQ+P,'Q!(Q7,Q)€F(K,L)} i=1,2

where Q      and   Q   are   national outputs of n and t respectively.
      The economy is populated with identical consumers whose utility is defined over the
two-periodconsumption of n and t. We assume that utility is homothetic and time sepa-

                                                   4
rable, and that consumers discount second period utility by the factor fl The aggregate
expenditure function for this economy is given by



(2)           E(F,",Pt,U,)=—                                            1=1,2

where C' and    C represent aggregate private consumptionof n and t, respectively,       and

where U(.) is the aggregateutility function.
   Governmentpurchases of n and t in period i are given by          Gand G respectively.

These purchases are assumed not to enter private utility. We will focus on the effects of a
shift in the composition of government spending rather than on its level or on the timing
of spending and taxes. Thus, the government is assumed throughout to balance its budget
in each period with lump sum taxes. Moreover, we assume initially that



                                          G1 —G2
(3\

so thatboth the level and compositionof government spending is fixed over time. Finally
we assume that initially the governmentconsumes n and tin the same proportion as does
the private sector, The relevance of this will be made clear in the next section.
     Each individual is endowed at the beginningof period 1 with an identical bundle of
 capital and labor. The owner of a unit of capital receives its marginal physical product.
 Individua save (diesave) in period 1 by buying (selling) claims to the marginal physical
 product of capital in period 2. The price of these claims we normalizeto one. However,
 since goods are not storable and since the aggregatecapital stock is fixed over time, there is

 no possibilityofaggregatesaving or dissaving.2 Consequently, in each period the integrated
 economy must consume exactlywhat it produces. By giving up       .   unitsof goodtin period

         absence of aggregate savings will allow us in the next section to focus on the
      2 The

 way in which the existing world capital stock reallocatesacross countries in responseto a
                                               S
1, a consur can puxchaae       a claim to a unit of capital which, in the second period, will
produce   j-   units of good t, where 2     RK (P, P' ,K, L) is the second period interest

rate. Therefore, in order for the economy to be content consuming what          it produces in
each period, iatertemporal prices of good t must satisfy



                          p   —    13au3(Q
                                              —
                                                G)/3C
                                                   ,    —

                                     8U(Q —G,Q —G"fl/aC
     Finally, since the government budget is by assumption balanced in each period, the
intertemporal price structure determinedin (4) will ensure that the prIvate 85Ct0r budget
constraint holds period by period as well, since the intertemporal prices consistent with
(4) must lead the economy as a whole neither to save nor to dissave in either period. To
see this, note that the intertemporal (public plus private) budget constraint must fulfill




                       +r3)(R(P1',P,K,L) —E(P',P,U1) PG'' PG)
                                                    —    —
                  (1

                       = E(P,P,U) +P;G + PG - R(P;,P,K,L)
where       is the equilibrium private utility reached in period   i However, if either side of
this equation is nonzero, then net savings must necessarilyoccur in some period, which
our assumptions preclude. As a result, the private budget constraint in each period must
be fulfilled. Therefore,



                                                                    1=1,2

compositionalshift in governmentspending without worrying about the additional coin-
plications introduced by the possibility of net capital creation. The absence of aggregate
savings   is a property shared by models of endowmenteconomies with non-storablegoods.
See, for example, Freniel and Razin (1q86).

                                               6
where we have used the linear homogeneity of the revenue and expenditure functions to
write each period's budget constraint in terms of relative intratemporal prices.

      By standard properties of the revenue and expenditure functions, differentiating(6)
with respect to   -   yields the equilibrium conditions for the   n market



(7)                                      - G7 = E(.)        =


with equilibriumthen guaranteedin the t market by Wairas' Law. Equilibriumintratempo-
ral relative prices 9r and 3r are thus determinedby (7), while the relative intertemporal
price structure       is determined by (4). Initially, since G'   =G   by assumption, equilib..
rium intratemporal relative prices are identical in the two periods. This characterizes the
initial stationary equilibrium.
      Consider now the impact on the integrated economy of an anticipated compositional
shift in second period government spending. Since we wish to isolate the importance of
the composition of governmentspending as distinct from its level, we define a composi-
tional shift in governmentspending as one which leaves private utility unaltered. Totally

differentiating(6) and setting    dU1   = d7Y2 = 0 yields



()8                                        dG        P
                                           dG        1';

      Expression (8) describes second period compositional shifts in governmentspending
that preserve (first and) second period utility. Expression(8) states that for small changes,
private utility will be maintained under any shift in the second period composition of gov-
ernmentspending which, at original prices, would leave aggregategovernmentexpenditure
levels unchanged.

                                                 7
    With this as our definitionof a compositional change, suppose that the government
announcesin period 1 a compositionalshift in second period spending toward good n. The
effect of this shift on relative prices comes from totally differentiating(7), which yields




                            d() = -{E -
     Thus, from  the properties of the revenue and expenditure functions,        > 0:
the relative price of n rises in period 2 in response to the second period government
compositional shift into n. Relative intratemporal prices in period 1 are unaffected by
the second period compositional shift.3 Thus, the relative intratemporal price of n rises
from period    1   to period 2 as a result of the shift. Finally,intertemporal prices    + adjust
according   to (4).
    Figure 1 depicts the effect of the second period compositionalshift on period 2 relative
prices. Initial period 2 governmentpurchases are given by G and G, Private utility U2
is measured initially with (G , G) as the origin, and     equates goods supplies to total

(public plus private) demands.       If the government increases its demand for n to G' and
continues to demand C, the initial private utility level U2 is no longer attainable as
measured from the new origin (G',G). To guarantee U2, government demands for t
must fall to   G', at which point U2       attainable at the new relative price
                                         is just

                                                           >    =
                                                                                 As a    ,,
result of the second period compositional shift into n,
    Finally, consider the impact of this compositional shift on the second period real
interest rate. Since          >   fr = -, we know that, starting from an initial stationary
equilibrium,second period real interest rates will rise (fall) as a result of the second period
     The absence of feedbackeffects on period          1 prices is a direct result of our assumptions

of time-separablepreferences,a balanced governmentbudget, and the absenceof aggregate
savings.
                                                   8
governmentcompoeitionalshift into n if n is capital (labor) intensive. This follows directly
from the Stolper-SamuelsonTheorem.




III. THE OPEN ECONOMY
    In this sectionwe carve up the factor endowments of the integratedeconomy of Section
II into two economies, home (no star) and foreign (star), each with distinct government
activity. In particular, we assume that there are no government purchases in the foreign
country, and that the government modeled in the previoussection is located in the domestic

country. Finally,we assume that capital and the goodt are traded freely between countries,
but that labor is internationally immobile and that the good n is non-traded.4
    Under these assumptions, the two trading economies will replicate the initial inte-
grated equilibrium of the previous section. This can be seen by noting that, with capital
internationally mobile and good t freely traded, a commoninterest rate and traded goods
price must be shared in each period by the two economies. With technology linearly homo-
geneous and identical between countries,the zero profit condition in the tradeables sector
then implies that the two economies must also share a commonwage rate in each period if
good t   produced in both countries. Sharing factor prices and the linearly homogeneous
         is

technology for the non-traded good n, both economies must then share a common price
each period for the non-traded good as well, as long as both produce it. Finally, equilib-

rium intertemporal prices must also be shared by the two countries as determined by (4).
Since preferences are identical and homothetic and intratemporal prices are shared, the

term in brackets on the right hand side of (4) is the same in the two countries. Moreover,
we have already argued that factor prices are equalized between countries in each period.

     The assumptions of perfect capital mobility and an integrated equilibrium can be
relaxed in a small country setting without changing the nature of any of our results. See
Durlauf and Staiger (1987).

                                            9
Thus, by (4), both countries will indeed share intertemporal prices. With all goods and
factor prices equalized internationally through trade in capital and the traded good, the
international immobilityof labor and the nontraded good are nonbindingconstraints. As
such, the two open economies will replicate the integrated economy.
    In order to begin with trade initiallybalanced in both periods, we make the additional

assumption of identical relative factor abundances in the two countries. Specifically, we
assume that individuals in each country are endowed with a common bundie of labor
and capital in period   1.   On the production side, this implies that aggregate capital-

labor ratios are identical in the two economies so that, facing the same intratemporal
relative prices in each period,     both countries produce the traded and non-traded goods
in identical proportions. On the demand side, factor price equalizationimplies that per-

capita disposable income is lower in the home than the foreign country, due to domestic
governmentexpenditures, but constant over time. Homothetic tastes and our assumption
that the domestic governmentinitially consumes goods in the same proportion as the
private sector then ensures that each country consumes non-traded and traded goods in
the same proportion as welL As such, there          is   no trade in goods (or capital) in either

period in the initial situation.&
     Figure 2 illustrates the initial equilibrium. Since it is stationary, the graphs character-
ize equilibrium in each period. The countries share identical production possibilitiesfron-
tiers and identicaland homotheticpreferences. Thus, the only difference between the home
and foreign country is that private utility is measured in the home country with (G" , C')

     The argumentactuallyonly requiresthat trade initially be balanced, not that coun-
tries initially do not trade. Thus, the model is easily generalized to one in which the traded
good sector is monopolistically competitive. Then two-way trade occurs between countries
with identical relative factor endowments even though the sectoral trade balance in the

monopolistically competitivesector is zero. See Helpman, 1985.

                                               10
as the origin, where G" and G represent stationary domestic government consumption
and lie initially on the same ray from the origin as private demands by assumption.
       Consider now an anticipated second period domesticgovernmentcompositional shift
into the non-traded good n. We assume that capital can move internationally in response
to expected period 2 interest differentials, but must move at the end of period 1.     Hence,

any current account imbalancesassociated with the reallocationof the world's capital stock
will show up in period    1.
       Note first that the foreign private budget constraint in the initial stationaryequilib-

rium, which again holds in      each period   as a result of the equilibrium determination of

intertemporal prices,    is given by




(10)                     R(P,',P,K,L) = E(P,,P,,U) I = 1,2
where K denotesforeign owned capital which, because trade is balanced,initiallycoincides
with the stock of capital located in the foreign country. Totally differentiating(10) yields



(11)
                                              d
       Thus, any small second period compositional shift in domestic governmentspending
will leave foreign utility unaltered.   If the domesticgovernmentcomposition shift atisfies
(8), it will also leave domesticutility unaltered. As such, a compositional shift in domestic
governmentspending which satisfies (8) will be equivalent in the open economy model of
this section to the compositional shift considered in the integrated economy of the previous
section. Given this,    if the domestic government alters according to (8) the second period
       The assumption that physical capital moves the period prior to utilization seems
technologically reasonable. Authors such as Razin (1984) have employed this assumption.
If capital were instantaneously mobile, the basic results still carry through.
                                                11
composition of its spending toward the non-traded good, the two open economies will
replicate before and after the announced change the integrated equilibria characterized in
the previous section, and the effects of this compositional shift on real exchange rates in
the two countries (the relative price of non-tradeablesto tradeables) and on world real
interest rates will be given by the results of the previous section. In particular we have



    Proposition I: The first period announcementof a domesticgovernmentcompositional
shift toward the non-traded good in period 2 will lead to an appreciation of the real
exchange rates in the second period in both countries and, if the non-traded good is

capital (labor) intensive,   to a rise   (fall) in the second period world real interest rate



    Proposition I implies that co-movements in real exchangerates and the real interest
rate induced by a compositional shift in domesticgovernmentspending will be the same
across countries. However, the sign of the co-movements between these variables will
depend on the relative capital intensity of the non-traded good. Real exchange rates and
the real interest rate will move in the same direction as a result of a compositional shift
if the non-traded good is capital intensive, and will move in opposite directions if the
non-traded good is labor intensive. The real interest rate effect is the mechanismthrough
which the domesticshift into non-traded goods, which induces a rise in the domestic real
exchange rate, also leads to an appreciation of the foreign real exchange rate. If the non-
tradedgood is capital intensive, the domesticshift drives up real interest rates in the world.
    We could also consider the effects  of an unanticipated second period compositional
shift. The only change in Proposition I would be that the effects on the real interest rate
and exchange rate would only occur in the domestic country. The foreign country would
be completely unaffectedby the unanticipated second period domesticcompositionalshift
in this two period model.

                                                  12
This in turn requires an appreciation of the foreign real exchange rate in order for foreign
production of the capital intensive non-traded good to continue. If, instead,the non-traded
good is labor intensive,   the domesticshift drives the real interest rate down. This in turn
requires an appreciationof the foreign real exchange rate in order to eliminate the positive

profits   that would otherwise accrue to foreign producers of the capital intensive traded
good.
     These results have strong implicationsfor the testing of macroeconomic theories with
data generated by open economies. As an example, considerthe testing of the Ricardian
equivalence proposition expoundedby Barro (1975) and others. In general, testing of the

theory exploreswhether the magnitudeof deficits affects interest rates once the magnitude
of governmentspending has been accounted for. If any correlation exists between deficit
levels and the composition of governmentpurchases,       a regression exploring   relationships
between interest rates, aggregate government purchases and deficits could easily attribute
statistical significance to the deficit variable,with no bearing on the theory per se. Proposi-
tion I thus sugjests that compositionas well as the magnitudesof aggregatevariablesmust
be accounted for in order to properly specify empiricalstudies. The comprehensivesurvey
of tests of Ricardian equivalence by Bernheim (1987) reveals that the issue of spending
composition has largely been ignored in the empirical arena. The results of our analysis
suggest this is dangerous, particularly when one analyzes data where compositionalshifts
have clearly occurred. An example of this is Evans (1985), who analyzes interactions of
deficits and interest rates during wartime.

   Finally,we considerthe implications of the compositionalshift for international capital
movements. Recall that we have assumed that in order to employ capital for production
in any period, it must be moved to the production location at the end of the previous

period. Since the compositional shift we have consideredhas no effect on private utility
levels anywhere in the world in either period, there will be no change in ownership of
capital in response to the announcement of the compositional shift. However, second
                                               13
period interest   rat must be equalized at home and abroad in equilibrium,so that capital
will flow between countries until



                                             —                 =0
                           RE(-,K2,L) Rk.(-,K;,L')
where k2 and K are the stocks of capital located in the domesticand the foreign country,
respectively,in period two, and are defined by



                                  K3     K   - I, k; K - I
with I representingthe net international capital flow which takes place at the end of period
one. Capital will flow into (out of) the home country if I > 0 (1 <0).
     Totally differentiating(12) yields



                               dl   —   —[dr/d(-)][d(r)/dG]
                                                 4K,   dIC;

     From standard properties of the revenue function,the denominator of the right hand
side of (14) is negative. From Proposition I we know that d(-)/dG > 0, so that the sign
of       is the same as the sign of dr/d(-). However, from Proposition I, we also know

that the sign of dr/d(2r) depends on whether the non-traded good is capital or labor
intensive. Combining all this with the knowledge that aggregatesavings in each country
is zero and that governmentbudgets balance in each period, we have




     Proposition 11: The first period impact of an announcementof a domestic government
compositional shift toward the non-traded good in period 2 will, if the non-traded good
is capital (labor) intensive, lead to a first period current account deficit (surplus) in the
                                                 14
home country as the world capital stock reallocates across countries to facilitate greater
domestic production of the non-traded good.



    Proposition II implies that the co-movements between the real exchange rate and
lagged current account balance induced by compositional shifts in government spending
depends not only on factor intensities but on the country under considerationas well. In
particular, while the real exchange rate appreciates in period 2 in both countries with a
domestic government shift toward the non-traded good, the first period domestic current
account will worsen (improve) and the foreign current account will improve (worsen) if the
non-traded good is capital (labor) intensive. Hence, even given factor intensities, the sign
of the co-movements between real exchange rates and current account balances induced
by compositionalshifts in government spending will be country specific.
     In contrast, co-movements between the real interest rate and lagged current account
balances are country specific,    but independent of factor intensities, In particular the
compositionalshift toward the non-traded good induces negative co-movements between
these variablesin the country within which the shift takes place, and positive co-movements
between these variables in the rest of the world.
     Figure 3 illustrates the results of propositions I and II for the case where the non-


second period relative price   ,
traded good is capital intensive, Starting from an initial second period equilibriumwith
                                 the announcementin period 1 of a domestic government

compositionalshift toward the non-traded good in period 2 will lead in the first period to
a flow of capital into the home country (I > 0) that eliminatesthe incipientsecond period
international interest rate differential.
     This international reallocationof the world capital stock shows up as a home country
current account deficit in the first period, and results in the second period home country
production possibilitiesfrontier shifting out to the dashed frontier in Figure 3, while the

                                             15
second period foreign production possibilitiesfrontier shifts into the dotted frontier. The
shapes of these shifts reflect the assumption that the non-traded good is capital intensive.
    The real exchange rate appreciates in both countries in period 2       (r>      =

leading the home and foreign countries to the second period production points labeled Q'
and Q', respectively. The home country consumes all of the non-traded good it produces,
but exports a portion of its tradable good production to the foreign country as a payment
to foreign owners of domestically located capitaL5 For the small changes considered here,
the private portion of total domestic second period consumption (labeled       C) is just suf-
ficient to maintain domestic utility      at U Likewise, the foreign country consumes all of
the non-traded good it produces and, in addition to consuming the tradeable goods it pro-
duces, receives factor payments from the home country in the form of imported tradeables.
Foreign consumption is      at   C, just sufficient to maintain foreign utility at U. Finally,
with               =   -   and   with the non-traded good capital intensive by assumption, the
world real interest rate rises in the second period by the Stolper-Saxnuelson result.

    Figure 4 summarizes the co-movements in the real interest rate, real exchangerates,
and trade balances induced by a government compositional shift. We summarize these

relationships in



       PropositionIII: Shifts in the compositionof governmentspending from the traded to
the non-traded good will result in
  &
      Since   the world ends after the second period, paying for the second period services
of capital is equivalent to paying back the entire loan: the value of the principle after the
secondperiod is zero. Thus, as a result of the two period assumption,the domestic current
account surplus in the second period offsets exactly the domestic current account deficit
in period 1. With more periods of course, future current accountscan balance indefinitely
after the initial international capital movements.

                                                 16
 1. co-movements between the real exchangerate and the real interest rate,       the sign of
    which is the same across countries but depends on the relative factor intensity of the
    non-traded good;
 2. co-movements between the real interest rate and the lagged current account balance,
    the sign of which is opposite across countries but independent of factor intensities;
    and
 3. co-movements between  the real exchange rate and the lagged current account balance,
    the sign of which is opposite across countries and depends on the relative factor
    intensity of the non-traded good.




IV. RELATIONSHIPTO PREVIOUS RESULTS

    In this section we compare the results from Section ifi to previous results in the litera-
ture, Helpman (1976) explores the importanceof the composition of government spending
for the employmentlevel in a one period small open two sector production economy with
a minimumwage restriction and no international physical capital mobility. The (binding)
minimumwagerestriction w f(P,, , Pt), alongwith zero profit (price equal unit cost) con-
ditions C (r, w) = P and C, (r, w) F,. determine all relative goods and factor prices in
the model, independentof shifts in the compositionof government spendingthat leave both
goods produced domestically Thus, changes in the composition of governmentspending
have no affect on real exchange rates or real interest rates in this model. Moreover, aggre-
gate investnnt and private savings are assumed to be zero, so that the current account
balance is determined by the governmentbudget balance. As such, the current account is
also unaffected by a (balanced budget) compositional shift in governmentspending.

    Helpman (1977) considers a one period small open two sector production economy
with a minimum wage, but adds the assumption of sector specific capital so that the

wage restriction no longer ties down P.,. As in Proposition I above, a compositionalshift

                                             17
toward the non-traded good leads to an appreciation of the real exchange rate in his
model. However, the sector-specific nature of capital in the model implies that sectoral
rents to capital will move in opposite directions in responseto changes in the composition
of government spending. Hence, predictions about the behaviorof a single real interest rate
do not emerge from the model. Finally, as in Helpman (1976), the current account balance

is determined by the governmentbudget balance, and is thus unaffectedby compositional

changes.
     Razin (1984) exploresthe importanceof the compositionof governmentspending in a

two-period two-sectorsmall open production economy with internationallymobile financial

capital. The real exchangerate effect of a compositionalshift in government spendingin his
model is qualitatively identical to that studied above. However, interest rates (on financial

capital) are fixed by the small country assumption, and thus unresponsiveto government
compositionshifts. And because only financial capital is mobile internationally, the current
account is alsoleft unaltered by a compositionalshift as defined above.
     Frenkel and Razin (1986) have examined the importance of the composition of gov-

ernment spending in a two-period two country endowment model, Since there is no pro-
duction in the model, the impact of the composition of governmentspending on real

exchange rates, real interest rates, and   trade balances depends upon a comparison of
temporal and intertemporal rates of substitution in consumption in the public and pri-
vate sectors. The restrictions on preferences in Frenkel arid Razin are weaker than ours,
as they require that the social welfare function factor such that U(C1, , Ci,., C2 , C2,.) =

U(f1(C,Cfl,f2(C,C)). Our assumption of time separability falls in this class. Thus
for at least a subset of the preferences consideredin Frenkel and Razin, the introduction of

production will place restrictions on co-movements of governmentspending and pricesbe-V
yond those imposedby demand. It is an empiricalquestion as to what extent the demand
                                             18
side considerationsidentified by Frenkel and Razin are dominated by the production side
effects consideredhere for more general preferences

     Finally,in a recent article Drazen and Helpman (1987) explore through a pure endow-
ment economy the role of cuts in government spendingon tradeables versus non- tradeables
in assisting with the stabilization of the home country's currency. These authors develop
a model where the expectation of future cuts in non-tradeablesspending has a different
anticipatory effect on the current account than a cut in future tradeables spending.      In

particular if the marginal utility of tradeables is increasingin non-tradeables, the expec-
tation of a non-tradeables cut will generate a large current account surplus (relative to
a tradeables cut) in order to create greater tradeables consumption in the future. The
structure of the Drazen-Helpmanmodel is not directly comparable to ours in that their
model refers   to a small economy with an infinite   horizon, Nevertheless, our two-period

results suggest that the introduction of production into the Drazen-Helpmanmodel could
generate quite different results,



V.   SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

     This paper has exploredthe impact of shifts in the compositionof governmentspend-
ing on equilibriumprices and quantitiesin a two-country, two-period,two-sectorHeckscher-
Ohlin model. The presenceof production in such an economy places strong restrictions on
co-movements   of the composition of government spending with relative prices and hence
factor returns. Within a given period, a shift in the compositionof a governmentspending
towards the non-tradeable good will raise the relative price of non-tradeables, and thus

     To be precise, Frenkel and Razin considershifts in the levels of governmentspending
in the two sectors rather than compositional shifts as we have defined them here. It is
straightforward to show that in their model, compositional shifts will lead to relative price
movements whose signs are dependent upon the characteristics of demand.

                                             19
raise (lower) the real interest rate if the non-tradeable good is capital (labor) intensive.
The real exchange rate, tautologicallyequal to the non-tradeable/tradeable price ratio,
appreciatesas well. Second, we consider the intertemporaleffects of a compositional shift
when international capital movements must occur the period prior to utilization. In a
two-period model, the anticipation of a period 2 shift in governmentspending toward the
non-traded goodgenerates a period 1 current account deficit (surplus) when non-tradeables
are capital (labor) intensive, The co-movement of real exchange rates and the lagged cur-
rent account is thus opposite for the two countries,but determinedby the factor intensity
of non-tradeablee. Conversely, the correlationbetween the lagged current account and real
interest rates will not depend upon the factor intensity of the sector which experiences
increased government purchases.
    Extensions for further research fall into two areas. First, the two period approach
needs to be to be expanded to an infinite horizon problem. This extension is important if
testable empiricalimplicationsare to be developed. The two period model places extremely
strong restrictions on the relationship between current trade flows and announced policy
shifts. Extension of the model to many periods will generate much richer dynamics.
    Secondly,   the compositionalresults may be generalizedto the question of taxes. In
particular, if income or sales taxes generate price distortions, a separate channel for the
compositionof fiscal policy to affect prices will exist. Whether shifting distortionary taxes
will generate real effects   that are as closely linked to factor intensity as the government
purchase effects is an important question in addreesing the general issue of the role of
changing deficits on macroeconomic variables,




                                               20
                         H-
           p.
           cç   —*




     pa)




                     C
C,
ci
t




cit

              cc              c

                                  1'
      cc

      Warnc


                   PIGUBI 2
               U
\-
 •1
      IJ
       \ ,',
    or     en5iIics




9




         CA




         FIGURZ 4
                               REFERENCES

Barro, R.J., (1974) Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political Econ-
    orny, 82, 1095-1117.

Barry, Frank G., "Fiscal Policy in a Small Open Economy: An Integration of the
    Short-Run, Heckscher-Ohlin and Capital Accumulation Models," Journal of In-
    ternationol Economics, 1987, pp. 102-121.

Bernheim, D., (1987) "Ricardian Equivalence: An Evaluation of Theory and Evi-
    dence," in NBER MacroeconomicsAnnual 1987.

Durlauf, Steven N. and Robert W. Staiger, "Compositional Effects of Government
    Spending in a Small Open ProductionEconomy," manuscript, December, 1987.

Evans, P., (1985) "Do Large Deficits Cause Real Interest Rates?" American Economic
    Review, 75, 1, 68-87.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin, "Fiscal Policies and Real Exchange Rates in the
    World Economy," NBER working paper No. 2065, November 1986.

Greenwood, Jeremy, "Nontraded Goods, the Trade Balance, and the Balance of Pay-
    ments," Canadian Journal of Economics, November 1984, pp. 806-823.

Helpman, Elhanan, "Macroeconomic Policy in a Model of InternationalTrade with a
    Wage Restriction," InternationalEconomic Review, June 1976, pp. 262-277.

—"Nontraded Goods and Macroeconomic Policy under a Fixed Exchange Rate,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1977, pp. 469-480.

—"International Trade in the Presence of Product Differentiation, Economies of
    Scale and Monopolistic Competition: A Chaxnberlin-Heckscher-OhlinApproach,"
    Journal of International Economics, 1981, pp. 305-340.

Jones, Ronald W., "Income Effects and Paradoxes in the Theory of International
    Trade," The Economic Journal, June, 1985, pp. 330-344.

Razin, Assaf, "Capital Movements, Intersectoral Resource Shifts and the Trade Bal-
    ance," European Economic Review, 1984, pp. 135-152.


                                     21
