                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                         FOLKLORE

                                     Stelios Michalopoulos
                                      Melanie Meng Xue

                                      Working Paper 25430
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25430


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2019




We are extremely grateful to Yuri Berezkin for generously sharing his lifetime work on folklore
classification and clarifying many of its aspects. We would like to thank Benjamin Enke, Rafael
La Porta, Ernesto Dal Bo, Roland Bénabou, Paul Seabright and Max Winkler for their insightful
comments. Seminar and workshop participants at George Washington, Bocconi University,
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, NBER Political Economy Meeting, New Economic School,
New York University, Simon Fraser University, Tel Aviv University, Toulouse IAST, UC
Berkeley, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, University of Chicago, University of Connecticut, and
University of Zurich offered many useful suggestions. Rohit Chaparala, Masahiro Kubo, Xueyun
Luo, Zhihan Wang, and Xiaochen Yan provided superlative research assistance. Melanie Meng
Xue acknowledges financial support from Donorstrust, the Balzan Foundation and the Center for
Economic History at Northwestern University. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Stelios Michalopoulos and Melanie Meng Xue. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Folklore
Stelios Michalopoulos and Melanie Meng Xue
NBER Working Paper No. 25430
January 2019
JEL No. N00,Z1,Z13

                                           ABSTRACT

Folklore is the collection of traditional beliefs, customs, and stories of a community, passed
through the generations by word of mouth. This vast expressive body, studied by the
corresponding discipline of folklore, has evaded the attention of economists. In this study we do
four things that reveal the tremendous potential of this corpus for understanding comparative
development and culture. First, we introduce and describe a unique catalogue of folklore that
codes the presence of thousands of motifs for roughly 1,000 pre-industrial societies. Second, we
use a dictionary-based approach to elicit group-specific measures of various traits related to the
natural environment, institutional framework, and mode of subsistence. We establish that these
proxies are in accordance with the ethnographic record, and illustrate how to use a group’s oral
tradition to quantify non-extant characteristics of preindustrial societies. Third, we use folklore to
uncover the historical cultural values of a group. Doing so allows us to test various influential
conjectures among social scientists including the original affluent society, the culture of honor
among pastoralists, the role of family in extended kinship systems and the intensity of trade and
rule-following norms in politically centralized group. Finally, we explore how cultural norms
inferred via text analysis of oral traditions predict contemporary attitudes and beliefs.


Stelios Michalopoulos
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and CEPR
and also NBER
smichalo@brown.edu

Melanie Meng Xue
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Room 3469
Evanston, IL 60208
melanie.xue@northwestern.edu
1       Introduction
Over the last two decades a burgeoning body of work has emerged which explores the deep roots
of comparative development.1 Moving to the subnational level and recognizing the significance
of groups (ethnic, linguistic, and religious) has improved our understanding of the process of
development. The combination of geographic information systems with the ethnographic record
has allowed researchers to test at a large-scale, long-standing conjectures developed by histori-
ans, anthropologists, geographers, and evolutionary biologists regarding preference formation,
institutional and societal traits, beliefs and attitudes, and their consequences for contempo-
rary economic performance (see Diamond and Robinson (2010), Nunn (2012), Spolaore and
Wacziarg (2013), Ashraf and Galor (2017), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2017b)).
        This renaissance of works exploring the shadow of history on today’s outcomes has given
rise to a set of critiques. The first one starts with the observation that our understanding of
historical cultural values is at best fragmentary. This is especially problematic in the context of
works where historical legacies and/or geographical attributes influence present-day economic
outcomes via their impact on unobserved historical cultural traits which are in turn assumed
to be reflected in contemporary values. Moreover, the absence of proxies of historical attitudes
renders inquiries into how norms change and why they persist intractable. Attempts to address
these issues have been made in the context of specific traits, regions and time periods, but a
comprehensive answer is lacking.2 A second set of critiques stresses the weaknesses of the
ethnographic work of George Peter Murdock (1967), reflected in the Ethnographic Atlas (EA),
including the incomplete coverage of certain economic and social aspects. This corpus has been
fruitfully used by social scientists over the last 20 years. In this study we show how integrating a
group’s folklore in the analysis can greatly expand the scope of questions asked, open a window
into the historical heritage across societies, and improve upon existing approaches.
        But what is folklore? Folklore is the collection of traditional beliefs, customs, myths, leg-
ends, and stories of a community, passed through the generations by word of mouth. This vast
expressive body of culture, studied by the corresponding discipline of folklore, has evaded the
attention of economists. Nevertheless, the appreciation that narratives are essential building
blocks of our society has gained momentum recently within economics and beyond. At a broad
level, Harari (2015) for example, identifies in the common myths and legends that exist in
people’s collective imagination the defining characteristic of homo sapiens. Within economics
    1
    See Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2017a) for a compilation of many of these seminal studies.
    2
    Algan and Cahuc (2010) provide an nice attempt to uncover trust values for most of the 20th century, and a
case of persistence of traits has been convincingly shown by Voigtlander and Voth (2012) in the context of anti-
Semitism in Germany. Giuliano and Nunn (2017) find that historical climate shocks weaken the contemporary
transmission of cultural traits.



                                                       1
Shiller (2017) points out that, despite the central role of stories in motivating and connect-
ing activities to deeply-felt values and needs, our understanding is at best superficial, and
calls for quantitative work to shed light on the relationship between narratives and economic
fluctuations.3
       In this study we do four things that reveal the tremendous potential of oral traditions for
economists and political scientists interested in comparative development and culture. First,
we introduce a unique database of folklore that codes the spatial distribution of thousands
of motifs across roughly 1 000 societies worldwide. This is the lifetime work of the eminent
anthropologist and folklorist Yuri Berezkin. The author uses the expressions “folklore,” and
“mythology” interchangeably to refer to all kinds of traditional stories and tales, long and short,
sacred and profane. His catalogue is described in Berezkin (2015a) and Berezkin (2016) where
he analyzes the thematic classification and areal distribution of folklore-mythological motifs.
But what is a motif? For folklorists a motif is the main analytical unit in a tale/myth. This is
any episode or image related to, or described in, narratives in the oral tradition. In section 3 we
discuss the relationship between tales and motifs and why folklorists have converged into using
motifs in classifying a society’s oral tradition. Moreover, we provide details of the structure of
Berezkin’s corpus.
       Second, we link the groups in Berezkin’s catalogue to those in the EA, eﬀectively adding
the oral traditions to the ethnographic record of these societies. We then employ a dictionary-
based approach to elicit group-specific measures of various traits related to the natural envi-
ronment, the institutional framework, and the mode of subsistence. Among other things, we
show that groups whose folklore has a higher intensity of earthquake-related motifs live closer
to earthquake-prone regions, those found on fertile lands display more motifs related to agricul-
ture, and finally those residing in areas more often struck by thunderstorms have more motifs
rationalizing this natural phenomenon. Besides establishing that salient elements of the phys-
ical environment are manifested in a group’s oral tradition, we also show that folklore-based
measures of political complexity and type of subsistence robustly correspond to the analo-
gous traits in the EA, suggesting the usefulness of folklore in quantifying currently non-extant
characteristics of preindustrial societies, including the importance of trade.
       Third, we attempt to uncover the societies’ historical norms. Specifically, we use two
psychosocial dictionaries. The Moral Foundations Dictionary (MFD) as well as the Linguis-
tic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) which have been widely used in linguistics, psychology,
and sociology. Reconstructing the historical cultural landscape across groups allows us to test
various influential conjectures among social scientists including the aﬄuent society among for-
   3
   See Bénabou, Falk, and Tirole (2018) for a theoretical investigation of the interplay between narratives and
moral reasoning.


                                                      2
agers, the culture of violence and honor among pastoralists, the importance of family members
in groups organized along extended family lines, the interplay between political complexity on
the one end, and trade and rule-following norms on the other end.
        In the last part of the paper we explore how the cultural norms we reconstructed from
the groups’ oral traditions map into contemporary attitudes and beliefs, reflected in modern-
day surveys. In particular, we demonstrate the predictive power of folklore-based measures of
culture on current norms regarding tolerance towards violence and anti-social behavior, trust
toward family members and attitudes towards enjoying one’s time, suggesting that folklore
itself may be one of the vehicles via which culture is vertically transmitted across generations.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we relate our study to existing
works in folklore, culture, historical development, and text analysis and provide a brief history of
the field of folkloristics. In Section 3 we introduce the work of Yuri Berezkin. We oﬀer a detailed
description of his catalogue, its advantages and potential biases, and how it compares with other
existing works in comparative mythology. We also introduce and discuss the dictionaries we
use to extract information from folklore. Namely, the ConceptNet, the LIWC and the MFD
dictionaries. In Section 4 we detail our empirical approach and present our results in four parts.
In Section 5 we conclude oﬀering some thoughts on future work.


2       The Added Value of Folklore
Group-level historical data, contrary to country-level statistics, are scarce particularly for so-
cieties outside Europe. The only systematic eﬀort to recover the institutional, economic, and
societal makeup for a large cross section of preindustrial societies is the Ethnographic Atlas (and
the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample which has a wealth of information, albeit for a handful of
societies). Synthesizing a large body of anthropological research, George Peter Murdock (1967)
and subsequent authors have put together an impressive dataset for a large cross section of eth-
nic groups around the world. The results of this major eﬀort are recorded in the Ethnographic
Atlas, reflecting societal, institutional, and economic traits of 1 264 ethnicities. Thanks to this
body of work, the research on the cultural, institutional, and social correlates of growth has
moved beyond country boundaries by combining Murdock’s EA and the mapping of the spatial
distribution of ethnicities (Murdock (1959)) with the underlying location-specific traits to shed
light on the origins and consequences of a variety of economic and institutional traits.4
        Starting with Landes (1998), cultural explanations have been thrust into the spotlight.
    4
    See, among others, Nunn and Wantchekon (2011), Michalopoulos (2012), Fenske (2013), Giuliano and Nunn
(2013), Osafo-Kwaako and Robinson (2013), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014), Fenske (2014), Alsan
(2015), Bentzen, Hariri, and Robinson (2015), Mayshar, Moav, Neeman, and Pascali (2015), Michalopoulos and
Papaioannou (2016), Cervellati, Chiovelli, and Esposito (2017), and Michalopoulos, Putterman, and Weil (2018).


                                                      3
For example, a recent addition to the list of candidates on the origins of comparative develop-
ment is a 2015 book by Harari (2015), who makes the bold claim that the successes and failures
of human society are deeply rooted in the common myths that exist in people’s collective imag-
ination. Such an intriguing conjecture is hard to assess quantitatively. Along with cultural
explanations as drivers of the observed diﬀerences in comparative development, a lively debate
has emerged regarding the historical interplay between institutions and culture. Nevertheless,
progress in these areas has been hindered by the mere fact that value surveys are not available
for preindustrial societies.
      This paper proposes a way to recover these traits by showing that folklore can shed
important light on a group’s historical heritage, including beliefs and attitudes of ancestral
populations conspicuously absent from the historical record. According to the Oxford English
Dictionary, folklore is “The traditional beliefs, customs, and stories of a community, passed
through the generations by word of mouth.” This very definition of folklore is akin to how
economists define culture (Alesina and Giuliano, 2015). Incidentally but importantly for our
purposes, folklore is also an academic discipline whose subject matter comprises the sum total
of traditionally derived and orally or imitatively transmitted literature, material culture, and
customs.
      The insights from this discipline have been overlooked within economics. In other social
sciences, folklore is gradually being integrated. For example, in a recent paper, Ross, Greenhill,
and Atkinson (2013) study the diﬀusion of a specific folktale and its spatial variation within
Europe. The researchers draw insights from population genetics to analyze 700 variants of
a folktale (“The Kind and the Unkind Girls”) from 31 ethnolinguistic populations with an
average of 23 variants each. They find that geographical distance and ethnolinguistic aﬃliation
exert significant independent eﬀects on folktale diversity.
      But how do we analyze folklore? In Section 3 we provide a detailed discussion. Broadly
speaking, what we have for each society is a set of motifs indicating the presence of a particular
theme or an episode in the group’s oral tradition. A motif comes with a title and a short
(usually two-line) description. For instance, motif 56 (present in 172 oral traditions), is titled
along the lines of the folktale studied by Ross, Greenhill, and Atkinson (2013), namely: “Kind
and unkind girls,” and has the following description: “a girl or a woman meets powerful person,
behaves herself in a right way and is successful. Another behaves in a wrong way and suﬀers
the opposite (is punished or not rewarded).” This example is deliberately chosen to illustrate
the usefulness of a motif as an aggregator of folktale content across multiple variants of a given
theme.
      This means that text comprises our underlying data. In the social sciences, where the


                                                4
interest in culture is perhaps most pronounced, the most common type of text analysis ex-
amining culture has been, one form or another of, content analysis (Berelson (1952); North
(1963); Gebner (1969); Holsti (1969); and Gottschalk and Gleser (1969)). Within this research
tradition, the focus has been on concepts and their distribution within and across texts. Over
the last few years, text analysis has seen great advances and taken a center stage thanks to the
abundance of text (from millions of digitized written sources and online content). For reviews of
studies in text analysis in political science and sociology, see Grimmer and Stewart (2013) and
Evans and Aceves (2016), respectively. Gentzkow, Kelly, and Taddy (2017) provide an excellent
entry into the available text-analysis methods along with their corresponding weaknesses and
advantages.
       The approach we employ to quantify folklore is the dictionary-based method which con-
nects counts of specific words to latent, unobserved attributes we wish to quantify. This is the
simplest and most commonly used method. Besides its simplicity, it is also appropriate for our
setting. In dictionary-based methods, one specifies a mapping between the counts of specific
words and the latent outcomes. For example, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010) count the number
of newspaper articles containing partisan phrases, whereas Saiz and Simonsohn (2013) enter
search queries in Google to obtain document-frequency measures of corruption by country, US
states and cities, counting the number of web pages measuring combinations of city names and
terms related to corruption.5
       Our analysis is closely related to the works of Tetlock (2007), Baker, Bloom, and Davis
(2016) and Enke (2017), who use a pre-specified dictionary of terms to obtain an estimate of
the outcome of interest.6 In Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016), the authors use the count of
articles in a given newspaper-month containing a set of pre-specified terms such as “policy,”
“uncertainty,” and “Federal Reserve,” with the outcome of interest being the degree of “policy
uncertainty” in the economy. Similarly, Enke (2017) in order to quantify the extent to which
US presidential candidates emphasize universal moral principles relative to “tribalistic” values
he applies the bag-of-words from MFD on presidential speeches.
       Inspired by these three papers, we follow a similar approach. Specifically, when we
want to capture relatively “objective” features of a group, including attributes of the physical
environment or the subsistence economy, we use the ConceptNet knowledge graph originated
   5
     Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Taddy (2016) apply a structural choice model and methods from machine learning
to study trends in the partisanship of congressional speech from 1873 to 2016.
   6
     See Antweiler and Frank (2004) for an early text analysis on how messages posted on Internet stock message
boards may reflect the views of day traders. Similarly, Bollen and Mao (2011) document a significant link
between Twitter messages and the stock market using other dictionary-based tools such as OpinionFinder.
Finally, Wisniewski and Lambe (2013) utilize predefined word lists to construct an index of negative media
attention toward the banking sector and find that the former Granger-causes bank stock returns during the
2007—2009 financial crisis.



                                                      5
at the MIT Media lab. Specifically, for each concept we are interested in measuring, we use
the top-50 related terms that come from the word embeddings built from ConceptNet.
       When we want to capture a group’s psychological states we rely on dictionaries generated
by social psychologists. The LIWC dictionary has been widely used among social scientists. It
classifies words into psychologically meaningful categories as well as areas of personal concern.
Similarly, the moral foundations theory with its 5 dimensions of morality comes with its cor-
responding dictionaries. Thanks to their intellectual origins being firmly rooted in the social
sciences and the humanities, the resulting bag-of-words classifications by the LIWC and the
MFD are likely to be appropriate for the classification of oral traditions. We discuss the pros
and cons of the individual dictionaries as well as the dictionary-approach itself below.

2.1    A Short History of Folklore

Folklore studies began in the early 19th century. In 1846, William Thoms invented the word
“folklore”to replace existing terms including “popular antiquities.” The terms “folk” and “lore”
simply refer to “ordinary people” and “knowledge,” respectively.7 The first generation of folk-
lorists focused exclusively on illiterate peasants, and on groups such as the Romani vagabonds,
who would be more or less unaﬀected by the sweeping social changes of the era, and attempted
to document their historical customs and beliefs preserved in the oral traditions. The under-
standing was that folklore reflected the cultural beliefs of ordinary people in opposition to those
of the elite. With increasing industrialization, urbanization, and the rise of literacy throughout
Europe in the 19th century, folklorists were concerned that the oral tradition, the lore of the
rural folk, would be lost. It was thought that the stories, beliefs, and customs were surviving
fragments of a cultural mythology of the region, often predating the spread of Christianity.
       From an anthropological perspective, folklore is one of the most important components
that make up the culture of a given people (Bascom (1953)). Importantly, folklore is considered
a key mechanism for preserving a group’s tradition. According to Bascom, there are four
functions of folklore: informally teaching cultural attitudes, escaping the accepted limitations
of a culture, maintaining cultural identity, and validating existing cultural norms.
       For over 150 years from the early 19th to the mid-20th centuries, a vast body of work
accumulated from collectors in all parts of the world as they listened to story-tellers and,
with better and better techniques, recorded and published what they heard. Hence, the very
nature of folklore, that is, its transmission via oral storytelling, might appear to be a source of
idiosyncratic variability. According to Barre Toelken, however, this was held in check by the
forces of orthodoxy and tradition, which were the “twin laws of folklore performance” (Toelken
   7
     A more contemporary definition of “folk” is a social group that includes two or more persons with common
traits who express their shared identity through distinctive traditions.


                                                     6
(1996)). Audiences expected storytellers to retell familiar stories, and this expectation reined in
tendencies to innovate or adapt folklore traditions. To rationalize the stability of the narrative,
a famous early 20th-century folklorist, Walter Anderson, posited a double redundancy, that is,
a feedback loop between performing and hearing the performance multiple times, in order to
retain the essential elements of the tale (Dorst (2016), Fine (1979)).
      The natural next step was the development of techniques to categorize this wealth of
information for comparative analysis. This was a critical advance in the discipline of folklore,
and the indexing of tale types and motifs lies at the heart of its comparative framework. The
concept of tale type was first delineated by the Hungarian folklorist Jànos Honti in 1939. Honti
proposed three diﬀerent ways of considering a tale type as a unit of analysis of folklore: first, a
tale type consists of a specific set of motifs; second, a tale type does not duplicate with other
tale types; third, a tale type manifests itself through multiple existence (termed variants).
The motif is defined as “the smallest element in a tale having a power to persist in tradition”
(Thompson (1946)). Both are hypothetical archetypes established by comparing a large number
of texts that share a common core. The methodology most closely associated with the use of
tale types and motifs in comparative mythology is the historic-geographic approach that began
in the late 19th century. It focused on establishing an oral tradition, identifying its geographic
origin and its spread. The method was questioned and criticized in the wake of postmodernism
in the humanities, alongside large paradigm shifts in the discipline. However, it has remained
popular as a methodological package for classifying textual sources in comparative analysis,
and as a tool for organizing the data according to degree of similarity. In 1982, Richard Dorson
declared the historic-geographic method the dominant force in folklore science.
      Folklorists working in the historic-geographic tradition often follow the Aarne-Thompson
(AT) classification systems. The latter include the AT motif-index, and the AT tale type index
which was updated by Uther and is now known as the Aarne-Thompson-Uther classification
system (ATU). The ATU classifies 2 239 tale types and their variants, Uther (2004). The AT
motif-index refers to the motif-index of folklore literature created by Stith Thompson in 1955.
The AT/ATU system was originally developed to study European oral traditions, limiting
its usefulness for classifying folklore from other parts of the world (see the criticism of the
classical historic-geographic method by Goldberg (1984)). Besides, ethnic attribution is rarely
available for folklore found in the non-Western world, even in several of the major regional
indices that followed the ATU index. Although Thompson’s motif index partially overcomes
the lack of non-European coverage, the distribution of motifs remains skewed towards Europe
and obscene-type motifs are intentionally left out, see Dundes (1997).
      Yuri Berezkin’s Folklore and Mythology Catalogue is a pioneering eﬀort in modifying


                                                7
and extending the ATU classification system, enabling a global comparative perspective of oral
traditions. It is important to keep in mind that there is also the Encyclopedia of the Folktale
(Enzyklopädie des Märchens) an impressive compilation of almost two centuries of international
research in the field of folk narrative tradition. However, it focuses on the oral and literary
narrative traditions of Europe and other countries influenced by Europeans. Moreover, there
are motif indexes compiled for specific regions that may be more relevant for those who have
a regional focus in their research. See El-Shamy (2004), for example, for a classification of the
folktales in the Arab world.


3     Berezkin’s Folklore and Mythology Catalogue
A critical dimension of the Folklore and Mythology Catalogue is that Berezkin does not limit
himself to the European-based ATU tale type classification, or S. Thompson’s Motif-index of
folklore-literature. To accommodate the richness of non-European folklore, he defines a motif as
“any image, structure, element of the plot or any combination of such elements which could be
found in at least two (practically, in many) texts including sacred and profane ones.” Starting
with indigenous societies in the Americas and extending his classification to groups in the Old
World over the course of 40 years, Berezkin has compiled a unique database of folklore and
mythology for 945 groups worldwide, categorizing their oral traditions into 2 461 motifs. The
fruit of his intellectual labor is a unique dataset on oral traditions with an unprecedented global
coverage. See Figure 1 for the spatial distribution of groups in Berezkin’s catalogue.
       Berezkin builds on the historic-geographic method, but with a diﬀerent goal from its
predecessors since he is primarily interested in understanding the historical spread of motifs
across societies and is influenced in terms of methods and theory by Boas (1898, 2002) and his
students.8 Classifying non-European and European oral traditions independently, ensures that
what is being explored are potential dissimilarities among oral traditions themselves, rather
than dissimilarities between European and non-European folklore.9
       To encode his motifs, he has consulted an impressive list of 6 239 books (67%) and
journal articles (33%)10 from 4 041 authors, published by 4 932 publishing houses in 32 diﬀerent
   8
     An advantage of this approach is that Berezkin retains the historic-geographic method’s focus on the formal
characteristic of folkloric traditions rather than on subjective attitudes of the narrator and the collector.
   9
     The following example illustrates the lopsided coverage of non-European groups in Thompson’s motif index.
Take two groups the Irish and the Guarani. In the Thompson (Berezkin) index there are approximately 8 000
(268) motifs in the Irish oral tradition compared to 36 (82) recorded for the Guarani.
  10
     Here are some folklore journals: The Folk-Lore Journal, Journal of American Folklore, Journal of Latin
American Lore, Latin American Indian Literature Journal, The Journal of the Polynesian Society, Journal de
la Societe des Americanistes, The Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, The
Journal of Indo-European Studies, Journal de la Societe Finno-Ougrienne, Oral Traditions, etc.




                                                       8
languages.11 The bulk of the materials in the textual catalogue were published during the 20th
century. Appendix Figures 1 and 1 plot the distribution of the dates of publication across
all titles in the catalogue as well as the distribution of the earliest publication consulted per
oral tradition, respectively. In Table 1 Panel  we report the language of publication across
all titles. The most common languages in descending order are English, Russian, Spanish,
German, French and Portuguese.
       The median group in Berezkin has 59 motifs (see Figure 2 for the distribution of the
number of motifs across oral traditions). Russians have the largest number of motifs and only
one group has a single recorded motif; the Yeyi in northwestern Botswana. In Table 1, Panel
, we report the top 10 groups in terms of motifs. For the average society, Berezkin consulted
15 publications from 12 authors, written in 35 languages, and published by 13 publishers.
       Broadly speaking, there are two types of motifs, those describing adventures and tricks
(roughly 50%) and the remaining are related to cosmology and etiology. Furthermore, Berezkin
classifies the 2 461 motifs into 12 categories. These are: (a) Sun and Moon; (b) Moon spots,
stars, constellations; (c) Cosmogony, the earth and the sky, etiology of the elements, natural
and biological phenomena (fire, water, soil, thunderstorms, dreams, etc.), cataclysms and cos-
mic threats, spirits of nature; (d) Origin of death, diseases, and hard life; (e) Origin of human
beings, ethnic groups, etiology of human anatomy, strange body configuration, ways of be-
havior, marriages before the establishment of the present norms; (f) Origin and interpretation
of culture elements, in particular related to agriculture, inadequate forms of subsistence and
economic activity before the establishment of the present norms; (g) Etiology of plants and an-
imals and of their peculiar features, particular animals as protagonists of cosmological stories,
metamorphoses, weather, and calendar; (h) Queer and monstrous beings, creatures, objects
and loci, folk beliefs related to particular phenomena and objects; (i) Identification of protago-
nists of the stories with particular animals or persons with particular qualities; (j) Adventures;
(k) Tricks and competitions won thanks to deception, absurd, and obscene behavior; and (l)
Formulae. In Table 1, Panel , we report one motif in each of these categories.
       In the Appendix we describe the construction of one particular motif and the underlying
sources of an oral tradition typical of Berezkin’s catalogue.


       Caveats Naturally, there are several limitations to using this database that one needs
to keep in mind. First, one may wonder about the time period the motifs and underlying
myths and tales correspond to. Since folklorists were interested in collecting stories that were
  11
     Here is an example of a reference on the oral tradition of the Inuit: “Stories of the Black River People.
From stories told by Robert (Nasruk) Cleveland of Shungnak (Alaska). Tape-recorded by Don Charles Foote.
Transcribed by Minnies (Aliitchak) Gray. Translated and proofread by Ruth (Taqaviñ) Ramoth-Sampson and
Angeline (Ipiilik). Newlin Anchorage: University of Alaska (1980)”.


                                                      9
relatively untouched by the waves of modernization of the 19th and 20th centuries, the motifs
are likely to provide a snapshot of folk life from the preindustrial times. In fact, for the
median society in Berezkin’s catalogue the earliest publication consulted dates back to 1904.
But how far back in history do these motifs go? There is no simple answer to this question.
The traditional historic-geographic approach to the tale-type was originally understood as a
narrative plot with a more or less precise origin in space and time. However, this idea has been
severely criticized by Jason (1970) and Goldberg (1984) and eventually abandoned, recognizing
the inherent uncertainty in coming up with convincing estimates.
         Nevertheless, it is commonly understood that some motifs likely predate others. For
example, cosmological motifs are thought to be significantly older than those regarding adven-
tures and tricks, and Berezkin himself has published a series of studies looking at the areal
distribution of individual motifs in relationship to large-scale population movements, migra-
tions, cultural contacts and interactions in history and prehistory (see Berezkin and Duvakin
(2016), and Berezkin (2015b) among others). Hence, in the comparisons below with the Ethno-
graphic Atlas, it is useful to keep in mind that the information coded in folklore is potentially
mapping into a historical horizon deeper than the date of first publication (around the turn of
the century for the median society). Below we will also use some time-varying, location-specific
traits to further explore this question.
         Second, in his coding of folklore, Berezkin does not code motifs which are universal or
found in a single oral tradition. This is also the case for the ATU classification. This is not
surprising. The focus of comparative mythology is on motifs that can be found in multiple
societies. To the extent that both the observed and the unobserved motifs (i.e., those that are
unique to a given society) are drawn from the same distribution of themes and images, our
quantification of group-specific traits is defensible.
         Third, we do not have a count of how often a given tale or motif is repeated in a society’s
folklore; that is, we do not know the popularity of a motif nor the number of variants of a
particular tale (which can be numerous, as the study by Ross, Greenhill, and Atkinson (2013)
reviewed above suggests). Hence, our folklore values reflect the extensive margin of themes in
the oral tradition. How much a given oral tradition has been originally studied will naturally
influence the number of variants recorded per tale. So, focusing on whether a given motif is
present may help mitigate concerns regarding diﬀerential sampling across traditions. Similarly,
we do not know the number of tales and legends in a given oral tradition since there is no
one-to-one mapping between tales and motifs. One tale may map into multiple motifs and vice
versa.
         Fourth, the definition of a group in Berezkin’s catalogue is usually along linguistic lines,


                                                  10
but sometimes he groups related societies when he cannot find enough information on the oral
tradition of each individual group.
       Fifth, as it will become apparent in the empirical specifications, we often control for
country-specific constants. Why are we doing this given the historical nature of most of our
exercises? Besides the obvious benefit of accounting for the broad diﬀerences in geography
and ecology as well as the preindustrial historical legacies across modern-day countries, the
inclusion of country fixed eﬀects is primarily motivated by concerns regarding the intensity
at which oral traditions were originally recorded by folklorists and subsequently surveyed by
Berezkin himself in diﬀerent parts of the globe. One may worry, for example, that the coverage
is systematically diﬀerent in certain parts of Asia or Melanesia compared to parts of Europe
or the Americas. Hence, by including country-specific constants, we hope to mitigate concerns
related to unbalanced coverage across countries in terms of the quality and breadth of the
underlying recorded oral traditions (assuming that groups within the same country are more
likely to be sampled by folklorists during the same time period and presumably with similar
biases and available technology).12 Taking a step further, we will explicitly control for the
number of publications in a group’s sources.
       Sixth, there was substantial heterogeneity in the folklore collection over time. Earlier
generations of folklore scholars were often missionaries or hobbyists, whereas later generations
were academics including anthropologists who did their field work in small-scale societies.
Diﬀerences in the timing of being surveyed might reflect diﬀerences in the tastes and interests
of the original story collectors. To partially account for this, we will control for the year of the
earliest publication per oral tradition.

Interpreting Folklore

In the early years of folklore, the main task of folklorists was to collect and classify diﬀerent
folklore materials, paying relatively little attention to its interpretation. Indeed, the primary
focus was on the “lore” per se. During the 20th century, understanding the relationship between
the “folk” and the “lore” became a focal topic for a long list of preeminent scholars of diﬀerent
backgrounds. While summarizing the various approaches is not our goal, we mention some
of them to illustrate Joseph Campbell’s prescient point made in 1968 that “there is no final
system for the interpretation of myths, and there never will be any such thing.”
       Broadly speaking, there are three dominant approaches: the humanistic, the anthropo-
  12
     A way to gauge the explanatory power of country-specific features on the coverage of oral traditions is to
record the R-square from regressing features of Berezkin’s underlying references per oral tradition on country
fixed eﬀects. Doing so, we find that country-specific constants explain between 30% and 40% of the variation in
the number of publications, number of distinct languages in the publication record, and year of first publication
across groups.


                                                       11
logical, and the psychological. Myths and folktales have been viewed, among other functions, as
reflecting: (i) the customs, institutions and beliefs of a given society, (ii) (distorted) historical
facts, (iii) allegories of deeper philosophical issues, (iv) moral truths, (v) explanations of the
cosmos, and (vi) metaphors or symbols of the unknown or of religious rituals.
        According to the pattern theory of culture, see Benedict (1934), all parts of culture
are related and reflect the same values and beliefs, with folklore oﬀering a window into it.
Anthropologists have taken an ethnographic approach, a structuralist approach, and more
recently, a symbolic anthropology approach to shed light on the function and meaning of
folklore, Green (1997).13 Within psychology, the use of depth psychology, or psychoanalytic
approaches, is the dominant method in interpreting folklore. Freud and Jung were pioneers
in applying this approach to folklore. Jung approached myths as essentially static symbolism,
Jung (1968), where recurring themes or motifs can be attributed to some deeply-seated human
needs or conflicts, called psychological archetypes. Hence, the “primitive” mentality is what is
“hidden in the unconscious and reflected in folkloric symbols,” Green (1997).
        Because we work with motifs, i.e., images and episodes of myths, legends, and tales –
both of which are intentionally deprived of details – the humanistic approach, which mainly
emphasizes the role of the narrator, is less relevant in our context. Between the anthropological
and psychological paradigms, we are agnostic. In fact, to maximize the amount of information
we may extract from the body of folklore materials, we employ psychosocial dictionaries (the
MFD and the LIWC) which have been useful tools for psychoanalysts and cultural anthropol-
ogists alike.

Dictionaries

Below we briefly describe the dictionaries we use to classify motifs into diﬀerent bags of words
(BoW).

3.0.1    ConceptNet

ConceptNet is a knowledge representation project, designed to represent the general human
knowledge and how it is expressed in natural language. It originated from MIT Media Lab’s
crowdsourcing project Open Mind Common Sense, and has benefited from other crowdsourced
resources and expert-created resources, such as Wikimedia projects, Games with a Purpose,
Princeton University’s WordNet, DBPedia, OpenCyc, and Umbel. It integrates knowledge
from formal and informal sources and makes them available through a common representation
  13
     Lévi-Strauss, a proponent of the structural study of myth, sees in myth’s structures elementary contradictions
or problems which no society can resolve. Hence, in order to understand myths one may focus only on the
repeated patterns and their structural relations to each other, Levi-Strauss (1955).



                                                        12
and includes common-sense associations made among concepts by ordinary people. Examples
of works that use this knowledge base include recognizing activities of daily living, Ullberg,
Coradeschi, and Pecora (2010), and analyzing the emotional content of text, Cambria, Hussain,
Havasi, and Eckl (2010).
        ConceptNet provides vector representations of the terms that can be compared for sim-
ilarity. We use the Web API of ConceptNet: api.conceptnet.io. One of the functions available
on this API is to use semantic vectors (also known as word embeddings) built from ConceptNet
and other inputs to find related terms.14 From this API, we retrieve the 50 most related English
words for each seed word to construct a ConceptNet-based BoW. We use the latter when we
want to obtain measures of relatively “objective” features including the physical environment,
mode of subsistence and degree of political complexity reflected in the group’s oral tradition.

3.0.2    LIWC

LIWC is a text analysis program that counts words in psychologically meaningful categories,
see Pennebaker, Booth, and Francis (2007). The development of this computer program first
began in the early 1990s. Over time, there have been several versions of LIWC. In this study,
we use LIWC2015 which is the latest.
        The LIWC2015 Dictionary is composed of almost 6 400 words, word stems, and emoti-
cons. The construction of LIWC has undergone several steps, from word collection, judge rating
phase, base rate analyses, candidate word list generation, psychometric evaluation, refinement
phase in addition to summary variables. Several stages of this procedure involve judges to vote
on keeping or omitting words, which introduces a human component to quality control.
        In this study, we focus on the 41 word categories concerning psychological constructs,
together with 6 personal concern categories. The former include aﬀective processes (positive
emotion, negative emotion), social processes (family, friends, female, male), cognitive processes
(insight, causation, discrepancy, tentative, certainty, diﬀerentiation), perceptual processes (see,
hear, feel), biological processes (body, health, sexual, ingestion), drives and needs (aﬃlia-
tion, achievement, power, reward, risk), time orientations (past focus, present focus, future
focus), relativity (motion, space, time) and personal concerns (work, achievement, leisure,
home, money, religion, death).
        Tausczik and Pennebaker (2010) summarize hundreds of studies using LIWC demon-
strating its ability to detect meaning in a wide variety of experimental settings and the validity
of the LIWC categories across a large number of psychological domains.
 14
   The embeddings are a version of ConceptNet Numberbatch. In an ACL 2017 SemEval paper, ConceptNet
Numberbatch is shown to be the best word embeddings one can use, Speer and Lowry-Duda (2017).




                                                13
3.0.3    MFD

To get at the moral values of a society’s folklore we use the Moral Foundations Theory, devel-
oped by Haidt and Craig (2004) and Graham, Haidt, Koleva, Motyl, Iyer, Wojcik, and Ditto
(2013) as a positive framework of morality. It was designed to explain the origins, develop-
ment, and cultural variations of morality. MFT argues that moral intuitions are based on five
foundations and linked to adaptive challenges. The five foundations are the following:
        (i) Care/harm: This foundation is related to our long evolution as mammals with at-
tachment systems and an ability to feel (and dislike) the pain of others. It underlies virtues of
kindness, gentleness, and nurturance.
        (i) Fairness/cheating: This foundation is related to the evolutionary process of reciprocal
altruism. It generates ideas of justice, rights, and autonomy.
        (iii) Loyalty/betrayal: This foundation is related to our long history as tribal creatures
able to form shifting coalitions. It underlies virtues of patriotism and self-sacrifice for the group.
        (iv) Authority/subversion: This foundation was shaped by our long primate history of
hierarchical social interactions. It underlies virtues of leadership and followership, including
deference to legitimate authority and respect for traditions.
        (v) Sanctity/degradation: This foundation was shaped by the psychology of disgust and
contamination.
        According to Haidt (2007) these five foundations underlie the cross-cultural diﬀerences in
moral reasoning. To make cross-cultural comparisons, we use the Moral Foundations Dictionary
to construct measures of morality at a society level based on the motifs present in that society.
The Dictionary is created by Graham, Haidt, and Nosek (2009) and contains 295 words and
word stems.


        Discussion The LIWC and MFD are mapping tools. They map a given text to
dictionary-supplied categories. Many of these categories may potentially capture meaningful
cultural indicators (e.g. “authority/subversion,” “family,” or “retaliation”). To use these tools,
we first break down each motif title and description into words. Then we look up all the words
therein and tag the motif to the appropriate category(ies). To arrive at our society-specific
estimates, we add up all motifs within each dictionary category to quantify the intensity of a
particular concept within a group’s oral tradition.
        Our dictionary-based approach provides an initial examination of the cultural context of
folklore. Computerized text analysis programs, LIWC or MFD, are meant to be probabilistic
systems. We may misclassify individual motifs, but as long as the errors are not systematic,
we may still obtain a set of cultural proxies at the level of the oral tradition. Despite its


                                                 14
limitations, the dictionary-based method oﬀers several advantages, including the minimization
of subjective interpretation of ad-hoc BoW. By focusing on the title and the short description
of each motif rather than the tales themselves, we only make use of the essential episode of a
story. This largely removes subjective influences introduced by the narrator and the collector.
            Nevertheless, the objective nature of this approach also creates its limitations. The LIWC
and MFD categories “have proven to supply useful information about a wide variety of texts.
But it remains up to the researchers, not the computer, to create knowledge and insight from
this mapped information.” Such dictionaries are unable to detect context, irony, sarcasm, and
idioms. In addition, both LIWC and MFD were developed over the last few decades. Hence,
some words are only applicable in the modern context. Given the historical context myths
and legends correspond to, it is possible that aspects of oral tradition remain unexplored when
viewed through the lenses of these contemporary psychosocial dictionaries.
            We recognize that the dictionary-based method is one of the many methods available
for text analysis. There are two reasons we employ this one. First, the former is the most
commonly used in the social sciences and is simple, transparent to implement, and easy to
replicate. Second, Baker et al. (2016), who are interested in measuring the degree of policy
uncertainty, use a pre-specified dictionary because there is no ground truth on the actual level
of policy uncertainty to develop training data for a supervised model. Also, fitting a model
would be unlikely to endogenously detect policy uncertainty as a topic. This reasoning largely
applies to our setting. Obtaining reliable training data for complex concepts such as “respect”
or “anger” or “leisure”, is not straightforward.15 Having said that we hope that subsequent
research by moving beyond dictionary-based methods will enrich our understanding of oral
traditions.


4         Empirical Analysis
The empirical analysis proceeds in two steps. First, we assess the predictive power of oral
traditions vis a vis an array of observable group-specific traits regarding a society’s physical
environment and traits known from its ethnographic record. Specifically, for each attribute we
wish to quantify, we use the top-50 related words generated by ConceptNet. We show that
folklore-based measures of the economy and the society complement our understanding of a
group’s historical account, improving and extending the set of societal historical traits. In the
second step, we employ the psychological dictionaries discussed above to uncover proxies of
historical attitudes of the ethnographic societies and use the uncovered norms to shed light on
famous conjectures among social scientists. Finally, we explore how these past norms predict
    15
         Moreover, topic modeling is unlikely to pick such themes independently.


                                                          15
contemporary beliefs and attitudes.

4.1    Folklore and the Natural Environment

Have groups’ natural environment left an imprint on the images and episodes of their oral
tradition? Folklorists think that the answer to this question is far from trivial for at least
two reasons. First, a society’s oral tradition is often thought of as a depository of a group’s
(migration) history, suggesting that folklore elements can be preserved even if the landscapes,
climates, and social configurations in which they are told, have changed (Berezkin (2015a)).
Second, it is well understood that folktales and myths travel across space as a result of inter-
actions among individuals belonging to diﬀerent oral traditions. Eventually through a process
known as assimilation, Boas (1916), the borrowed stories are integrated into the stock of the
indigenous folklore. These processes of migration and cross-pollination inherent in the forma-
tion of a group’s oral tradition suggest that its link with a society’s landscape at the time of
observation (in the late 19th, early 20th century) is not straightforward. With these caveats in
mind, we hope that documenting that a group’s natural environment is reflected in its folklore
images will increase our confidence in using the oral tradition to surmise other aspects of the
group for which less is currently known.
       We check the following four traits that we think can be reliably measured both in the
folklore and in the physical environment of a group. These are: proximity to earthquake zones;
intensity of lightning strikes; annual temperature; and caloric suitability for agriculture for
the crops available before 1500 CE. See Table 2-Panel  for the respective summary statistics
across the 945 oral traditions in Berezkin’s catalogue. Are these natural phenomena salient
enough to manifest themselves in a society’s folklore? This is what we explore below.
       Specifically, we report OLS estimates of the following type:16

            ln(1 + Topic-Specific Motifs ) =  + Geo +  +                (1)

       The dependent variable, Topic-Specific Motifs  is the number of motifs mentioning a
particular feature of group , located in country/continent ;  reflects continental or country-
specific constants; and  is a vector of geographic traits. We use the group’s centroid
(recorded by Berezkin) to compute the distance terms and a radius of 50 kilometers to construct
the values of the respective geographic and ecological attributes. The baseline controls are (i)
the log number of motifs per group, ln(# Motifs), (ii) the log word-count length of an average
motif, (iii) the number of publications that Berezkin has consulted for a group’s folklore, and
the year of the earliest publication Berezkin has accessed for group .
  16
    Results are similar using Poisson models or using OLS with the level instead of the log transformation of
the count of topic-specific motifs.


                                                     16
       The rationale for accounting for these features is the following. First, the number of
motifs is, in principle, a variable of independent interest, partially reflecting the underlying
breadth of themes, images, and episodes present in the oral tradition of a given society. How-
ever, the same variable also naturally reflects the intensity with which a given society has been
sampled both by folklorists and eventually by Berezkin himself. Controlling for the average
number of words per motif is important given that longer titles/descriptions mechanically in-
crease the pool of potential words to be assigned to a given category. By controlling for the
number of publications and for the date of the first publication we attempt to account for the
diﬀerential breadth of sources consulted and the potential diﬀerences in the content depending
on the time period of the publication. Finally, we cluster the standard errors at the level of
the language family recorded by Berezkin.


       Images and Episodes in Folklore Reflecting the Physical Environment
  The results are presented in Table 3. Columns (1), (3), (5). and (7) include continental fixed
eﬀects and the rest have country-specific constants. In the first two columns the dependent
variable is the log count of motifs that mention the word “earthquake.” There is a total of
6 such motifs that mention the word earthquake.17 Typically, these motifs oﬀer a rationale
for why earthquakes occur, such as motif 119 which is titled: “The dead shake the earth”
and has the following description “The earthquakes are produced by the dead who are in the
underworld or during the earthquakes the inhabitants of the lower world try to come out.”
Another motif is 28 titled “Animals produce earthquakes” and the description reads: “Big
game animals disappear under the earth and produce earthquakes”. Are groups closer to
earthquake-prone regions more likely to have such motifs? We construct the distance from
the centroid of each group to the nearest high-intensity earthquake region (and follow Bentzen
(2015) to define the latter as those in zones 3 and 4). An average group in Berezkin’s dataset has
010 earthquake-related motifs. However, those located within 100 kilometers of an earthquake
zone have on average 019 such motifs, approximately 5 times as many compared to groups
located outside these areas (mean 005). In columns (1) and (2) we show that this pattern is
robust to accounting for continental and country fixed eﬀects and the estimated beta coeﬃcients
are 017 and 021, respectively.
       In columns (3) and (4) we use as a dependent variable the count of motifs related to
thunders. A total of 32 motifs mention this natural phenomenon. To arrive at this number we
use “thunder” as a seed in ConceptNet. The related words that are tagged in Berezkin’s motifs
  17
     We are not using “earthquake” as a seed in ConceptNet because we are specifically interested in earthquakes
and not in natural disasters more generally. For example, tagging motifs using the top-related words to “earth-
quake” from ConceptNet would more than double our count of motifs. This is because we would now include
motifs that describe a calamity or a disaster not specific to earthquakes.


                                                      17
are: “thunder,” “lightning,” “storm,” “thunderbolt,” and “thunderstorm”. Here is an example.
Motif, 2 is titled: “Lightning from eyes” and reads: “Lightning emerges from eyes or mouth
of the being who is thought to produce thunderstorms.” This motif is present in 56 societies.
Perhaps not surprisingly, most thunder-related motifs are also etiological, i.e., they oﬀer an
explanation for the origins of thunderstorms. To measure the lightning intensity of a region,
we use the gridded climatologies of the mean lightning flash rates observed by the spaceborne
Optical Transient Detector (OTD) and Lightning Imaging Sensor (LIS) instruments from 1995
to 2010 (see Cecil, Buechler, and Blakeslee (2014)). Societies located in regions experiencing
intense thunder strikes feature more thunder-related images and episodes in their oral tradition.
This is the case both when we compare groups within the same continent and within the same
country.
      Do societies located in colder environments feature scenes in their oral tradition that
depict the cold climates they experience? To answer this question, we use the word “cold” as
a seed for ConceptNet. There are 34 motifs that are tagged by the following words: “cold,”
“cool,” “chil,” “icy,” “warm,” “freeze,” “frozen,” and “frost.” Motif 27 titled “A horn in the
ice” is present in 40 oral traditions and its description reads: “A horned monster breaks ice on
river or lake. Usually people walk across frozen body of water, get to see a horn protruding
from the ice and try to cut it oﬀ. The monster breaks the ice, many people drown”.
      How does the annual temperature shape the frequency of cold-related motifs? We con-
struct for each society the mean annual temperature between 1900 − 2000 in a radius of 50km
from its centroid. In regions with a mean annual temperature below 10 Celsius, groups’ oral
tradition have on average 144 cold-tagged motifs. This is two and half times larger (059) than
the corresponding number for groups located in warmer climates. In columns (5) and (6) we
show that this pattern holds within continents and within countries.
      It is well understood that the environment exerts a significant influence on a group’s
mode of subsistence. For example, groups residing on more fertile lands are on average more
likely to depend on agriculture. In the last 3 columns of Table 3 we ask whether this relationship
is also evident in the oral tradition of a group. We use the caloric suitability of agriculture in a
given region for crops available before AD 1500 from Galor and Ozak (2015). But how do we
get a proxy of the importance of agricultural activities from a society’s folklore? We look for
the BoW from 3 diﬀerent seeds which reflect the most commonly cultivated crops worldwide,
namely “rice,” “wheat” and “corn”. Doing so we tag 27 diﬀerent motifs related to these 3
main crops. The tagged words are: “flour,” “oat,” “cereal,” “grain” “wheat,” “maize,” “cob,”
and “corn.” Motif 34 is a crop-related motif. It can be found in 35 oral traditions, it is
titled: “One grain porridge” and its description reads “One cereal grain (cob, etc.) is enough


                                                18
to prepare a meal.”
       An average group in Berezkin has 059 crop-related motifs. However, among groups that
have 0 such motifs, the median regional caloric suitability for agriculture is 5 277, whereas
the caloric suitability jumps 40% for groups with at least one farming-related motif reaching
7 390. This pattern is the same when we exploit within-continent variation and within-country
variation in columns 7 and 8, respectively. In the last column of Table 3 we add as a control
the change in mean caloric suitability from agriculture induced by the post-1500 large-scale
population movements. We are doing this exercise in order to indirectly check whether the crop-
related motifs in the oral tradition are shaped by the pre-1500 CE agricultural opportunities
or by the agricultural options shaped during the last 500 years by the Columbian exchange.
The estimated coeﬃcients suggest that although increases in agricultural quality post-1500
enter with a positive sign it is the pre-1500 agricultural landscape that is economically and
statistically correlated with crop-related motifs in a group’s tradition. Figures 3 − 3 depict
the relationship between each feature of the physical environment and its intensity in the oral
tradition. In particular, the binned scatterplots correspond to the relationships estimated in
columns 2, 4, 6, and 8, respectively. Overall, the results in Table 3 provide strong evidence for
influences of geography and ecology on folklore-based measures of the natural environment.

4.2    Folklore and the Ethnographic Record

Our goal in this part of the paper is to provide evidence that folklore-based measures of the
economy and the polity are in accordance with measures of similar aspects recorded in the EA.
Our hope is that by doing so, we can then use folklore to deduce other aspects of a group that
are either have incomplete coverage or are plainly absent from the EA, such as the extent of
trade. Hence, we view oral tradition and the ethnographic record as providing (noisy, but as
shown below, consistent) information for the same underlying social, economic and institutional
structure.
       To construct a correspondence between a group’s oral tradition and its ethnographic
record, we linked the societies in Berezkin’s database to those in the EA. Out of the 1 264 groups
in the EA, we found a corresponding oral tradition in Berezkin’s database for 1 238 of these
societies, resulting in a match rate of roughly 98% From the 945 groups in Berezkin, we matched
617 to these 1 237 societies in the EA, implying no ethnographic coverage for approximately
one-third of societies for which Berezkin has systematized its folklore.18 Generally, we run OLS
  18
    For these 328 societies, after establishing the link between oral traditions and ethnographic traits, we can
use the empirical relationship to reconstruct the missing ethnographic record of these groups.




                                                      19
specifications of the following type:

        EA Trait =  + ln(1 + Topic-Specific Motifs ) +   +    (2)

where EA Trait is the trait of interest from the EA for group  located in continent/country ;
and ln(1 + Topic-Specific-Motifs ) is the log number of motifs belonging to a given BoW. The
term,   captures continent or country-specific constants. Baseline Controls are as described
above. See Table 2, Panel , for the summary statistics of this sample.

Mode of Subsistence in the Oral Tradition and in the Ethnographic Record
  Table 4 aims at showing that the folklore-based measures of the specific subsistence modes are
in accordance with ethnographic measures of economic activity. Needless to say, we interpret
these results as conditional correlations.
      We generate the appropriate BoW for each diﬀerent type of subsistence in the following
manner. To capture hunting activities we employ the BoW that results from using “hunt” as
a seed in ConceptNet. Doing so, we end up tagging 131 motifs. Words tagged by the resulting
BoW include: “hunt,” “chase,” “deer,” “moose,” “hunt,” “elk,” “pursuit,” “search,” “quest,”
and “seek.” The following hunt-related motif, 19, titled: “Raven tries to starve people,” is
found in 27 oral traditions and its description reads: “Raven hides or scares game animals
preventing hunters to kill them. People outwit him.” To capture fishing activities we use
“fish,” as our seed word. This results in 98 motifs tagged as fishing-related ones. The words
that are tagged include only “fish,” and “fisherman”. Motif, 18 is fish-related and it is
titled “Getting fishing hook or harpoon” with the following description: “Person turns into a
fish to steal fishing hook or harpoon or he turns into fishing hook to catch a fish.”
      For animal husbandry we use “pastoralism” as our seed in ConceptNet and this results
in 27 motifs that are tagged accordingly. The related words in this case include: “cattle,”
“agriculture,” “graze,” “herd,” “farm,” “herdsman,” “livestock,” and “pasture”. Here is the
description of a pastoral motif, 136 : “A lad becomes a master and a leader of great amount
of cattle (cows or buﬀaloes) and meets a princess.” Finally, for agriculture we use the BoW
explained above.
      The dependent variable in Table 4 is the share of subsistence from agriculture in columns
(1) and (2), the reliance on herding in columns (3) and (4), and the share of subsistence from
fishing in columns (5)-(6) and hunting and gathering in (7)-(8). Each measure of subsistence
ranges from 0 to 9, roughly mapping into the deciles of the share of subsistence needs covered
by the corresponding activity. The folklore-based measures enter with the expected signs across
all specifications when we exploit variation across groups both between and within countries.
For example, societies with more crop-related motifs in their oral traditions are systematically

                                                20
more likely to be farmers, and those with more motifs describing hunting are less likely so. For
pastoral societies the beta coeﬃcient on the intensity of pastoral motifs is roughly 020.
       Predominantly fishing societies have a median of 4 fishing motifs whereas the correspond-
ing statistic for non-fishing groups is 1. Columns (5) and (6) show that this pattern holds when
we compare groups within continents and within countries. Finally, hunting-specific motifs are
robust features of hunting and gathering societies. The latter are also systematically less likely
to have pastoral and farming motifs.
       A complementary way to gauge the predictive power of folklore-based measures of sub-
sistence with respect to the shares of subsistence recorded in the EA is to look at the 2 in
specifications without continental or country constants (not reported). The estimates range
from 010 for the reliance on animal husbandry to 016 for the share of subsistence from agri-
culture, suggesting that a substantial fraction of the observed variation of a given mode of
subsistence can be accounted for by variation in the intensity of the subsistence-related mo-
tifs. In Figures 4 − 4 we show binned scatterplots visualizing the relationships established in
columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 of Table 4, respectively.


       Uncovering Missing Values of Traits Recorded in the Ethnographic Record
  The first two columns of Table 5 follow a strategy similar to Table 4. Specifically, we
ask whether folklore-based measures of political complexity predict the strength of political
complexity in the EA. The set of words we use to categorize a motif is based on the seed “king”
that we input in ConceptNet. Doing so, the following words are tagged: “king,” “queen,”
“prince,” “princess,” “ruler,” and “rein”. An average society in the EA has 180 king-related
motifs. This number jumps to 403 for centralized societies and is 4 times smaller (104) for
non-centralized ones.19 Columns 1 and 2 in Table 5 show that the same pattern is present
within continents and countries. Hierarchical groups during the precolonial era (as recorded
by ethnographers in the EA) are systematically more likely to have authority-related motifs.
Figure 5 shows the binned scatterplot corresponding to column 2.
       Out of the 1 264 societies in the EA there is missing information on the layers of juris-
dictional hierarchy beyond the local community for 135 groups. Can the oral tradition help us
recover this information? Figure 5 plots the value of predicted levels of jurisdictional hierar-
chy based on the intensity of king-related motifs (and the baseline controls of equation (2). To
facilitate comparison, besides plotting the average for the groups with missing values, we also
plot the predicted values at diﬀerent levels of observed hierarchy. The average group without a
  19
     We follow Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) and classify non-centralized groups as those with 0 or
1 layers of jurisdictional hierarchy above the local community level (variable 33 in the EA). See Fortes and
Evans-Pritchard (1940) for an original exposition.



                                                     21
record on political complexity is predicted to be roughly at the level of societies organized along
petty chiefdoms in the EA. One might expect groups with missing values to be less politically
complex. On the contrary, a simple t-test reveals that in fact groups with missing ethnographic
records on political centralization are on average more complex based on their oral tradition
compared to those groups where such information was recorded. This diﬀerence is statistically
significant at 5% level. Figure 5 depicts the density plots of predicted centralization for those
with and without EA-recorded levels of hierarchy, respectively. The latter is shifted overall to
the right. This example illustrates the possibility of using a group’s oral tradition to recover
missing entries of the ethnographic record.
      Using Folklore to encode non-extant, Group-Level Characteristics: The Case
of Trade


      In the last three columns of Table 5, we ask a diﬀerent question. Motivated by the
finding that folklore reflects features of the economic and institutional structure of a group, we
use a group’s oral tradition to obtain a measure of the intensity of the exchange economy in
that society. To do this, we construct a BoW that aims at capturing the presence of trade.
Specifically, we use “trade” as the seed in ConceptNet and tag the motifs that contain the
related words. These are the tagged words: “exchange,” “trade,” “swap,” “barter,” “deal,”
and “market.” The average group in Berezkin’s database has 127 motifs related to exchange
(see Figure 6 for the global distribution of such motifs). Is there a way to verify whether the
variation in exchange-related motifs reflects the true underlying trade intensity? Data on the
extent of the market economy is not available from the EA, and such estimates are largely
missing from the historical record. An indirect way to get at this question is to compare
(distance to) historical trade routes to the intensity of trade-related motifs.
      In other words, is it the case that groups closer to the preindustrial trade routes are
more likely to have trade-related motifs in their oral tradition? To shed light on this question,
we used data from Michalopoulos, Naghavi, and Prarolo (2018) that put together for the Old
World a comprehensive set of pre-AD 600 trade routes, along with historical harbors and ports
before the 5 century AD as well as the network of Roman roads, and constructed the distance
of each group in Berezkin’s database to the nearest pre-AD 600 route. The summary statistics
are telling of a robust, broad pattern. Among the 474 societies in Berezkin’s catalogue located
in the Old World (Africa, Asia, Europe), those within 100 kilometers of ancient trade routes
have an average of 352 exchange-related motifs, a number twice as large compared to groups
located farther away (which have 178 such motifs).
      Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 show that this pattern is not driven by broad group diﬀerences


                                                22
across continents or modern-day countries, highlighting the usefulness of folklore in quantifying
missing yet important aspects of preindustrial societies. In column 5 we add a control reflecting
how much the distance to trade routes decreased in between 600 AD and 1800 AD. Interestingly,
the latter enters insignificant, whereas the pre-AD 600 coeﬃcient remains precisely estimated.
This pattern echoes what we found earlier regarding the role of pre-1500 and post-1500 land
quality for agriculture and crop-related motifs, and suggests that although we only have a
snapshot of the oral traditions across societies in late 19th century, elements of folklore are
likely to encode information of the economy and the polity harking back several hundreds of
years.20

4.3    Folklore and Historical Norms

So far, we have shown how the oral tradition of a given pre-industrial society may complement
our reliance on the EA, both deepening and broadening our understanding of a group’s eco-
nomic, social and institutional background. Besides the value of having two (noisy) sources to
reconstruct societal historical attributes, below we show how we use folklore to reconstruct the
historical beliefs, attitudes, and norms via text analysis. Naturally, in absence of alternative
proxies of cultural norms we cannot directly check how accurate are the values elicited from a
group’s folklore. Nevertheless, by establishing that the content of folklore is broadly consistent
with the known ethnographic material it increases our confidence that the historical values
inferred from the oral tradition may be useful proxies of the unobserved historical cultural
norms.
       After discussing the methodological framework, we attempt an empirical assessment
of famous conjectures among social scientists. Specifically, through the lenses of folklore we
investigate the original aﬄuent society hypothesis, the culture of honor among pastoralists,
the importance of family in groups formed along extended family lines, and the relationship
between statehood and rule-following norms as well as trade. This list of conjectures is by
no means exhaustive. Our choice is mainly driven by the fact that besides their outsized
importance in the social sciences, these hypotheses have been the departing point for a series
of studies among economists interested in how culture shapes contemporary outcomes.

A Methodological Digression

The set of values that one may extract from folklore is potentially very large. How do we
discipline our choices? Broadly speaking, there are two categories of questions one may ask.
  20
     In the LIWC dictionary there is an entry reflecting concern with money. This is a broader category compared
to the one on trade from ConceptNet. In Appendix Table 2 we show that a similar pattern obtains when we use
the motifs tagged by the money-related BoW or the first principal component between the two BoW.



                                                      23
On the one hand, we could test a specific hypothesis. For example, below we will show how a
group’s oral tradition can shed light on several conjectures from anthropology linking a society’s
historical mode of subsistence or type of social organization to a given psychological disposition.
       On the other hand, one may prefer to let the data “tell” whether there are particular
values that stand out from a group’s folklore. This is a case of feature selection, i.e., the
process of selecting a subset of relevant variables for use in the model. In the era of big data
there are numerous methods that have been proposed to help with feature selection. In the
context of linear regression models and in the presence of many correlated predictor variables,
the general solution is to reduce variance at the cost of introducing some bias. This approach
is called regularization and helps the predictive performance of the model. There are various
shrinkage techniques including Lasso, Ridge, and Elastic Net (a convex combination of the
previous two).21
       To address either inquiry (test a specific hypothesis, or perform feature selection) one
needs to define what is the underlying set of potential psychological states. This question has
no clear answer. For example, ConceptNet, a great resource for obtaining related words for
virtually any seed (word), encompasses much more than psychological states, personal concerns
or moral values. This is where existing psychosocial dictionaries can help. Specifically, we
discipline our choice of BoW using the entries from two widely-used psychosocial dictionaries
that map psychologically cross-validated BoW into specific values and states of mind. See the
discussion in Section 3 Using the entries from the LIWC and the MFD dictionaries has clear
advantages by delineating the pool of potential values. Nevertheless, an important caveat to
keep in mind is that all BoW are based on contemporary English. Although translation issues
are less pressing since Berezkin has done the translation of the motifs himself, contemporary
words that map into personal concerns and psychological states may not necessarily have the
same meaning in the historical context that tales and myths describe.22
       Sometimes, a given BoW from LIWC/MFD closely reflects what we want to capture;
other times, however, a given entry may be only loosely related. In these cases, we will use
specific BoW selected from ConceptNet and combine related concepts from LIWC/MFD via a
principal component analysis.
  21
     A thorough investigation of what the alternative algorithms deliver in the context of oral traditions is
beyond the realm of the present study. Nevertheless, below we will sometimes comment on the BoW chosen by
the rigorous lasso. The latter was introduced by Belloni et al. (2012) and is a data-driven method of choosing
the penalty level that delivers asymptotically valid estimates under non-Gaussian, heteroscedastic disturbances.
  22
     Ideally, we would like to have the BoW from LIWC, MFD and ConceptNet to be based and cross-validated
on the historical context of the time period an oral tradition corresponds to.




                                                      24
        Testing Specific Conjectures: The Case of Correlated Concepts While testing
a specific hypothesis, it quickly becomes clear that the uncovered correlations may suﬀer from
omitted variables bias. Suppose that one researcher finds a correlation between psychological
state  and group attribute  . One may naturally wonder whether this is a robust associa-
tion or whether there is another psychological trait , that is correlated both with  and 
resulting in a spurious correlation between the latter two. This is a case of correlated concepts.
How best to deal with this? Usually, one would leverage prior knowledge of co-occurrence of
psychological/moral traits and control for them appropriately. However, in this case we have
weak priors about which BoW are correlated and, moreover, there are dozens of potential BoW
from LIWC and MFD. In other words, we do not know what is the “right” set of controls
among the numerous BoW.
        To address this issue we take advantage of recent developments in estimating structural
parameters in linear, sparse, high-dimensional models with many controls, which is our case.
Specifically, we use the “post-double-selection” methodology (PDS) proposed by Belloni et al.
(2012, 2014, 2015). The idea is to separately lasso over the pool of potential BoW on the
dependent variable,  , and on the BoW of interest, , and include the union of variables
selected as controls in the OLS regression of  on  . The intuition is straightforward. Find
the variables systematically related to either  or  and explicitly account for them when
estimating the association between the two.
        Note that the discussion above does not touch upon the issue of causality, i.e., whether 
causes  or the other way around. Nevertheless, it provides an informed way to discipline the
choice of potential control variables. Below we will be showing results both with and without
the PDS-selected covariates.

4.3.1    Foraging Societies

The Original Aﬄuent Society Hypothesis Before Sahlins (1972), anthropologists por-
trayed the forager’s lifestyle as an indigent one, with day-long toiling to obtain the means
necessary to survive and coping with a marginal environment, leaving little if any time for
leisure. In 1972 Marshall Sahlins oﬀered a drastically diﬀerent take on this. Drawing on data
from a small number of foraging societies, he argued that hunter-gatherers were able to meet
their needs by working roughly 15 − 20 hours per week, significantly less than the hours worked
by industrial workers, concluding that with economic development, the amount of work actu-
ally increases and the amount of leisure decreases. This radically diﬀerent view espoused by
Sahlins has become popular among anthropologists but has also generated vigorous criticism,
see Kaplan (2000). To settle this open question in a definitive manner one would need time-use


                                                25
data for the universe of hunting and gathering societies. An alternative route is to take ad-
vantage of a society’s folklore. To the extent that a group’s lifestyle is imprinted in the images
and episodes of its oral tradition then one might expect to find more leisure-related motifs in
societies where leisure activities are more common.
       The LIWC dictionary, among the BoW reflecting personal concerns, includes an entry
on “leisure” that is useful in our context. Leisure—related motifs that are tagged by the cor-
responding LIWC category include words like: “celebrate”, “dance”, “entertain”, “dream”,
“fun”, “game”, “joke”, “sing”, “play”, “art”, and “relax.” Here are a couple of motifs prevalent
among foraging societies in North America; “Person joins dancers but then understands that
these are trees or reeds moved by the wind”. “Person plays throwing his eyes or his tooth up
or away. Eyes or tooth first come back to eye sockets or mouth but eventually are lost.” There
are 175 societies in the EA that derive their livelihood predominantly from either hunting or
gathering. The median foraging society has 17 motifs that are classified as related to leisure
whereas non-foraging ones have only 10 such motifs.
       Table 6 has the following structure, which will be repeated when we explore the as-
sociation between an observable economic/institutional trait and a given concept. The first
two columns exploit within-continent variation whereas columns (3) and (4) compare the oral
traditions of groups located in the same country. Figure 7 shows the binned scatterplot of
the relationship estimated in Column 1 of Table 6. All columns include the baseline controls
explained in equation (2). The additional controls in the even-numbered columns are the BoW
selected by the post-double lasso selection method over all entries in the LIWC and MFD dic-
tionaries. See discussion above. Doing so, in column (2) ((4)), for example, we control for the
frequency of motifs reflecting an additional 6 (8) concepts/BoW that are found to be highly
correlated in the first stage. To fix ideas “leisure”-related motifs systematically co-occur with
motifs on “motion”. Hence, the frequency of motion-related motifs in a group’s oral tradition
is part of the additional covariates.23 Comparing the coeﬃcient estimates without and with the
additional controls is instructive of how much of the covariance between the BoW of interest
and the corresponding trait is driven by concepts that are correlated both with the RHS and
the LHS variables. Accounting for the lasso-selected BoW in columns (2) and (4) does not
change the estimated relationship either qualitatively or quantitatively. Hunting and gathering
societies feature in their oral tradition themes systematically related to leisure.24
  23
      Although we do not report the variables selected by the first stage of the post-double lasso selection regres-
sions, these chosen covariates oﬀer a unique glimpse into the covariance structure of psychological states and
personal concerns in a group’s oral tradition.
   24
      We find a similar pattern but with the opposite sign when we focus on “work”-related motifs according to
the LIWC (not reported for brevity). Foraging groups have on average 22 such motifs compared to non-foragers
that have on average 26 such images. Note that this is not a mechanical relationship. It is not the case that
when a group features more leisure-tagged motifs it has fewer work-related ones. The empirical relationship


                                                        26
        Although one needs to keep in mind that leisure-related words are classified using a con-
temporary dictionary, these robust associations tentatively oﬀer large-scale evidence in support
of Sahlins (1972) thesis. Comparing oral traditions across societies at diﬀerent stages of devel-
opment, there is a gradient in the intensity of leisure-related images; those images decrease as
societies transit from hunting and gathering to agriculture. Predominantly agricultural groups
show the opposite to foraging communities’ pattern. Leisure-related motifs are relatively scarce
and work-related ones abound.25

4.3.2    Pastoral Societies

The Culture of Honor Anthropologist Walter Goldschmidt was perhaps the first to observe
that among African cultures “pastoralists would do more ‘acting out’ in their interpersonal re-
lationships, being more ready to express anger and to take direct action, while the farmers
would suppress their negative emotions and restrain their action” (1971, 16—17). Just as pas-
toral environments are thought to favor a psychological phenotype that is sensitive to honor
and prone to aggression, it is similarly thought that horticultural environments select for the
opposite psychological profile.
        Edgerton’s seminal work in 1971 oﬀers a fascinating examination of the psychological
profile of farmers and herders across four groups in East Africa. Conducting an extensive
comparative psychological study he concluded that herder attitudes were associated with a
number of attributes including direct aggression, independence, fear, bravery, and brutality.
Bolton et al (1976), focusing on two Peruvian villages of farmers and herders, found that these
diﬀerences were manifested already among children of 5 to 7 years old, suggesting the formation
of these psychological traits at a very young age.
        Motivated by these works Nisbett and Cohen (1996) conjectured that the high prevalence
of homicides in the South of the United States can be attributed to its initial settlement by
herders from the fringes of Britain in the 18th century, who transplanted a culture of honor
and concomitant aggression. Grosjean (2014) provides robust evidence along these lines. The
idea behind this link is that pastoral societies are likely to rely heavily on aggression as a way
to deter theft from their herd. In such environments of imperfect property rights and easily
movable property, creating a reputation of readiness to exact revenge may prevent theft.
between these BoW is if anything weakly positive.
  25
     Setting aside Sahlin’s influential conjecture, one might be interested in knowing what features are conspicu-
ously present (or absent) from the oral tradition of a typical foraging society. We provide a partial answer to this
question by investigating the features selected by the feasible Lasso method proposed by Belloni et al (2012).
When we cluster the standard errors along the language family level (variable v98 in the EA) and partial out
the baseline controls, the feasible Lasso selects 4 BoW as predictive of predominantly hunting and gathering
societies. Overall, foragers’ oral tradition abounds with “leisure”-related motifs whereas images and episodes
related to “money”, “religion” and “home” are very much predictive of non-foraging cultures.



                                                        27
       A natural question is whether themes of aggression are more frequent in the oral tradition
of pastoral groups. Although LIWC does not have an entry focusing clearly on aggression and
retaliation it does feature a BoW reflecting “anger” among the list of psychological states
regarding negative emotions. Examples of words in this BoW are: “aggressive”, “angry”,
“revenge”, “assault”, “brutal”, “cruel”, “kill”, etc. We complement this entry with a BoW from
Conceptnet on “retaliation” to obtain a more precise measure of motifs that are directly related
to instances of retaliation. The words tagged in the motifs are: “revenge”, “avenge”, “retaliate”,
“wrath”. Predominantly pastoral groups have on average 4168 (180) motifs reflecting anger
(retaliation), whereas the corresponding number among non-pastoral societies is 2686 (117).
       To quantify the intensity of violent motifs in a group’s oral tradition, we take the first
principal component of “anger” and “retaliation” BoW.26 Columns 1 to 4 in Table 7 Panel
 show that there is a robust association between the frequency of retaliatory, anger-related
images in a group’s oral tradition and its mode of subsistence. Figure 7 displays the binned
scatterplot of the relationship estimated in Column 1. Pastoral groups have disproportionately
more violent motifs compared to others. This relationship obtains both when we exploit within
continent and within-country variation and when we account for correlated BoW with the
post-double lasso selection method. When we do so, the coeﬃcient estimate of interest drops
moderately, which implies that there are other BoW in LIWC and MFD that are correlated
both with the intensity of anger in a group’s folklore and are more common in herding societies.
For example, it appears that anger-related BoW are positively correlated with BoW associated
with authority/subversion in the MFD dictionary. Motifs tagged as reflecting deference to
authority are also more common across pastoral societies. Hence, once we control for the share
of motifs reflecting deference to authority in the second stage of the post-double lasso selection
method, the association between pastoral groups and anger-related motifs weakens.
       Establishing that pastoral oral traditions feature more motifs depicting anger and re-
taliation is important for two reasons. First, it provides large-scale evidence in favor of an
influential (and intensely debated) conjecture about the culture of honor and aggression among
pastoral societies. Second, this finding also helps us understand how a particular attitude
survives across generations even when the original conditions, that made this type of cultural
adaptation emerge, no longer apply. A group’s collective memory enshrined in its oral tradition
may be the vehicle of cultural transmission.
  26
    The first principal component explains 83% of the common variance of these two measures of aggression
across oral traditions. We focus on the first principal component because its eigenvalue is 167 (one being the
rule of thumb), while the eigenvalue of the second principal component is strictly less than one. In Appendix
Table 3 we show that the results are similar when we use as the dependent variable each BoW, separately.




                                                      28
4.3.3    Societies Organized Along Extended Family Lines

Family Members in the Oral Tradition Numerous studies have documented the impor-
tance of family ties for understanding a variety of policies and contemporary attitudes related
to trust towards family members and demand for regulation of labor markets, among others.
See Alesina and Giuliano (2013), Alesina, Algan, Cahuc, and Giuliano (2015), Enke (2018),
among others.
        Here we explore whether groups organized along extended family lines are more likely
to feature family members in the images and episodes of their oral traditions. This question
is motivated by the fact that unlike nuclear families, in extended-family societies socialization
is more likely to take place within the confines of the extended family network. If this is the
case, then one would expect to see family members often being the protagonists in the stories
and tales being passed from one generation to the next. This is a straightforward exercise to
conduct since among the LIWC entries that describe social processes, there is a BoW specific to
“family”. Among the 1 237 groups recorded in the Ethnographic Atlas, 361 are coded as being
domestically organized along independent nuclear families with the remaining 876 featuring
polygynous, and extended families. In the latter, family members show up in 22% of the motifs
whereas the corresponding statistic is 199% for societies with a nuclear structure. This simple
diﬀerence in means is statistically significant at 1% level.
        In Table 7− Panel  we explore the robustness of this association. Specifically, in columns
(1) and (2) we look within continents whereas in columns (3) and (4) we add country-specific
constants. Figure 7 displays the binned scatterplot of the relationship estimated in Column 1.
The odd-numbered columns include only the baseline controls whereas in the even-numbered
ones we add the controls selected by the post-double lasso selection method. Adding these
additional BoW weakens the relationship between extended family groups and the prevalence
of family-related motifs but it remains both economically and statistically significant. In the
most restrictive specification of Table 7 Panel B, nuclear-family groups have 5% fewer motifs
where family members are mentioned.
        This finding matters not only for our understanding of how the content of motifs reflects
the mode of social organization (in this case nuclear versus extended families) but, as will
become apparent, this diﬀerential representation of family members in the narratives of groups
is an important predictor of how much individuals trust their own kin today.

4.3.4    Political Centralization

Historical states have fascinated economists with an accompanying increase in the studies
exploring their legacy and origins over the last two decades. Thanks to the thorough historical


                                                 29
work and the wealth of ethnographic studies available, our understanding of societies with
complex political legacies is substantial. Nevertheless, there is one dimension for which we
know relatively little. This regards the extent of trade whose link with statehood has been
often assumed but comprehensive evidence is lacking. For example, Robert Bates has famously
linked the roots of statehood to the gains that can be reaped from the promotion of markets. In
regions where trade could flourish more easily, states would arise to facilitate production and
exchange. Despite leveraging interesting geographic variation in trade potential, see Fenske
(2014), there is an inherent diﬃculty in testing any hypothesis involving the role of trade in
history. This is particularly true for societies outside Europe and China where information on
the importance of exchange is at best limited.


The Importance of Trade In this section we explore the relationship between statehood
and the intensity of trade motifs in a group’s folklore. The measure of trade intensity we
have already constructed takes into account only trade-related words from ConceptNet. Nev-
ertheless, in LIWC among the BoW on personal concerns there is an entry on “money” which
encompasses trade-related words. Hence, we combine the trade-related motifs from Concept-
Net with the money-related ones from LIWC to obtain a set of motifs that are related to trade
and money more broadly. Specifically, we take the first principal component that explains 90%
of the common variance of the two measures across the 945 oral traditions. We focus on the
first principal component because it loads positively on both variables and has an eigenvalue
of 181, while the eigenvalue of the second principal component is 02. In Appendix Table 4 we
show that the results are similar when we use as a measure of exchange each BoW separately.
      Armed with the measure on the intensity of exchange in the oral tradition, in Panel  of
Table 8 we explore its relationship with the degree of political centralization. Again, we make
no attempt to get at the question of what causes what; our goal is to simply oﬀer illustrative
correlations of a pattern that has been much theorized upon with few empirical counterparts.
      Among stateless societies, i.e., those without any levels of jurisdictional hierarchy above
the village level, motifs on trade and money are notably absent, with a mean of 072 and 394,
respectively. On the contrary, among groups organized as states the relevant statistics are
roughly 5 times larger (36 and 1983, respectively). Table 8-Panel  suggests that this pattern
remains strong both when we explore within continent and within country variation in columns
(1)-(3) and (4)-(6), respectively, as well as when we additionally account for the BoW from
LIWC and MFD identified by the post-double lasso selection method in specifications (2), (3),
(5) and (6). Figure 7 displays the binned scatterplot of the relationship estimated in Column
1.



                                               30
       In columns (3) and (6) we control for the shares of subsistence that come from agriculture
and from pastoralism. Two points are worth discussing. First, political centralization remains
a robust correlate of trade and money beyond the relationship between the mode of subsidence
and exchange itself. Second, the intensity of money-related motifs for agricultural groups is no
diﬀerent compared to that of foraging groups, whereas pastoral groups are systematically more
likely to feature exchange-related themes in their oral tradition. This pattern is consistent with
the observation that farming communities in the preindustrial era were not necessarily more
likely to engage in trade–agricultural groups could satisfy a large part of their subsistence
needs from agricultural products, whereas pastoral ones, given the limited set of resources they
produced, had to rely more on trade and exchange for their survival. Richerson, Mulder, and
Vila (2001), for example, observe that ”despite the emphasis on animals, most herders are
dependent on crop staples for part of their caloric intake ... procured by client agricultural
families that are often part of the society and the presence of specialized tradesmen that
organize the exchange of agricultural products for animal products.”


Rule-Following Norms Some studies have identified robust associations between the histor-
ical statehood and contemporary economic performance at the country and ethnic homeland
level, see Bockstette, Chanda, and Putterman (2002) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou
(2013), respectively. Others have looked at how the experience of centralized forms of gover-
nance influences the norms towards rule following today. From a theoretical standpoint, the
answer for the latter is ex ante ambiguous, and it boils down to whether institutions crowd in or
crowd out rule-following behavior. From an empirical point of view, the existing findings go in
both directions. For example, Lowes, Nunn, Robinson, and Weigel (2017) compare descendants
of a centralized group, the Kuba, to those of neighboring stateless groups in Congo DRC and
find in field experiments that the former are less likely to follow the rules and more likely to
cheat, suggesting a substitutability between the strength of the state and rule-following norms.
On the contrary, Dell, Lane, and Querubin (2017) focus on the Dai Viet-Khmer boundary
within Vietnam, and comparing adjacent villages, find that a strong historical state crowded
in village-level collective action and quality of local governance. Can the oral tradition of a
group help to shed light on this question?
       The MFD dictionary has 82 words that are meant to capture virtues and vices of leader-
ship and followership, including deference to legitimate authority and respect for traditions.27
Among those, the most common words in the tagged motifs are: “order,” “control,”“status,”
  27
     We combine both BoW on vice and virtue for authority constructing a BoW on authority overall. From the
287 motifs tagged by the MFD as authority-related motifs 278 are tagged by the virtue-related BoW and only
9 as vice-related.



                                                    31
“serve,” “leader,” “respect,” and “hierarchy”. Here is a description of such a motif present
in 26 societies: “For finding the lost husband (wife, savior), person sets up an inn (bakery,
bathhouse) where guests are served gratis. This attracts people. One of the guests proves to
be the lost one or the guest tells a story that helps to find the lost one.” Another one reads:
“Person who gives diﬃcult tasks to the hero is a prominent figure in social hierarchy, i.e., a
head of political unit of community- or higher level and not a mythical being.” This motif is
present in 228 societies in Berezkin’s dataset.
         We complement the entry on authority/subversion from the MFD dictionary with the
BoW from ConceptNet on “respect”. We do so because the MFD BoW on authority/subversion
is based on a broad set of words whereas the ConceptNet BoW for respect has significantly
fewer. As a result, 287 motifs are tagged by the authority/subversion BoW from MFD whereas
only 26 motifs are tagged by the “respect” entry in ConceptNet. The words tagged by the
latter are: respect, admire, aﬀect, gratitude, honor, regard, and sympathize. Below, we use as
the dependent variable the first principal component of the two.28
         A simple cross-tabulation of the intensity of these categories and state centralization
as recorded in the EA is indicative of the underlying pattern. On the one hand, stateless
groups have on average just 045 motifs that are tagged as respect-related by ConceptNet (the
respective number for the authority/subversion entry from MFD is 699). On the other hand,
the corresponding number for centralized states is four times as large with an average of 234
(2219). In Table 8, Panel , we show that this pattern is robust to adding continental fixed
eﬀects in columns (1) and (3), and comparing groups within the same modern-day-country
boundaries in columns (2), (4), (5) and (6). Moreover, controlling for additional BoW chosen
by the post-double selection method, the coeﬃcient estimates of interest decline in magnitude
but remain precisely estimated. Finally, in the last two columns we show that this correlation
is present both in groups that have high gods and in groups without high gods. Across these
diﬀerent samples and conditioning sets we find that political complexity goes in tandem with
respect (for authority) motifs. Figure 7 shows the binned scatterplots of the relationship
estimated in Column 1.
         All in all, the results in Table 8, Panel , oﬀer large-scale support in favor of arguments
put forth that predict a complementarity between statehood and rule-following behavior, see
(Weber (1976) and Foucault (1995) among others).
 28
      In Appendix Table 5 we show that results are similar using each BoW separately.




                                                      32
4.4    Historical Norms and Contemporary Beliefs and Attitudes

Do historical norms correspond to contemporary attitudes? Folklore is believed to be the
“intellectual remains of earlier cultures surfacing in the traditions of peasant class”. If so, to
what degree, do cultural values encapsulated in the oral tradition predict values and beliefs
today?
       To answer this question, we turn to the World Value Surveys (and its European equivalent–
the European Value Surveys). The first step is to assign an oral tradition to each respondent
based on her information regarding ethnicity, language spoken at home, and language spoken
at interview. Out of the 417 347 respondents, for which at least one of the three characteris-
tics is present, we have recovered an oral tradition for 368 951 individuals. The procedure is
the following: whenever information on ethnicity is available, a respondent is matched to the
folklore tradition(s) of his ethnic identity. If ethnicity is missing or unknown, we look at the
variable indicating the language the respondent speaks at home and assign the corresponding
oral tradition.29 When no oral tradition could be matched from the first two steps, we use
the language a respondent speaks at the interview.30 This accounts for about 25%, or 86 246
respondents, of the sample. For regions in Europe with a well-known regional identity whose
folklore is also present in Berezkin’s catalogue, we institute an overriding rule: we assign all
respondents sampled in that specific region to the regional folklore tradition. This is the case
for the following regions: Scotland, Ireland, Wales, Aragon, Sicily, Sardinia, Eastern Sami,
Western Sami, Gagauzia and Kashubia. Behind the links we have constructed lies a deeper
question, i.e., what is the vehicle by which an oral tradition is passed from one generation to
another? Is it one’s ethnicity? Is it the language one speaks at home, the language one uses
in his communications outside home, his region or a combination of all of the above? Our
current matching prioritizes ethnicity over home language and the latter over the language of
the interview.31
       Having constructed a correspondence between an individual and her oral tradition, we
  29
      It is possible for one language/ethnicity to correspond to several oral traditions. When this the case (like
for the “indigenous” in Guatemala), we assign to these groups the simple average of folklore measures of the
indigenous societies present in Guatemala (in Berezkin’s corpus). Other times, a respondent answers with a
country as his/her ethnic identifier. In this case, we created country-level BoW. We did this in the following
manner. First, we matched groups in the Georeferencing of Ethnic Groups Dataset (GREG) to an oral tradition.
We then generated for each ethnic group in GREG the corresponding BoW. Finally, to arrive at a country-level
BoW we took the weighted average of the BoW of the country’s groups using as weights the groups’ population
shares in the 1990’s.
   30
      When a respondent speaks English in the interview in a former British colony but he speaks a diﬀerent
language at home which we cannot match to an oral tradition, we err on the conservative side and do not assign
to her the English oral tradition.
   31
      An alternative route to reconstructing an individual’s oral tradition would be to use some kind of maximum
likelihood estimation minimizing the distance between folklore-based values (of one’s ethnicity, language and
region) and current attitudes. Doing so, one could uncover the closest oral tradition.


                                                       33
attach to the respondents their historical values based on their folklore.
       The empirical specifications we use in this part of the study take the following form:


              Attitude =  + Historic Value + Baseline Controls +X +             (3)

       where Attitude is the answer given by individual , with oral tradition , residing
in country . X is a vector of individual characteristics including age, age square, sex, 9
educational attainment indicators and 50 religious denomination fixed eﬀects. Standard errors
are clustered at the oral tradition level and  reflect country-of-residence specific constants.
The baseline controls are the same as those discussed above.32
       We use the BoW we constructed in the previous section to capture historic values from
an oral tradition,    .

       Respect (for Authority) in a Group’s Folklore and Rule-Following Today
We first examine how the intensity of “respect”-related motifs in a society’s folklore influences
tolerance of antisocial behavior today. The reason we look at these values is because there is
a vibrant literature that attempts to understand the variation in contemporary rule-following
norms across countries. Starting with the well-identified study by Fisman and Miguel (2007)
who show that cultural norms towards corruption are systematic determinants of rule-following
behavior, many studies try to shed light on how these rule-abiding norms rise in the first place
and get transmitted over time.
       Given the interest of the academic and policy-making community in this aspect of cul-
ture it is not surprising that the WVS-EVS has several questions that get at diﬀerent instances
of condoning socially-deviant behavior. In Table 9 we use 4 of these questions,  114 −  117.
Specifically, in column 1 the dependent variable reflects how justifiable the respondent finds
claiming government benefits to which she is not entitled. In column 2 (3) the variable of in-
terest is the extent to which a respondent justifies avoiding paying the fare on public transport
(cheating on taxes) and finally in column 4 the question gauges how comfortable is the individ-
ual with someone accepting a bribe. These 4 questions are on the same scale and range from 1
to 10 where 1 implies that the respondent finds this specific action “never justifiable” and 10
“always justifiable”. So, higher values indicate greater tolerance for rule-breaking behavior.
       The first 4 columns of Table 9 Panel  paint a clear picture. Respondents belonging to
groups whose oral traditions have more images and episodes on respect for tradition are sys-
tematically more likely to condone instances of anti-social behavior, like exploiting government
benefits, cheating on taxes, avoiding transport fare or accepting a bribe. The estimated beta
  32
    We focus on oral traditions with at least 40 respondents to make sure that our results are not driven by
leveraging variation from groups with a handful of respondents.


                                                    34
coeﬃcients are also sizeable. A one-standard-deviation increase in the intensity of “respect”-
related motifs decreases tolerance for socially deviant behavior by around 07 standard devia-
tions. We obtain the same pattern at the group level (Panel A) and at the individual level in
Panel B. The individual-level specifications are interesting because they show that the pattern
uncovered across oral traditions (i) is not driven by cross-country specific diﬀerences in folk-
lore and (ii) remains robust when we exploit across-individuals diﬀerences in education, age
and religious denomination. Within major and minor religious groups, variation in the fre-
quency of motifs related to authority/subversion systematically predicts low tolerance towards
rule-breaking behavior.
      The first 8 columns of Appendix Table 6 in Panels A and B show that the pattern is
qualitatively similar if instead of the first principal component we use the individual BoW on
“respect” from ConceptNet and “authority/subversion” from MFD, respectively.


      Family-Related Motifs and Trust in Family Does exposure to stories at an im-
pressionable age, where family members are the main characters, increases one’s trust to family
members? Question 001_ in the WVS-EVS asks the respondent how much he/she trusts
her own family and the answers range from 1 to 4 where 1 indicates complete trust (this is
the case for 83% of the respondents) and 4 complete distrust (this is the case only for 065%
of the sample). Here is a rather common family-related motif present in 74 societies: “Many
brothers marry or have to marry in such a way that all their wives are sisters.”
      A one-standard deviation increase in the frequency of motifs featuring family members
increases trust in family by 102 standard deviations, suggesting a quantitatively important
association (column 5 in Panel A of Table 9). Column 5 in Panel B shows this to be true
also when we explore individual-level variation. In the sixth column of Panels  and  we
ask whether this link masks an increase in generalized trust among those exposed to an oral
tradition rich in episodes featuring family members. Specifically, we control for the level of
generalized trust (variable 165) at the group and individual level, respectively. The association
between the frequency of family-related motifs and trust towards family members remains
intact.


      Leisure-Related Motifs and Importance of Enjoying one’s Time Above we es-
tablished that leisure-related images are more common among hunting and gathering societies.
We interpreted this finding as evidence in favor of a lifestyle of relatively abundant leisure for
these groups. Naturally, one may wonder if such motifs are consequential for contemporary
norms, i.e., when a society’s myths and legends feature images of fun and amusement, do mem-
bers of such groups place more importance on having a good time? Question 192 gets at

                                               35
this point. In particular, the question reads: “It is important to this person to have a good
time” with potential answers ranging from 0 (“very much like me”) to 6 (“not at all like me.”)
Hence, higher values indicate disagreement with the statement in question. Answers to this
question are fairly uniformly distributed across the diﬀerent dispositions. Column 7 reveals a
robust inverse relationship between the frequency of leisure-related motifs in an oral tradition
and the extent of disagreement with the importance of having a good time. The relationship is
also economically meaningful with an estimated beta coeﬃcient of 06. Is this pattern driven
by country-specific features, or individual diﬀerences in age, education, gender and religious
identity? Column 7 in Panel  shows that this not the case.
       A similar patterns emerges when we look at individual attitudes towards non-work in
column 8. Specifically, question 038 reads: “People who don´t work turn lazy” and higher
numbers suggest that the respondent increasingly disagrees with this statement. People whose
oral traditions have more motifs related to leisure are systematically less likely to think that
people who do not work turn lazy. Exploiting within-country, cross-oral tradition variation
delivers the same pattern. Overall, the evidence in columns 7 and 8 in Panels  and  of Table
9 suggests that exposure to images and episodes of leisure seems to make people value having
a good time, and be less likely to think of someone as lazy if she is not working.


       Anger/Retaliation-Related Motifs and Attitudes Towards Violence Today
Attitudes toward violence vary significantly across groups.                For example, in the question
whether “it is justifiable to use violence against other people”,  114_03, there are groups
like the Tswana, on the one end, whose respondents are very much likely to find such an action
justifiable compared to the Poles, on the other end, who almost unanimously reject the use of
violence.33 55% (51%) of Tswana’s motifs feature an act of retaliation (anger) compared to
just 06% (34%) for the images in the oral tradition of the Poles. Is this pattern more general?
That is, can part of the variation in attitudes towards violence be attributed to the intensity of
anger and retaliation-related motifs in the groups’ oral tradition? In Column 9 the dependent
variable reflects the share of people within a group that find violence more justifiable than not.
To capture the psychological proclivity of groups toward violence we use the first principal
component of motifs tagged as related to anger (by the LIWC) and retaliatory ones as tagged
by ConceptNet. Groups whose folklore displays images of anger and revenge are more accepting
towards violence overall. Panel  shows that this pattern is the same at the individual level
within countries.34
  33
     Tolerance towards violence ranges from 1 which is never justifiable to 10 which is always justifiable. So,
values above 5 indicate a respondent who is more likely to justify the use of violence than not.
  34
     In columns 9 and 10 in Appendix Table 6 we use the BoWs related to anger and retaliation separately. It is
the retaliatory motifs that seem to have all the explanatory power vis a vis current attitudes towards violence.


                                                      36
       Our initial examination of the WVS-EVS with the psychological states and moral values
captured by BoW from the LIWC and MFD dictionaries indicates a striking consistency be-
tween past values derived from folklore, and contemporary values reflected in the WVS-EVS
regarding rule-following, trust towards family members, acceptance of violence and attitudes
towards enjoying one’s life. Images and episodes encapsulated in folklore related to these fea-
tures appear to have a lasting life and more suggestively, but quite possibly, are still shaping
the way individuals perceive the world. This reveals the potential for folklore to be an anchor
for past values and to serve as an important benchmark in the research of culture.


5    Concluding Remarks
The economics literature on the cultural determinants of growth, starting with Landes (1998) ,
have placed a great emphasis on culture for determining contemporary economic and political
outcomes. To overcome the issue of endogeneity, promising instrumental variable strategies
have been devised linking historical accidents and geographic endowments to contemporary
beliefs and attitudes, often looking at individuals no longer living in their ancestral homelands
(following the epidemiological approach of Fernandez (2011)). Nevertheless, there has been
a missing element in this literature. Namely, the absence of historical proxies of beliefs has
severely limited the debate about the transmission of culture.35 In this study we propose a
way to close this gap by integrating folklore into our toolset.
       Specifically, we do four things. First, we introduce and describe a novel catalogue of
oral tradition across approximately 1 000 preindustrial societies assembled by the eminent
anthropologist and folklorist Yuri Berezkin. Second, following a dictionary-based method, we
quantify several aspects of folklore related to the physical environment, the mode of subsistence,
and its institutional complexity. We show that these folklore-based measures are predictive of
the observed natural landscape, and of the economic and societal structure recorded in the
Ethnographic Atlas. We then describe how one may utilize a society’s oral tradition to quantify
unknown economic and institutional aspects including the importance of trade and the degree
of jurisdictional hierarchy for those groups where such information is missing.
       Third, motivated by Bascom’s (1953) view of folklore as a depository of a group’s beliefs
and attitudes, we make a first attempt to uncover these norms by applying a dictionary-based
method to the motifs of the recorded oral traditions. We use the LIWC and the MFD dictionar-
ies, which have been widely applied in linguistics, psychology, sociology, and anthropology to
analyze text. Armed with these historical values we proceed in two steps. First, we use them
  35
     See Chen (2013) and Galor, Ozak, and Sarid (2016) for attempts to link linguistic features regarding, for
example, the structure of the future tense to cultural attributes today.



                                                     37
to assess the empirical content of an array of influential conjectures among anthropologists
regarding the original aﬄuent society, the culture of honor among pastoralists, the importance
of family for groups organized along extended-family lines, and the relationship between state-
hood and trade and rule-following norms, respectively. Finally, we explore how the norms
deduced from a group’s oral tradition are predictive of contemporary beliefs and attitudes.
      We view this study as a springboard for further research. For example, one can utilize
folklore to derive bilateral measures of cultural proximity, see Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009), or
explore how diﬀerent geographical traits influence the content of oral traditions. For example,
what do groups located in malaria-prone regions, fertile territories, or rugged terrains, “talk”
about? Moreover, folklore may shed light on which values are largely stable and which ones are
subject to change. An alternative dimension along which folklore can be employed is related to
Berezkin’s work, that is, using it to trace the groups’ historical migration paths. Also, although
obtaining time variation in folklore is challenging given the inherent uncertainty with timing
the origin of a given motif, one may extend this analysis to construct the psychological content
of contemporary popular culture as reflected in song genres, for example.
      Finally, one could investigate whether the content of children’s books read today in diﬀer-
ent parts of the world (or the US) is similar to the oral tradition of the respective places/groups.
We posit that the degree of continuity in the narratives between contemporary children books
and the folktales and myths of the respective societies is a direct measure of the rate at which
ancestral norms are intergenerationally transmitted. Given the versatility of folklore as a vehi-
cle of obtaining a unique (and perhaps our only) view of our ancestral oral cultural heritage, we
expect it to be widely used among scholars interested in the historical origins of comparative
development, culture and beyond.




                                                38
References
Alesina, A., Y. Algan, P. Cahuc, and P. Giuliano (2015): “Family Values and the
  Regulation of Labor,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 13(3), 599—630.

Alesina, A., and P. Giuliano (2013): “Family Ties,” in Handbook of Economic Growth,
  Volume 2, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. Durlauf, vol. 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Alesina, A. F., and P. Giuliano (2015): “Culture and Institutions,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, 53(4), 898—944.

Algan, Y., and P. Cahuc (2010): “Inherited Trust and Growth,” American Economic
  Review, 100, 2060—2092.

Alsan, M. (2015): “The Eﬀect of the TseTse Fly on African Development,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 105(1), 382—410.

Antweiler, W., and M. Z. Frank (2004): “Is All That Talk Just Noise? The Information
  Content of Internet Stock Message Boards,” Journal of Finance, 59(3), 1259—1294.

Ashraf, Q., and O. Galor (2017): “The Macrogenoeconomics of Comparative Develop-
  ment,” Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.

Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016): “Measuring Economic Policy Uncer-
  tainty,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4), 1593—1636.

Bascom, W. R. (1953): “Folklore and Anthropology,” Journal of American Folklore, 66(262),
  283—290.

Bates, R. H. (1983): Essays on the Political Economy of Rural Africa. University of California
  Press, Berkeley, CA.

Belloni, A., D. Chen, V. Chernozhukov, and C. Hansen (2012): “Sparse Models and
  Methods for Optimal Instruments with an Application to Eminent Domain,” Econometrica,
  80(6), 2369—2429.

Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, and C. Hansen (2014): “Inference on Treatment Eﬀects
  After Selection Among High-Dimensional Controls,” Review of Economic Studies, 81, 608—
  650.

         (2015): “High-dimensional Methods and Inference on Structural and Treatment Ef-
  fects,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(2), 608—650.


                                             39
Benedict, R. (1934): Patterns of Culture. Houghton Miﬄin Harcourt, New York.

Bentzen, J., J. G. Hariri, and J. A. Robinson (2015): “The Indigenous Roots of Repre-
  sentative Democracy,” NBER Working Paper 21193.

Bentzen, J. S. (2015): “Acts of God: Religiosity and Natural Disasters Across Subnational
  World Districts,” University of Copenhagen Working Paper.

Berelson, B. (1952): Content Analysis in Communications Research. The Free Press.

Berezkin, Y. (2015a): “Folklore and Mythology Catalogue: its Lay-out and Potential for
  Research,” in The Retrospective Methods Network Newsletter, ed. by Frog, H. F. Leslie-
  Jacobsen, and J. S. Hopkins, vol. 10, chap. Between Text and Practice: Mythology, Religion
  and Research, pp. 58—70. Folklore Studies / Dept. of Philosophy, History, Culture and Art
  Studies University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Helsinki.

         (2015b): “Spread of Folklore Motifs as a Proxy for Information Exchange: Contact
  Zones and Borderlines in Eurasia,” Trames: Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences,
  19(1), 3—13.

         (2016): “Peopling of the New World in Light of the Data on Distribution of Folklore
  Motifs,” in Maths Meets Myths: Quantitative Approaches to Ancient Narratives (Under-
  standing Complex Systems), ed. by R. Kenna, M. M. Carron, and P. M. Carron, vol. 10, pp.
  71—89. Springer Verlag.

Berezkin, Y., and E. Duvakin (2016): “Buried in a Head: African and Asian Parallels to
  Aesop’s Fable,” Folklore, 127(1), 91—102.

Boas, F. (1916): “The Development of Folk-Tales and Myths,” The Scientific Monthly, 3(4),
  335—343.

         (2002): in Indian Myths and Legends from the North Pacific Coast of America: A
  Translation of Franz Boas’ 1895 Edition of Indianische Sagen von der Nordpazifischen Kuste
  Amerikas, trans. Dietrich Bertz, ed. by R. Bouchard, and D. KennedyTalonbooks, Vancouver,
  Canada.

Bockstette, V., A. Chanda, and L. Putterman (2002): “States and Markets: The
  Advantage of an Early Start,” Journal of Economic Growth, 7(4), 347—369.

Bollen, J., and H. Mao (2011): “Twitter Mood Predicts the Stock Market,” Journal of
  Computational Science, 2(1), 1—8.


                                               40
Bolton, C., R. Bolton, L. Gross, A. Koel, C. Michelson, R. L. Munroe, and R. H.
  Munroe (1976): “Pastoralism and Personality: An Andean Replication,” Ethos, 4(4), 463—
  481.

Bénabou, R., A. Falk, and J. Tirole (2018): “Narratives, Imperatives, and Moral Rea-
  soning,” NBER Working Paper No. 24798.

Cambria, E., A. Hussain, C. Havasi, and C. Eckl (2010): “SenticSpace Visualizing Opin-
  ions and Sentiments in a Multi-Dimensional Vector Space,” in International Conference
  on Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems, pp. 385—393.
  Springler.

Campbell, J. (1968): The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Princeton University Press, Novato,
  California.

Cecil, D. J., D. E. Buechler, and R. J. Blakeslee (2014): “Gridded Lightning Clima-
  tology from TRMM-LIS and OTD: Dataset Description,” Atmospheric Research, 135-136,
  404—414.

Cervellati, M., G. Chiovelli, and E. Esposito (2017): “Bite and Divide: Ancestral
  Exposure to Malaria and the Emergence and Persistence of Ethnic Diversity in Africa,”
  Working paper, London Business School.

Chen, K. (2013): “The Eﬀect of Language on Economic Behavior: Evidence from Savings
  Rates, Health Behaviors, and Retirement Assets,” American Economic Review, 103(2), 690—
  731.

Dell, M., N. Lane, and P. Querubin (2017): “The Historical State, Local Collective Action,
  and Economic Development in Vietnam,” working paper, Harvard University, Department
  of Economics.

Diamond, J., and J. A. Robinson (2010): Natural Experiments of History. Harvard Univer-
  sity Press, Cambridge, MA.

Dorson, R. M. (1982): Folklore and folklife: An introduction. University of Chicago Press.

Dorst, J. D. (2016): “Folklore’s Cybernetic Imaginary, or, Unpacking the Obvious,” Journal
  of American Folklore, 129(512), 127—145.

Dundes, A. (1997): “The Motif-Index and the Tale Type Index: A Critique,” Journal of
  Folklore Research, 34(3), 195—202.


                                             41
Edgerton, R. D. (1971): “The Individual in Cultural Adaptation: a Study of Four East
  African Peoples,” in Studies in Culture and Ecology in East Africa, ed. by W. GoldSchmidt.
  University of California Press, Berkeley and London.

El-Shamy, H. M. (2004): Types of the Folktale in the Arab World: A Demographically Ori-
  ented Tale-Type Index. Indiana University Press, Bloomington.

Enke, B. (2017): “Moral Values and Trump Voting,” working paper, Harvard University.

          (2018): “Kinship, Cooperation, and the Evolution of Moral Systems,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Evans, J. A., and P. Aceves (2016): “Machine Translation: Mining Text for Social Theory,”
  Annual Review of Sociology, 42, 21—50.

Fenske, J. (2013): “Does Land Abundance Explain African Institutions?,” Economic Journal,
  123(573), 1363—1390.

          (2014): “Ecology, Trade, and States in Pre-colonial Africa,” Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 12(3), 612—640.

Fernandez, R. (2011): “Does Culture Matter?,” in Handbook of Social Economics, ed. by
  J. Benhabib, M. O. Jackson, and A. Bisin, vol. 1A, pp. 481—510. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Fine, G. A. (1979): “Folklore Diﬀusion Through Interactive Social Networks: Conduits in a
  Preadolescent Community,” New York Folklore Society, 5(1-2).

Fisman, R., and E. Miguel (2007): “Corruption, Norms, and Legal Enforcement: Evidence
  from Diplomatic Parking Tickets,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(6), 1020—1048.

Fortes, M., and E. Evans-Pritchard (1940): African Political Systems. Oxford University
  Press, New York.

Foucault, M. (1995): Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Vintage Books, New
  York.

Galor, O., and O. Ozak (2015): “Land Productivity and Economic Development: Caloric
  Suitability vs. Agricultural Suitability,” mimeo, Brown University.

Galor, O., O. Ozak, and A. Sarid (2016): “Geographical Origins and Economic Conse-
  quences of Language Structures,” Brown University Working Paper.



                                              42
Gebner, G. (1969): “The Analysis of Communication Content; Developments in Scientific
  Theories and Computer Techniques,” Discussion paper.

Gentzkow, M., B. T. Kelly, and M. Taddy (2017): “Text as Data,” NBER Working
  Paper 23276.

Gentzkow, M., J. M. Shapiro, and M. Taddy (2016): “Measuring Polarization in High-
  Dimensional Data: Method and Application to Congressional Speech,” NBER Working Pa-
  per 22423.

Giuliano, P., and N. Nunn (2013): “The Transmission of Democracy: From the Village to
  the Nation State,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 103(3), 86—92.

         (2017): “Understanding Cultural Persistence and Change,” NBER Working Paper
  No. 23617.

Goldberg, C. (1984): “The Historic-Geographic Method: Past and Future,” Journal of
  Folklore Research, 21(1), 1—18.

GoldSchmidt, W. (1971): “Introduction: The Theory of Cultural Adaptation, The Individ-
  ual in Cultural Adaptation: A Study of Four East African Peoples,” in Studies in Culture
  and Ecology in East Africa, ed. by W. GoldSchmidt. University of California Press, Berkeley
  and London.

Gottschalk, L. A., and G. C. Gleser (1969): The Measurement of Psychological States
  through the Content Analysis of Verbal Behavior. University of California Press.

Graham, J., J. Haidt, S. Koleva, M. Motyl, P. Iyer, S. Wojcik, and P. Ditto
  (2013): “Moral foundations theory: The pragmatic validity of moral pluralism,” in Advances
  in Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 47, pp. 55—130. Elsevier.

Graham, J., J. Haidt, and B. A. Nosek (2009): “Liberals and conservatives rely on diﬀerent
  sets of moral foundations.,” Journal of personality and social psychology, 96(5), 1029.

Green, T. A. (1997): Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art,
  vol. 1. ABC-CLIO, Santa Barbara, CA.

Grimmer, J., and B. Stewart (2013): “Text as Data: The Promise and Pitfalls of Automatic
  Content Analysis Methods for Political Texts,” Political Analysis, 21(3), 267—297.

Grosjean, P. (2014): “A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor and Homicide in the US
  South,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(5), 1285—1316.

                                              43
Haidt, J. (2007): “The New Synthesis in Moral Psychology,” Science, 316(5827), 998—1002.

Haidt, J., and J. Craig (2004): “Intuitive Ethics: How Innately Prepared Intuitions Gener-
  ate Culturally Variable Virtues,” Daedalus, 133(4), 55—66.

Harari, Y. N. (2015): Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind. HarperCollins, New York.

Holsti, O. R. (1969): “Content Analysis for the Social Sciences and Humanities,” .

Honti, J. (1939): “Marchenmorphologie und Marchen typologie,” Folk-Liv, 3, 307—318.

Jason, H. (1970): “The Russian Criticism of the Finnish School in Folktale Scholarship,”
  Norveg, 14, 285—294.

Jung, G. C. (1968): “The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious,” in Collected Works
  of CG Jung, vol. 9. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Kaplan, D. (2000): “The Darker Side of the "Original Aﬄuent Society",” Journal of Anthro-
  pological Research, 56(3), 301—324.

Landes, D. S. (1998): The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some
  So Poor. W.W. Norton, New York.

Levi-Strauss, C. (1955): “The Structural Study of Myth,” The Journal of American Folklore,
  68(270), 428—444.

Lowes, S., N. Nunn, J. A. Robinson, and J. L. Weigel (2017): “The Evolution of Culture
  and Institutions: Evidence from the Kuba Kingdom,” Econometrica, 85(4), 1065—1091.

Mayshar, J., O. Moav, Z. Neeman, and L. Pascali (2015): “Cereals, Appropriability and
  Hierarchy,” CEPR Discussion Paper 10742.

Michalopoulos, S. (2012): “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,” American Economic
  Review, 102(4), 1508—1539.

Michalopoulos, S., A. Naghavi, and G. Prarolo (2018): “Trade and Geography in the
  Spread of Islam,” Economic Journal, 128(616), 3210—3241.

Michalopoulos, S., and E. Papaioannou (2013): “Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and
  Contemporary African Development,” Econometrica, 81(1), 113—152.

         (2014): “National Institutions and Subnational Development in Africa,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129(1), 151—213.


                                             44
          (2016): “The Long-Run Eﬀects of the Scramble for Africa,” American Economic
  Review, 106(7), 1802—1848.

          (2017a): The Long Economic and Political Shadow of History: Vol. 1: A Global
  View chap. Introduction: Historical Legacies and Contemporary Development, pp. viii—xxix.
  VoxEU. PDF e-book.

          (2017b): “Spatial Patterns of Development: A Meso Approach,” Annual Review of
  Economics, forthcoming.

Michalopoulos, S., L. Putterman, and D. N. Weil (2018): “The Influence of Ancestral
  Lifeways on Individual Economic Outcomes in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Journal of European
  Economic Association, forthcoming.

Murdock, G. P. (1959): Africa: Its Peoples and their Culture History. McGraw-Hill, New
  York.

          (1967): Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh,
  PA.

Nisbett, R. E., and D. Cohen (1996): Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence in the
  South. Westview Press, Boulder, CO.

North, R. C. (1963): Content Analysis: A Handbook with Applications for the Study of
  international Crisis. Northwestern University Press.

Nunn, N. (2012): “Culture and the Historical Process,” Economic History of Developing
  Regions, 27(S1), 108—126.

Nunn, N., and L. Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
  Africa,” American Economic Review, 101(7), 3221—3252.

Osafo-Kwaako, P., and J. A. Robinson (2013): “Political Centralization in Pre-colonial
  Africa,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 41(1), 6—21.

Pennebaker, J. W., R. J. Booth, and M. E. Francis (2007): “Linguistic inquiry and
  word count: LIWC [Computer software],” Austin, TX: liwc. net.

Richerson, P. J., M. B. Mulder, and B. J. Vila (2001): Principles of Human Ecology.
  University of California, Davis, PDF e-book.

Ross, R. M., S. J. Greenhill, and Q. D. Atkinson (2013): “Population Structure and
  Cultural Geography of a Folktale in Europe,” Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 280(1756).

                                             45
Sahlins, M. (1972): Stone Age Economics. Aldine Publishing, Chicago.

Saiz, A., and U. Simonsohn (2013): “Proxying for Unobservable Variables with Internet
  Document-Frequency,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(1), 137—165.

Shiller, R. J. (2017): “Narrative Economics,” American Economic Review, 107(4), 967—1004.

Speer, R., and J. Lowry-Duda (2017): “Conceptnet at semeval-2017 task 2: Extending
  word embeddings with multilingual relational knowledge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03560.

Spolaore, E., and R. Wacziarg (2009): “The Diﬀusion of Development,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 124(2), 469—529.

Spolaore, E., and R. Wacziarg (2013): “How Deep Are the Roots of Economic Develop-
  ment?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 51(2), 325—369.

Tausczik, Y. R., and J. W. Pennebaker (2010): “The psychological meaning of words:
  LIWC and computerized text analysis methods,” Journal of language and social psychology,
  29(1), 24—54.

Tetlock, P. C. (2007): “Giving Content to Investor Sentiment: The Role of Media in the
  Stock Market,” Journal of Finance, 62(3), 1139—1168.

Thompson, S. (1946): The Folktale. The Dryden Press, New York, NY.

          (1955): Motif-Index of Folk-Literature: a Classification of Narrative Elements in
  Folktales, Ballads, Myths, Fables, Medieval Romances, Exempla, Fabliaux, Jest-Books and
  Local Legends. Indiana University Press.

Toelken, B. (1996): Dynamics of Folklore. University Press of Colorado, Boulder, CO.

Ullberg, J., S. Coradeschi, and F. Pecora (2010): “On-line ADL Recognition with
  Prior Knowledge,” in Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on STAIRS 2010: Proceedings of
  the Fifth Starting AI Researchers’ Symposium, pp. 354—366, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
  The Netherlands. IOS Press.

Uther, H.-J. (2004): The Types of International Folktales: a Classification and Bibliogra-
  phy, Based on the System of Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson. Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia,
  Helsinki, Finland.

Voigtlander, N., and H.-J. Voth (2012): “Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins
  of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 1339—
  1392.

                                             46
Weber, E. (1976): Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France, 1870-1914.
  Stanford University Press, Redwood City, CA.

Wisniewski, T. P., and B. Lambe (2013): “The Role of Media in the Credit Crunch: The
  Case of the Banking Sector,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 85(1), 163—
  175.




                                           47
6     Appendix
6.1   The Construction of a Motif/Oral Tradition

Motif 271 is titled “Task-giver is a king or a chief” and the description reads: “Person who
gives diﬃcult tasks to the hero is a prominent figure in social hierarchy, i.e., a head of political
unit of community - or higher level and not a mythical being.” This motif is among the top-10
most widespread motifs being present in 228 societies (Appendix Figure 2 depicts its spatial
distribution). Going briefly over the sources consulted by Berezkin to map the presence of this
motif across oral traditions it becomes clear that each appearance of k27n1 is associated with
a diﬀerent tale/myth. Depending on the context, the “prominent figure” in the tale may be a
king, queen, sultan, emir, tsar, rajah, emperor, boyar, khan, prince, aldar, padishah, oﬃcial,
mayor, chief, chieftain, or kurak. This implies that the use of “king” as a seed for capturing the
presence of hierarchy across motifs takes into account many of the alternative configurations
of political authority worldwide and not only those strictly related to the notion of kingdoms.
      For the Telugu (15th largest language group worldwide), for example, Berezkin consulted
a range sources to construct its oral tradition. Those sources include 9 diﬀerent authors and
were written in 3 languages which is typical of the societies in his catalogue. Altogether, 53
motifs can be found in the Telugu oral tradition. The particular tale where motif 271 can
be found comes from the book “Folktales from India” written by Mosur Venkataswami and
published by the Diocesan Press publishing house in Madras in 1923. Specifically, it is in the
tale: “The adventures of Ratnalpolchetty,” where a prince gets to perform a series of diﬃcult
tasks, including finding the Parijata flower and rare gems upon request of the ruler’s daughter
in order to convince her that he is worthy of her. This type of story is very much in the spirit
of what Campbell in his famous 1968 work “The Hero with a Thousand Faces” described as
the hero’s journey, an archetypical narrative that involves a hero who goes on an adventure,
wins decisive victories, and returns home transformed.
      Other works by Mosur Venkataswami include “Five hundred instructive Tamil proverbs
with their English equivalents” and “Uttama neeti”. Panels  and  in Appendix Table 1
describe the underlying sources consulted by Berezkin for the Telugu oral tradition and the
resulting motifs, respectively.




                                                48
                                                                        Polar Esk

                                                                                                                                                                                          Enets         Dolgan                              Russkoye
             Kutchin                     Netsilik           Iglulik                                                                    Western SEastern S                     Tundra Ne           Nganasan
KoyukonTanana               Hare                                                    Wayana, A Eest Gree                                                                                                                                       Yucuna, K
                                                  Caribou                 Baffin La                                                                                                      Northern                         Yaka
  Ingalik EyakHan                                                                                                                                                    Komi Mansi                       Western A                    Evens (LaReindeer MarkovoKerek
                         Kaska Slavey, D                                                                                     Norwegian
                                                                                                                                        Wiyot         Vepsians                                                                                          Maritime
    Kodiak Athna Tagish        Beaver          Swampy CrLabradorNaskapi                                                Scotland Danes FinnsSetu                Mari
                                                                                                                                                                               Forest NeSouthern
                                                                                                                                                      Chuvash
               Tlingit            Sarsi      NorthernNorthern                                                  IrelandWales Sorbs                                  Udmurt SouthernKhakasShor Tofa Buryat                              Nivkh        Kamchadal
                                                                                                                                                        Russians
                      Comox
                             Twana                          Swampy Cr Montagnai                                                      Czech                            Bashkir
                                                                                                                                                                               Kazakh Siberian Oirat Darkhad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dahur Uilta
                   Quinault             Crow Mandan                                                               EnglandFrance                      MordvinsKalmyk                                                                Oroch
                                                           Ottawa          Micmac                                                         Serbs AbkhazSvan                                     Tuvinians           Manchu    Udihe
                       KarokCoos     Teton        Oto Mahican Lenape                                         BretagneBasque                                              Kara Kalp                           Mongols  (                Ainu
                                                                                                                                  Bulgaria                                                  Uyghur
                   Takelma Pomo         Ute Yana Iowa                                                                 Spain                         Turks Udin Tats       UzbekYava                   Yeyi                Korea
                                   Hopi                                                                                                                                                    Monguor,S        Dungan
                        MaiduYami Pima Kiowa
                                                                Catawba                                            Portugal, Kabyle Maltese Hittite,          Kurd                  Dards                                        Japan
                                                   Caddo Cherokee                                                                   Sicilia             Sumer           PashtoTajik
                                                                                                                 Algeria ATunisia A                                                  Kashmiri Tibetans:Ancient CChinese f Northern
                             Yukpa Seri         TunicaBiloxi                                                                                Arabs:   Pa   Persians    Brahui
                                        Yap                                                                                                                                         Lepcha                                 Okinawa,M
                                                                                                                                      Arabs: Li              Saudia BaluchSindhi           KhasiMikir        Miao,Yao
                                   HuicholCora        Chitimach                                                                                                                                      Kachin           Ami
     Hawaii                                                       Taino                                         Western  S    Tuareg                                              Warao Sora                          Yambasa,
                                                                                                                                          Teda     Nuba                  Gujarati
                                 Durango NHuave Chol                                                                                                          Mehri,Jib                                   Lao
                                  Tarascan          PipilLenca
                                                                            Island Ca                          Dogon Songhai YurokMaba BedjaBilin                           KonkaniGondi Oriya Mon                   Southern            Chamorro
                                            Zaparo                                                   Tenda, Bi        Bobo     Hausa                     Amhara     Soqotri            Tamil       KarenKhmer
                                                                 IjkaBari                                                              Sara                                     Telugu                                             Ulithi, N
                                             Rama,Guat Kuna                                            TemneSusu                              Bongo                                        Nicobar       Tjam,Ede,Palawan                                 Marshal I
                                                                    Kogi Hoti Locono                                Kru Ewe Yamana                    Uduk                                         Aceh                         Palau           Ponape di
                                                      Boruca Yuki                                                                                                          Toda,KotaMalayali                    Sangir IsMindanao
                                                                                  Trio                     KissiGola       Fon                         Omotic                                                                                 Truk dist
                                                               Cofan   Cubeo                                                     Zaghawa Soko                                                       Nias,Sime                       Ifaluk, L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Kapingama       Gilber
                                                         Andoque Bora                                                          Lingala Sakata HadzaSanye                                                 Kubu Ngaju        Ceram
                                                                      Macu MuraMawe Crenye                                      Kongo                                                          Lampung                                     N.BritainOntong Ja
                                                    NorthernWintu                       Craho                                         Yagua           Irakw                                              Yaruro              North New Central S
   Cook isla     Marquesas                                                 Cayapo                                                                                                                               Sumba                                Southern
                                                               MaruboPiro                                                          Lunda Songe                                                                          Roti SE New Gu
 Rennel,Ti                                                                         Washo Kariri                               Chokwe,Lu
                                                                                                                                                        Yanomamo                                       Bali, LomFlores                       Santa-Cru
                                                    Pasco,Jun Siriono Bororo                 Kamakan                                           Ila           Comoros   I                                                 Kimberley                      Central V
                Tuamotu                                                                                                   Mbundu, O Yemen Shona                                                                                        Queenslan                  Fiji
    Cook isla                                            Ica dep.TacanaParesi Terena        Maxakali
                                                                                                                               Herrero               Nyungwe                                                                                  New   Caled Loyalty
                     Mangareva                                 ChipayaMakka                 Tupinamba                                                                                                                          Central A
                                                                                      Sheta                                           Bushmen
                                       Easter Is                     Mocovi Toba                                                                   Zoque                                                           Western A
                                                                           VilelaAche
                                                                                                                                    Khoikhoi Wotians                                                                            Southern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SE Austra
                                                               Mapuche                                                                                                                                                                                         Maori,M
                                                                         Puelche                                                                                                                                                          Tasmania
                                                                       Tehuelche

                                                              SelknamYakut




                                                               Figure 1: The Spatial Distribution of Groups in Berezkin's Catalogue
                                       Number
                                       of Motifs
                                               0.0 - 23.0

                                               23.1 - 45.0

                                               45.1 - 73.0

                                               73.1 - 118.0

                                               118.1 - 490.0



Figure 2: # of Motifs across Oral Traditions
Figure 3a   Figure 3b




Figure 3c       Figure 3d
Figure 4a   Figure 4b




Figure 4c   Figure 4d
Figure 5a               Figure 5b




            Figure 5c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




    (
    !
                                                (
                                                !
                                                                                (
                                                                                !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                        (
                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                            (
                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                            (
                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                            (
                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                    (
                    !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
        (
        !                                           (
                                                    !                   (
                                                                        !                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                 !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                (
                                !


        (
        !
                                        (
                                        !
                                                        (
                                                        !
                                                                                    (
                                                                                    !   (
                                                                                        !
                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                            (
                            !                                               (
                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                (
                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                           (
                                                                                            (
                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (                                                                                                                                                                   (                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                        (
                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                            !               (
                                                                                                                            !                               (
                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                            !                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                    !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                    !                           (
                                                                                                                                                !                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                !                   (
                                                                                                                                    !                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ((!(!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                             !              (
                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                            ! !
                                                                                                                            (  (

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                            !                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                  !                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ! !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                            (!
                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                            ((
                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                        (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                        !                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                            !               (
                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ! (                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (!  (!                                                 (
                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                        !                   (
                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (!                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                        !       (
                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                ! !
                                                                                                                                ( (                              (
                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (                                          (
                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                !           (
                                                                                                                                            !       (
                                                                                                                                                    !                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (!(!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                        !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                !           (
                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                            (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                    !!
                                                                                                                                     (




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                    (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                            !                   (!
                                                                                                                                                                ! (




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                       !      (
                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !

                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                      (                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                              (                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                               !              (
                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                            !                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                          !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                              !                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                  !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                          !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (!                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ( (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !   ( !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! (                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ! (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ((       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                       (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                (
                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ( !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ( !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ! (           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ( !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (!                            ( (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !   (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !           (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ! (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (!(!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Transaction-Related
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                    (
                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
        (
        !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
(
!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                               ( !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ! (                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                (
                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                    (
                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Motifs Normalized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !


            (
            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !

                                                                                (
                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (                                                                                                                   exchangeal / totmot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       09



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 6: # of Trade‐Related Motifs across Oral Traditions
Figure 7a               Figure 7b




Figure 7c               Figure 7d




            Figure 7e
                 Appendix Figure 1a                                          Appendix Figure 1b
  Date of Publication across 6,239 Titles                           Date of First Publication across Groups




                  Appendix Figure 2: The Spatial Distribution of Motif k27n1
Motif Description: “Person who gives difficult tasks to the hero is a prominent figure in social hierarchy, i.e.,
a head of political unit of community ‐ or higher level and not a mythical being”
Table 1 ‐ Panel A: Language Breakdown of Publications in Berezkin's Catalogue
Language                 # of Publications   Language                # of Publications
English                        2527          Belarusian                     7
Russian                        1844          Scots Gaelic                   6
Spanish                        558           Czech                          4
German                         452           Arabic                         2
French                         389           Galician                       2
Portuguese                      76           Luxembourgish                  2
Estonian                        49           Serbian                        2
Romanian                        42           Ukrainian                      2
Hungarian                       40           Bulgarian                      1
Danish                          39           Samoan                         1
Dutch                           30           Shona                          1
Nepali                          28           Welsh                          1
Catalan                         22
Polish                          21
Latin                           18
Italian                         16
Slovenian                       16
Swedish                         16
Bosnian                         13
Finnish                         10


Table 1 ‐ Panel B: Top 10 Groups with the Largest Number of Motifs
Group                       # of Motifs
Finns                          417
Greek (modern)                 429
Germans                        429
Latvians                       437
Kazakh                         439
Lithuanians                    457
Georgians                      465
Bulgaria                       533
Ukrainians                     556
Russians                       563
Table 1 ‐ Panel C: Examples of Motifs in Each of the 12 categories of Berezkin's Catalogue

Motif Group      ID             Description

       a         a3             The Moon is female or bisexual, the Sun is male.

       b         a32            A figure or an imprint of some being or object are seen in the
                                Moon.

        c        b3a            Water is the original element, the dry earth appears later.

       d         h28            Killed and destroyed (often burned) person or creature (usually
                                ogre, fierce animal, powerful shaman) turns into a multitude of
                                biting insects or into other small molesting creatures.

       e         f9             For different reasons, sexual contact with a woman is deadly
                                dangerous for a man.

        f        g6             One of the trees is the principal, original one (emerged before all
                                the other; ancestor of wild or cultivated plants; ocean or rivers
                                inside it; world axis; higher than all the others; overshadows sky).


        g        b82            Raven or other carrion‐eating bird of dark color and a similar size
                                was originally white.

       h         l19b           A being with three or more heads is described in tales or
                                represented in art.

        i        m29b           In episodes related to deception, absurd, obscene or anti‐social
                                behavior the protagonist is fox, jackal or coyote.

        j        k27n           Father or other kinsmen of hero's wife or bride try to kill or test
                                him and/or suggest him difficult tasks.

        k        m30            Person or creature who has no wings or is unable to fly on a long
                                distance attempts to ascend to the sky or to fly far away but falls
                                down or, deprived of his wings, remains in a place from which he is
                                unable to return.

        l        k38e           Loci or objects of three (rare – four) different materials are
                                mentioned in such a way that all of them have positive
                                connotations though unequal value (copper, silver and gold; silver,
                                gold and diamonds, etc.)
Table 2 ‐ Panel A: Summary Statistics for the Oral Traditions in Berezkin's Catalogue
                                                mean        p50         sd        min       max      N
# of Motifs                                     84.05      59.00      83.18       1.00     563.00    945
Word Count of an Average Motif                  60.03      58.95       7.49      33.00     89.67     945
# of Publications                               14.84      10.00      13.40       1.00     104.00    945
# of Languages in the Publications               3.53       3.00       2.44       1.00     14.00     945
# of Authors                                    12.48       9.00      11.30       1.00     84.00     945
Year of First Publication                      1908.19    1904.00     35.61     1638.00   2015.00    945
Year of Average Publication                    1958.65    1960.19     19.56     1882.00   2015.00    945
# of Motifs on Earthquakes                       0.10       0.00       0.34       0.00      3.00     945

# of Motifs on Thunder                           1.21       1.00       1.50       0.00      9.00     945
# of Motifs on Cold                              0.85       0.00       1.24       0.00      6.00     945
# of Motifs on Wheat, Rice and Maize             0.58       0.00       1.07       0.00      8.33     945
Distance to Earthquake Zones of Strength 3     575.94     315.41      716.39      0.00    4694.88    945
and 4
Mean Lightning Flash Rates (1995‐2010)          10.61       6.72      11.48       0.05     96.87     925
Mean Annual Temperature (1901‐2000)             14.78      17.77      11.40      ‐20.31    30.41     891
Optimal Agricultural Calories Pre‐1500         5960.03    6345.41    4040.19      1.00    19175.24   942
Change in Optimal Agricultural Calories        1369.04    503.28     1883.07    ‐230.00 10519.32     942
from the Columbian Exchange
See Main Text for variable definition
Table 2 ‐ Panel B: Summary Statistics of Oral Traditions and Ethnographic Traits (in the Sample of the EA)
                                                          mean        p50         sd        min       max         N

# of Motifs                                               81.03      63.00      69.48      2.00      563.00     1,238
Word Count of an Average Motif                            60.75      59.70       6.88      38.91      80.77     1,238
# of Publications                                         16.34      14.00      11.54      1.00      104.00     1,238
# of Languages in the Publications                        3.80       4.00        2.17      1.00       14.00     1,238
# of Authors                                              13.80      12.00       9.71      1.00       84.00     1,238

Year of First Publication                               1906.12    1905.00      28.52    1638.00    2015.00     1,238
Year of Average Publication                              1956.85   1956.56      15.96    1882.00    2015.00     1,238
% of Subsistence from Hunting and Gathering               2.46       1.00        2.73      0.00       10.00     1,264
Predominantly Hunting and Gathering Groups                0.14       0.00        0.35      0.00       1.00      1,264
% of Subsistence from Fishing                             1.53       1.00        1.70      0.00       9.00      1,264
% of Subsistence from Animal Husbandry                    1.56       1.00        1.80      0.00       9.00      1,264
Predominantly Pastoral Groups                             0.06       0.00        0.24      0.00       1.00      1,264
% of Subsistence from Agriculture                         4.45       5.00        2.71      0.00       9.00      1,264
Levels of Jurisdictional Hierachy Beyond the Village
                                                          1.91       2.00        1.05      1.00       5.00      1,129
level
# of Motifs on Trade (ConceptNet)                         1.24       0.00        2.05      0.00       14.00     1,238
# of Motifs on Money (LIWC)                               6.61       3.00       10.22      0.00       77.00     1,238
First PCA of Motifs on Trade and Money                    0.06       ‐0.22       1.24      ‐1.50      4.15      1,238
# of Motifs on Wheat, Maize, and Rice (ConceptNet)        0.50       0.00        0.90      0.00       8.33      1,238
# of Motifs on Pastoralism (ConceptNet)                   0.72       0.00        1.77      0.00       15.00     1,238
# of Motifs on Fish (ConceptNet)                          2.53       2.00        2.94      0.00       19.00     1,238
# of Motifs on Hunt (ConceptNet)                          3.19       2.00        3.57      0.00       29.00     1,238
# of Motifs on King (ConceptNet)                          1.81       1.00        3.70      0.00       23.00     1,238
Distance to Pre‐600AD Trade Routes in 1000km              3.14       2.04        2.69      0.00       11.75     1,238
Change in Distance to Trade Routes Between 600 AD
                                                          ‐0.33      ‐0.06       1.24      ‐2.87      1.61      1,238
and 1700AD
Group Organized Along Extended Family Lines               0.71       1.00        0.45      0.00       1.00      1,237
# of Motifs on Leisure (LIWC)                             13.71      10.00      12.83      0.00       93.00     1,238
# of Motifs on Family (LIWC)                              19.18      13.00      21.25      0.00      158.00     1,238
# of Motifs on Anger (LIWC)                               27.78      20.00      27.41      0.00      210.00     1,238
# of Motifs on Retaliation (ConceptNet)                    1.21       1.00       1.47      0.00       9.00      1,238
First PCA of Motifs on Anger and Retaliation              0.13       0.11        1.22      ‐2.52      3.64      1,238
# of Motifs on Respect (ConceptNet)                       0.74       0.00        1.46      0.00       10.00     1,238
# of Motifs on Respect to Authority (MFD)                 9.29       6.00       11.05      0.00       79.00     1,238
First PCA of Motifs on Respect and Respect for
                                                          ‐0.05     ‐0.28       1.12      ‐1.78      3.93       1,238
Authority
See Main Text for variable definition. In parentheses we mention the dictionary used to tag the motifs. These are the:
ConceptNet, LIWC and MFD, respectively.
Table 3: Folklore, Subsistence, and the Physical Environment

                                           Ln(1+# Motifs on              Ln(1+# Motifs on           Ln(1+# Motifs on Cold)           Ln(1+# Motifs on Crops)
                                             Earthquakes)                    Thunder)
                                           (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)         (8)          (9)

Distance to Earthquake Zones in        ‐0.0524*** ‐0.0650***
1000 km's                                (0.0097)   (0.0165)

Ln(Mean Lightning Flash Density)                                     0.0337**      0.0424***
                                                                     (0.0156)       (0.0159)
Mean Yearly Temperature 1900‐2000                                                                 ‐0.0108***       ‐0.0070*
                                                                                                    (0.0022)       (0.0042)

Ln(Optimal Agricultural Calories Pre‐1500)                                                                                      0.0196*** 0.0177** 0.0158**
                                                                                                                                 (0.0053) (0.0067) (0.0070)
Change in Optimal Agricultural Calories from                                                                                                         0.0133
the Columbian Exchange                                                                                                                              (0.0088)
Baseline Controls                          yes            yes           yes            yes            yes             yes           yes         yes          yes
Continental FE                             yes            no            yes            no             yes             no            yes          no          no
Country FE                                 no             yes           no             yes            no              yes           no          yes          yes
R2                                        0.046          0.079         0.426          0.452          0.362           0.393         0.444        0.47        0.471
# of Observations                          945            945           925            925            891             891           942         942          942
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The unit of analysis is a group in Berezkin's catalogue. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words per
Motif), # Publications, Year of First Publication. Standard errors are clustered at the language family level as recorded by Berezkin. ***, **, * denote significance
at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main text for variable definition and Table 2 ‐ Panel A for summary statistics.
Table 4: Folklore, Subsistence, and the Ethnographic Record

 Share of Subsistence from:                   Farming                   Animal Husbadry                    Fishing              Hunting & Gathering

                                      (1)               (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)             (6)          (7)            (8)
Ln(Farming Motifs + 1)      1.5333***              1.0540***         0.3067***      0.0673  ‐0.5912*** ‐0.4478*** ‐1.2340*** ‐0.6668***
                              (0.2717)              (0.1734)          (0.0955)     (0.1475)   (0.1533)   (0.1381)   (0.2337)   (0.2117)
Ln(Pastoralism Motifs + 1)     ‐0.146               ‐0.2125          0.7669***    0.6241*** ‐0.1745*     ‐0.0269   ‐0.4656** ‐0.4001***
                              (0.1606)              (0.1921)          (0.1659)     (0.0925)   (0.0899)   (0.1479)   (0.1782)   (0.1099)
Ln(Fish‐Related Motifs + 1)   ‐0.1505               ‐0.2211         ‐0.2227***     ‐0.1391   0.6414*** 0.6550***    ‐0.2744    ‐0.3031
                              (0.1823)              (0.2151)          (0.0739)     (0.0900)   (0.1499)   (0.1473)   (0.2571)   (0.2536)
Ln(Hunt‐Related Motifs + 1) ‐1.1383***             ‐0.3950**         0.4222**     0.2702**    ‐0.0645   ‐0.2141** 0.7802*** 0.3452**
                              (0.2445)              (0.1689)          (0.2071)     (0.1326)   (0.1273)   (0.1059)   (0.2155)   (0.1419)

Baseline Controls                    yes               yes              yes           yes           yes               yes         yes            yes
Continental FE                       yes               no               yes           no            yes               no          yes            no
Country FE                           no                yes              no            yes           no                yes         no             yes
R2                                  0.414             0.55             0.443         0.59          0.286             0.37        0.523          0.623
# of Observations                   1237              1237             1237          1237          1237              1237        1237           1237
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The unit of analysis is a group in the Ethnographic Atlas which has been matched to an oral tradition in
Berezkin's catalogue. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words per Motif), # of Publications, and Year of First Publication. Standard
errors are clustered at the language family level as classified in the EA, v98. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main
Text for variable definition and Table 2 ‐ Panel B for summary statistics.
Table 5: Folklore, Institutions and Exchange
                                        Levels of Jurisdictional Hierarchy
                                                                                     Ln(1+# Motifs on Trade)
                                               Beyond the Village

                                             (1)                (2)                (3)          (4)           (5)
Ln(King‐Related Motifs+1)               0.4565***           0.3520***
                                         (0.1151)            (0.0946)
Distance to Pre‐600AD Trade Routes                                            ‐0.1637*** ‐0.2436*** ‐0.2663***
                                                                                (0.0290)   (0.0542)   (0.0556)
Change in Distance to Trade Routes Between                                                            ‐0.1134
600 AD and 1700AD                                                                                     (0.0996)
Baseline Controls                           yes                 yes               yes          yes            yes
Continental FE                              yes                 no                yes          no             no
Country FE                                  no                  yes               no           yes            yes
R2                                         0.316               0.424              0.6         0.596          0.597
# of Observations                          1108                1108               474          474            474
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. In Columns 1 and 2 the unit of analysis is a group in the Ethnographic Atlas
which has been matched to an oral tradition in Berezkin's catalogue. In Columns 3, 4, and 5 the unit is a group in
Berezkin's catalogue. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words per Motif), # of Publications, and
Year of First Publication. Columns 3‐5 focus on societies in the Old World. Standard errors in columns 1 and 2 are
clustered at the language family level as classified in the EA, v98, whereas standard errors in columns 3, 4 and 5 are
clustered at the language family as classified by Berezkin. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%,
respectively. See Main Text for variable definition and Table 2 ‐ Panel B for summary statistics.
Table 6: Motifs on Leisure in Hunter‐Gatherer Societies
                                                               ln(1+ Motifs on Leisure)
                                         (1)                    (2)                   (3)                   (4)

Predominantly Hunting and            0.1799***             0.1709***              0.1042***            0.1179***
Gathering Groups                      (0.0538)              (0.0480)               (0.0386)             (0.0338)
Baseline Controls                        yes                   yes                    yes                  yes
Additional Controls                      no                    yes                    no                   yes
Continental FE                           yes                   yes                    no                   no
Country FE                               no                    no                     yes                  yes
# of Observations                       1237                  1237                   1237                 1237
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The additional controls in columns 2, and 4 are selected by the "post‐double
selection" methodology of Belloni et al (2015) from the set of 52 BoW in the LIWC and MFD dictionaries (naturally
the BoW on leisure is not considered). In the "post‐double selection" specifications the baseline controls as well as
the respective FE are partialled out first. The unit of analysis is a group in the Ethnographic Atlas. A group in the EA
has been matched to an oral tradition in Berezkin's catalogue. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean #
Words per Motif), # of Publications, and Year of First Publication. Standard errors are clustered at the language
family level as classified in the EA, v98. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main Text
for variable definition and Table 2 ‐ Panel B for summary statistics.
Table 7 ‐ Panel A: Pastoralism and Motifs on Violence
                                                First Principal Component of Anger and Retaliation
                                         (1)                    (2)              (3)               (4)

Predominantly Pastoral               0.2188***              0.0887**             0.1903***             0.1388***
Groups                                (0.0420)              (0.0347)              (0.0700)              (0.0427)
Baseline Controls                        yes                   yes                    yes                  yes
Additional Controls                      no                    yes                    no                   yes
Continental FE                           yes                   yes                    no                   no
Country FE                               no                    no                     yes                  yes
# of Observations                       1237                  1237                   1237                 1237
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The additional controls in columns 2, and 4 are selected by the "post‐double
selection" methodology of Belloni et al (2015) from the set of 52 BoW in the LIWC and MFD dictionaries (the BoW on
anger is naturally not considered). In the "post‐double selection" specifications the baseline controls as well as the
respective FE are partialled out first. The unit of analysis is a group in the Ethnographic Atlas. A group in the EA has
been matched to an oral tradition in Berezkin's catalogue. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words
per Motif), # of Publications, and Year of First Publication. Standard errors are clustered at the language family level
as classified in the EA, v98. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main Text for variable
definition and Table 2 ‐ Panel B for summary statistics.

Table 7 ‐ Panel B: Extended Families and Motifs on Family Members
                                                               Ln(1+Motifs on Family)
                                         (1)                    (2)                   (3)                  (4)

Groups Organized along               0.0740***              0.0360**             0.0813***             0.0432**
Extended Family Lines                 (0.0224)              (0.0180)              (0.0287)              (0.0194)

Baseline Controls                        yes                   yes                    yes                  yes
Additional Controls                      no                    yes                    no                   yes
Continental FE                           yes                   yes                    no                   no
Country FE                               no                    no                     yes                  yes
# of Observations                       1211                  1211                   1211                 1211
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The additional controls in columns 2, and 4 are selected by the "post‐double
selection" methodology of Belloni et al (2015) from the set of 52 BoW in the LIWC and MFD dictionaries (the BoW on
family is naturally not considered). In the "post‐double selection" specifications the baseline controls as well as the
respective FE are partialled out first. The unit of analysis is a group in the Ethnographic Atlas. A group in the EA has
been matched to an oral tradition in Berezkin's catalogue. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words
per Motif), # of Publications, and Year of First Publication. Standard errors are clustered at the language family level
as classified in the EA, v98. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main Text for variable
definition and Table 2 ‐ Panel B for summary statistics.
Table 8 ‐ Panel A: States and the Exchange‐Economy
                                                    First Principal Component of Trade and Money
                                     (1)               (2)             (3)         (4)        (5)                    (6)

Levels of Jurisdictional        0.1532***          0.1306***         0.1175*** 0.1446*** 0.1388***               0.1317***
Hierarhy                         (0.0413)           (0.0364)          (0.0355)  (0.0439)  (0.0388)                (0.0382)
Share of Subsistence from Animal Husbandry                           0.0563***                                   0.0580***
                                                                      (0.0133)                                    (0.0140)
Share of Subsistence from Agriculture                                  ‐0.0003                                    ‐0.0055
                                                                       (0.0107)                                   (0.0126)
Baseline Controls                   yes                yes                yes          yes            yes            yes
Additional Controls                 no                 yes                yes          no             yes            yes
Continental FE                      yes                yes                yes          no             no             no
Country FE                          no                 no                 no           yes            yes            yes
# of Observations                  1108               1108               1108         1108           1108           1108
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The additional controls in columns 2, 3 and 5, 6 are selected by the "post‐double
selection" methodology of Belloni et al (2015) from the set of 52 BoW in the LIWC and MFD dictionaries (the BoW on
money is naturally not considered). In the "post‐double selection" specifications the baseline controls as well as the
respective FE are partialled out first. The unit of analysis is a group in the Ethnographic Atlas. A group in the EA has been
matched to an oral tradition in Berezkin's catalogue. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words per Motif),
# of Publications, and Year of First Publication. Standard errors are clustered at the language family level as classified in
the EA, v98. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main Text for variable definition and
Table 2 ‐ Panel B for summary statistics.

Table 8 ‐ Panel B: Centralized Societies and Motifs on Respect for Authority
                                             First Principal Component of Authority and Respect
                                     (1)                (2)               (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                                                                            High Gods
                                                                                                   Absent         Present
Levels of Jurisdictional        0.1737***          0.0827***         0.1183*** 0.0854***          0.0694**       0.1206***
Hierarhy                         (0.0430)           (0.0277)          (0.0316)  (0.0204)          (0.0302)        (0.0278)
Baseline Controls                   yes                yes               yes       yes               yes             yes
Additional Controls                 no                 yes               no        yes               yes             yes
Continental FE                      yes                yes               no        no                no              no
Country FE                          no                 no                yes       yes               yes             yes
# of Observations                  1108               1108              1108      1108               556             158
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The controls in columns 2, 4, 5, 6 are selected by the "post‐double selection"
methodology of Belloni et al (2015). The additional controls set includes the 52 BoW from the LIWC and MFD dictionaries
(the anger‐related BoW from LIWC is naturally not included). The unit of analysis is a group in the Ethnographic Atlas. A
group in the EA has been matched to an oral tradition in Berezkin's catalogue. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs),
ln(Mean # Words per Motif), # of Publications, and Year of First Publication. In the "post‐double selection" specifications
in columns 2, 4, 5, 6 the baseline controls are partialled out. Standard errors are clustered at the language family level as
classified in the EA, v98. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main Text for variable
definition and Table 2 ‐ Panel B for summary statistics.
Table 9: Oral Traditions and Current Attitudes
                                                                             Panel A: Across Groups
                                                   A Respondent finds Justifiable:
                                                                                                                              It is Important to People Who  Justifiable:
Group Mean to the Question: Claiming Govt Avoiding a Fare                  Cheating  Someone             How much you           this Person to Don’t Work Violence Against
                                               on Public                   on Taxes Accepting a         trust: Your family       Have a Good      Turn Lazy Other People
                            Benefits (F114)
                                            Transport (F115)                (F116) Bribe (F117)             (D001_B)              Time (A192)      (C038)    (F114_03)
                                         (1)                 (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)             (7)              (8)               (9)
First PCA of Respect and             ‐0.4040***          ‐0.3353**        ‐0.3245** ‐0.4991***
Respect for Authority BoWs             (0.1389)           (0.1475)         (0.1457)   (0.1318)
                                                                                                       ‐0.1327**‐0.1243**
Ln(# of Motifs on Family)
                                                                                                        (0.0593) (0.0597)
Ln(# of Motifs on Leisure)                                                                                                        ‐0.3944*          0.2770*
                                                                                                                                  (0.2157)          (0.1644)
                                                                                                                                                                      0.0586**
First PCA of Retaliation and Anger BoWs
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.0234)
Baseline Controls                        yes                 yes              yes            yes          yes         yes            yes               yes               yes
R2                                      0.119               0.093            0.035         0.152         0.105      0.103           0.111             0.027             0.143
# of Observations                        163                 164              161           165           114        114             118               116                84

                                                                           Panel B: Across Individuals
                                          (1)                (2)             (3)           (4)         (5)            (6)             (7)              (8)               (9)
First PCA of Respect and             ‐0.5274***          ‐0.3794**        ‐0.3628** ‐0.4542***
Respect for Authority BoWs             (0.1536)           (0.1478)         (0.1478)   (0.1468)
                                                                                                       ‐0.1394**‐0.1512**
Ln(# of Motifs on Family)                                                                               (0.0593) (0.0625)
                                                                                                                                 ‐0.3844***         0.2148**
Ln(# of Motifs on Leisure)                                                                                                         (0.1184)         (0.0937)
                                                                                                                                                                      0.0259*
First PCA of Retaliation and Anger BoWs
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.0146)
Baseline Controls, Country FE,
                                         yes                 yes              yes            yes          yes         yes            yes               yes               yes
Individual‐Level Controls
R2                                      0.094               0.104            0.085         0.09          0.056      0.057           0.172             0.093            0.105
# of Observations                      296094              295484           295542        306805        140639     133341          141782            145345            74447
Notes: Both Panels report OLS estimates. The unit of analysis in Panel A is a group in Berezkin's catalogue, defined first by the ethnicity of the respondent, then by the language
spoken at home and if both are missing by the language of the interview. In Panel B the unit of analysis is an individual. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words
per Motif), # of Publications, and Year of First Publication. Individual‐level controls include: a quadratic term on age, sex, educational attainment FE, religious denomination FE.
In Column (6) we account for the level of generalized trust at the group and individual level, respectively (estimate not shown). Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses in Panel A (clustered at the oral tradition level in Panel B). ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main Text for variable definition.
Appendix Table 1 - Panel A: Telugu-related Sources

Author                             Year    Source
Elwin, Verrier                     1949    Myths of Middle India. Madras: Oxford University Press.
                                           532 p.
Payyand, Raghavan                  2006     “Religion – native and alien: Interaction, assimilation and
                                           annihilation – a study based on worldview”. Discourse of
                                           Ideology, Religion and Worldview, M.D.
                                           Muthukumaraswamy, ed. Chennai: National Folklore
                                           Support Center. P. 198-208.
Zograf, Georgy Alexandrovich       1964     Tales of the peoples of India. Translations from Marathi,
                                           Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu, Hindi. Preface and notes G.
                                           Zograf. M.-L.
Venkataswami, M.N.                 1923     Heerámma and Venkataswami or Folktales from India.
                                           Madras: Diocesan Press. 230 p.
Hiebert, Paul G.                   1971     Konduru. Structure and Integration in a South Indian
                                           Village. Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press.
                                           192 p.
Pantulu, G.R. Subramiah            1905     Folk-lore of the Telugus, a collection of forty-two highly
                                           amusing and instructive tales. Madras: G.A. Natesan &
                                           Co. 139 p.
Grierson, George A.                1908     Linguistic Survey of India. Collected and edited by G.A.
                                           Grierson. Vol. 9. Part 2. Specimens of Rajastani and
                                           Gujarati. Calcutta: Superintendent Government Printing.
                                           477 p.
Jason, Heda                        1989
                                           Types of Indic Oral Tales. Supplement. Helsinki: Finnish
                                           Academy of Sciences. 100 pp (FF Communications 242).
Kudinova, M.V., A.M. Kudinov       1995     When luck smiles: Indian tales, legends and folk tales.
                                           Comp. and trans. from English Mv Kudinova and A.M.
                                           Kudinov. M .: Oriental literature, School Press. 320 s.
                                           {According to Folk Tales of India (21 Volumes). Sterling
                                           Publishers Private Lmt., 1969-1974}.
Appendix Table 1 ‐ Panel B: The Telugu Oral Tradition
Group     ID         Title
Telugu    a12        Eclipses: a monster’s attack
Telugu    a12f       Eclipses: creditor
Telugu    b2a        The female earth
Telugu    b3b        Earth grows big
Telugu    c8         The primeval couple of siblings
Telugu    f100       Test of chastity (a queen and a servant girl)
Telugu    h36        The muddled message
Telugu    h36g       Muddled message: how many meals a day
Telugu    h36g1      Bull is a failed messenger
Telugu    h49b       The faithful dog as security for a debt
Telugu    h7         The personified Death
Telugu    h7c        Not finished prayer
Telugu    i127       Ursa major is a bed
Telugu    i40        Rainbow bow
Telugu    j23        A late son kills monsters
Telugu    k101       Night dances of girls
Telugu    k101c      In the palace by day, on the sky by night
Telugu    k116b      The lecherous holy man and the maiden in the box
Telugu    k129       The disenchanted beauty
Telugu    k130a      Girl in the house of several brothers
Telugu    k136c      Killed and revived periodically
Telugu    k144       The predestined death because of an animal
Telugu    k24        Stolen clothes of supernatural woman
Telugu    k25        Woman from sky‐world marries mortal man
Telugu    k27n1      Task‐giver is a king or a chief
Telugu    k27nn      Envious minister
Telugu    k27x2      To steal an egg from under the bird
Telugu    k27z       Game of chance for life and death
Telugu    k27z3      Cat with a lamp
Telugu    k27z4      The trained animal of the gambler
Telugu    k37        Recognition‐test
Telugu    k38b       Snake threatens nestlings
Telugu    k38c       Bird carries hero to his destination
Telugu    k38e       Of copper, of silver, of gold
Telugu    k56b       The worthy man is rewarded, the unworthy punished
Telugu    k77a       Small objects and animals defeat the ogre
Telugu    k77c       Ones who hide in a house frighten dangerous enemy
Telugu    k82        Evil sister‐in‐law
Telugu    k83        The sons on a quest for a wonderful remedy for their father
Telugu    k92a       The princess responsible for her own fortune
Telugu    k99b       Eloping with the wrong man
Telugu    l19b       Multi‐headed being
Telugu    m114j      All women are similar
Telugu    m130a      Bird helps animal to escape from snare
Telugu    m145       The lion in a well
Appendix Table 1 ‐ Panel B: The Telugu Oral Tradition cont'd
Group     ID         Description
Telugu    m152       Why only one wolf?
Telugu    m152a      Animal tied to another for safety
Telugu    m170       Pilgrimage of the animals
Telugu    m197d      The shortened stick
Telugu    m29b       Trickster‐fox, jackal or coyote
Telugu    m29w3 The lion is a failure
Telugu    m39e2      The speaking tree
Telugu    m91c2      Put into bag
Appendix Table 2: Folklore, Institutions and Exchange
                                                                                                                           First PCA of Motifs on Trade and
                                                Ln(1+# Motifs on Trade)                Ln(1+# Motifs on Money)
                                                                                                                                        Money
                                               (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)

Distance to Pre‐600AD Trade Routes ‐0.1637*** ‐0.2436*** ‐0.2663*** ‐0.1610*** ‐0.1696*** ‐0.1707*** ‐0.2740*** ‐0.3617*** ‐0.3857***
                                     (0.0290) (0.0542) (0.0556) (0.0539) (0.0382) (0.0453)             (0.0530)   (0.0699) (0.0814)
Change in Distance to Trade Routes                         ‐0.1134                          ‐0.0054                            ‐0.12
Between 600 AD and 1700AD                                  (0.0996)                         (0.0543)                         (0.1198)
Baseline Controls                       yes       yes         yes       yes        yes         yes        yes        yes        yes
Continental FE                          yes       no          no        yes        no          no         yes        no         no
Country FE                              no        yes         yes        no        yes         yes        no         yes        yes
 2
R                                       0.6      0.596       0.597      0.83      0.853      0.852       0.765      0.776      0.776
# of Observations                      474        474         474       474        474        474         474        474        474
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The unit is a group in Berezkin's catalogue. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words per Motif), # of
Publications, and Year of First Publication. All columns focus on groups in the Old World. Standard errors are clustered at the language family as classified by
Berezkin. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main Text for variable definition.
Appendix Table 3: Pastoralism and Motifs on Violence

                               ln(1+# of Motifs on Retaliation (ConceptNet))                ln(1+# of Motifs on Anger (LIWC))

                                  (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)          (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)

Predominantly Pastoral       0.1492***        0.0207      0.1430*** 0.0716**          0.0641**     0.0617**       0.0317 0.0578***
Groups                        (0.0281)       (0.0244)      (0.0491) (0.0330)          (0.0261)     (0.0272)      (0.0332) (0.0146)
Baseline Controls                 yes           yes           yes           yes          yes           yes          yes          yes
Additional Controls               no            yes           no            yes          no            yes          no           yes
Continental FE                    yes           yes           no            no           yes           yes          no           no
Country FE                        no            no            yes           yes          no            no           yes          yes
# of Observations                1237          1237          1237          1237         1237          1237         1237         1237
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The additional controls are selected by the "post‐double selection" methodology of Belloni
et al (2015) from the set of 52 BoW in the LIWC and MFD dictionaries (the BoW on anger is naturally not considered). In the "post‐
double selection" specifications the baseline controls as well as the respective FE are partialled out first. The unit of analysis is a
group in the Ethnographic Atlas. A group in the EA has been matched to an oral tradition in Berezkin's catalogue. Baseline Controls
include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words per Motif), # of Publications, and Year of First Publication. Standard errors are clustered at
the language family level as classified in the EA, v98. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main Text
for variables' definitions.
Appendix Table 4: States and the Exchange‐Economy
                                            ln(1 + # of Trade‐Related Motifs)                                      ln(1 + # of Money‐Related Motifs)
                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)
Jurisdictional Hierarhy 0.0733*** 0.0671*** 0.0584** 0.0731*** 0.0713*** 0.0677*** 0.1185*** 0.0942*** 0.0889*** 0.1056*** 0.0946*** 0.0898***
Beyond the Village       (0.0213) (0.0208) (0.0236) (0.0260) (0.0234) (0.0247) (0.0328) (0.0252) (0.0219) (0.0292) (0.0248) (0.0231)
Share of Subsistence from Animal                  0.0391***                           0.0458***                            0.0242**                             0.0178
Husbandry                                          (0.0116)                            (0.0127)                            (0.0116)                            (0.0128)
Share of Subsistence from                          ‐0.0101                             ‐0.0099                              0.0075                              0.0046
Agriculture                                        (0.0066)                            (0.0083)                            (0.0097)                            (0.0114)
Baseline Controls             yes         yes         yes         yes         yes         yes         yes         yes         yes         yes         yes         yes
Additional Controls           no          yes         yes         no          yes         yes         no          yes         yes         no          yes         yes
Continental FE                yes         yes         yes         no          no          no          yes         yes         yes         no          no          no
Country FE                    no          no          no          yes         yes         yes         no          no          no          yes         yes         yes
# of Observations            1108        1108        1108        1108        1108        1108        1108        1108        1108        1108        1108        1108

Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The additional controls are selected by the "post‐double selection" methodology of Belloni et al (2015) from the set of 52 BoW
in the LIWC and MFD dictionaries (the BoW on money is naturally not considered). In the "post‐double selection" specifications the baseline controls as well as the
respective FE are partialled out first. The unit of analysis is a group in the Ethnographic Atlas. A group in the EA has been matched to an oral tradition in Berezkin's
catalogue. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words per Motif), # of Publications, and Year of First Publication. Standard errors are clustered at the
language family level as classified in the EA, v98. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main Text for variable definition.
Appendix Table 5: States and Rule Following
                              ln(1+ # of Respect‐Related Motifs              ln(1+ # of Respect for Authority‐Related Motifs
                                        (ConceptNet))                                             (MFD))
                            (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)             (8)
Jurisdictional          0.1100*** 0.0716*** 0.0855*** 0.0768*** 0.0689*** 0.0309** 0.0289*                            0.0214**
Hierarhy Beyond          (0.0317) (0.0240) (0.0224) (0.0180) (0.0203) (0.0157) (0.0154)                               (0.0104)
the Village

Baseline Controls           yes         yes          yes          yes           yes         yes          yes             yes
Additional Controls         no          yes          yes          no            yes         yes          no              yes
Continental FE              yes         yes          yes          no            no          no           yes             yes
Country FE                  no          no           no           yes           yes         yes          no              no
# of Observations          1108        1108         1108         1108          1108        1108         1108            1108
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The additional controls are selected by the "post‐double selection" methodology of
Belloni et al (2015) from the set of 52 BoW in the LIWC and MFD dictionaries (the BoW on respect for authority is naturally not
considered). In the "post‐double selection" specifications the baseline controls as well as the respective FE are partialled out
first. The unit of analysis is a group in the Ethnographic Atlas. A group in the EA has been matched to an oral tradition in
Berezkin's catalogue. Baseline Controls include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words per Motif), # of Publications, and Year of First
Publication. Standard errors are clustered at the language family level as classified in the EA, v98. ***, **, * denote significance
at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main Text for variable definition.
Appendix Table 6: Oral Traditions and Current Attitudes
                                                              Panel A: Across Groups
                                                                                     A Respondent finds Justifiable:
Group Mean to the Question:           Claiming Govt        Avoiding a Fare on Public Cheating on Taxes Someone Accepting a Violence Against Other
                                      Benefits (F114)          Transport (F115)            (F116)          Bribe (F117)       People (F114_03)
                                       (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)     (7)        (8)       (9)        (10)
Ln(# Respect‐Tagged Motifs        ‐0.4451***                 ‐0.2841                       ‐0.2999*               ‐0.5712***
from ConceptNet)                    (0.1612)                 (0.1732)                      (0.1679)                 (0.1594)
Ln(# Respect for Auhority‐                     ‐0.4183**                   ‐0.5815**                  ‐0.3561                  ‐0.5052**
Tagged Motifs from MFD)                         (0.2095)                    (0.2288)                  (0.2518)                  (0.2400)
Ln(# Anger‐Tagged Motifs                                                                                                                    ‐0.1942*
from LIWC)                                                                                                                                  (0.1163)
                                                                                                                                                        0.0935***
Ln(# Retaliation‐Tagged Motifs from ConceptNet)                                                                                                          (0.0300)
Baseline Controls                     yes          yes          yes           yes            yes        yes          yes          yes         yes           yes
R2                                   0.113        0.085        0.078         0.096          0.029      0.022        0.148        0.092        0.14         0.177
# of Observations                     163          163          164           164            163        163          165          165          84           84

                                                            Panel B: Across Individuals
                                       (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)           (10)

Ln(# Respect‐Tagged Motifs         ‐0.5228**                 ‐0.3451*                     ‐0.3904**               ‐0.4720**
from ConceptNet)                    (0.2050)                 (0.1923)                      (0.1893)                (0.1915)

                                               ‐0.7099***                 ‐0.5759***                  ‐0.4194**                ‐0.5697***
Ln(# Respect for Auhority‐
Tagged Motifs from MFD)                          (0.1858)                   (0.1798)                   (0.1676)                  (0.1732)

                                                                                                                                             0.0536
Ln(# Anger‐Tagged Motifs
                                                                                                                                            (0.0835)
from LIWC)
                                                                                                                                                         0.0324*
Ln(# Retaliation‐Tagged Motifs from ConceptNet)                                                                                                          (0.0176)
Baseline Controls, Country
                                   yes      yes                 yes            yes           yes        yes          yes          yes         yes           yes
FE, Individual‐Level Controls
R2                                0.094    0.094               0.103         0.104          0.085       0.085       0.089        0.089       0.105         0.105
# of Observations                296094   296094              295484        295484         295542      295542      306805       306805       74447         74447
Notes: Both Panels report OLS estimates. The unit of analysis in Panel A is a group in Berezkin's catalogue, defined first by the ethnicity of the respondent, then
by the language spoken at home and if both are missing by the language of the interview. In Panel B the unit of analysis is an individual. Baseline Controls
include: ln(# Motifs), ln(Mean # Words per Motif), # of Publications, and Year of First Publication. Individual‐level controls include: a quadratic term on age, sex,
educational attainment FE, religious denomination FE. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses in Panel A (clustered at the oral tradition level in Panel
B). ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. See Main Text for variable definition.
