                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE EFFECT OF MINIMUM WAGES ON LOW-WAGE JOBS:
      EVIDENCE FROM THE UNITED STATES USING A BUNCHING ESTIMATOR

                                       Doruk Cengiz
                                       Arindrajit Dube
                                       Attila Lindner
                                        Ben Zipperer

                                     Working Paper 25434
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25434


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2019




We thank David Autor, David Card, Sebastian Findeisen, Eric French, Hedvig Horvath, Gabor
Kezdi, Patrick Kline, Steve Machin, Alan Manning, Sendhil Mullainathan, Suresh Naidu, James
Rebitzer, Michael Reich, Janos Vincze, Daniel Wilhelm, and participants at WEAI 2016 Annual
Meetings, CREAM 2016 conference, Boston University Empirical Micro workshop, Colorado
State University, IFS-STICERD seminar, Michigan State University, NBER Summer Institute
2018 (Labor Studies), Northeastern University, University of Arizona, University of Illinois-
Urbana Champagne, University of California Berkeley IRLE, University of Mannheim, and
University of Warwick for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Doruk Cengiz, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Minimum Wages on Low-Wage Jobs: Evidence from the United States Using
a Bunching Estimator
Doruk Cengiz, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer
NBER Working Paper No. 25434
January 2019
JEL No. J23,J38,J88

                                         ABSTRACT

We propose a novel method that infers the employment effect of a minimum wage increase by
comparing the number of excess jobs paying at or slightly above the new minimum wage to the
missing jobs paying below it. To implement our approach, we estimate the effect of the minimum
wage on the frequency distribution of hourly wages using 138 prominent state-level minimum
wage changes between 1979 and 2016. We find that the overall number of low-wage jobs
remained essentially unchanged over five years following the increase. At the same time, the
direct effect of the minimum wage on average earnings was amplified by modest wage spillovers
at the bottom of the wage distribution. Our estimates by detailed demographic groups show that
the lack of job loss is not explained by labor-labor substitution at the bottom of the wage
distribution. We also find no evidence of disemployment when we consider higher levels of
minimum wages. However, we do find some evidence of reduced employment in tradable
sectors. In contrast to our bunching-based estimates, we show that some conventional studies can
produce misleading inference due to spurious changes in employment higher up in the wage
distribution.

Doruk Cengiz                                   Attila Lindner
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Crotty Hall                                    University College London 30
412 North Pleasant Street                      Gordon Street
University of Massachusetts                    London
Amherst, MA 01002                              WC1H 0AX
dcdorukcengiz@gmail.com                        United Kingdom
                                               and CERS-HAS, IZA and IFS
Arindrajit Dube Department                     a.lindner@ucl.ac.uk
of Economics University of
Massachusetts Crotty Hall                      Ben Zipperer
412 N. Pleasant Street                         Economic Policy Institute
Amherst, MA 01002                              1225 Eye St. NW, Suite 600
and NBER                                       Washington, DC 20005
adube@econs.umass.edu                          benzipperer@gmail.com
1     Introduction
Minimum wage policies have featured prominently in recent policy debates in the United
States at the federal, state and local levels. California, Massachusetts, New York have passed
legislation to eventually increase minimum wages to $15/hour, while five other states are on
paths to raise their minimum wages of $12 or more. Over a dozen cities have also instituted
city-wide minimum wages during the past three years, typically by substantial amounts above
state and federal standards. Underlying much of the policy debate is the central question:
what is the overall effect of minimum wages on low-wage jobs?
    Even though nearly three decades have passed since the advent of “new minimum wage
research” (see e.g. Card and Krueger 1995; Neumark and Wascher 2008), there is scant
evidence on the effect of the policy on overall employment. This shortcoming is particularly
acute given the importance policymakers place on understanding overall responses. For
example, in its attempt to arrive at such an estimate, the 2014 Congressional Budget Office
(CBO) report noted the paucity of relevant research and then used estimates for teen minimum
wage elasticities to extrapolate the total impact on low-wage jobs.
    In this paper we propose a novel method to identify the overall employment effect of the
minimum wage together with its effect on the shape of the frequency distribution of wages.
The basic idea behind our approach is summarized in Figure 1, which shows a hypothetical
frequency distribution of wages with and without a statutory minimum wage. The binding
minimum wage will directly affect jobs that were previously paying below the new minimum
wage. These jobs may either be destroyed or shifted into compliance with the mandated
minimum. The jobs shifted into compliance create a “bunching” at and slightly above the
minimum. Crucially, the effect of the minimum wage on the wage distribution fades out
and becomes negligible beyond a certain point. Therefore, the overall employment and
wage effects of the policy can be inferred from the localized employment changes around
the minimum wage. In particular, we derive the changes in employment from the difference
between the number of excess jobs at and slightly above the minimum wage and the number
of missing jobs below the minimum.
    We apply this bunching approach to the U.S. context. The main empirical challenge is to
uncover the counterfactual wage distribution in absence of the minimum wage. Instead of
using either ad hoc functional forms (Meyer and Wise 1983, Dickens, Machin and Manning
1998) or the distribution prior to the minimum wage increase (Harasztosi and Lindner 2016)
we exploit state-level variation in the minimum wage and compare states with and without
minimum wage changes using a difference-in-differences strategy. In particular, we implement
an event study analysis that exploits 138 prominent state-level minimum wage increases


                                              1
between 1979 and 2016. We estimate employment changes in each dollar wage bin relative
to the new minimum wage for three years prior to and five years following an event. Our
empirical approach, therefore, decomposes the aggregate employment effect of the policy into
constituent wage bins, and we use these bin-by-bin estimates to calculate the missing jobs
below and excess jobs at and above the minimum wage.
    There are several advantages of our bunching method relative to the more standard
approach that estimates the disemployment effect using aggregate employment or wage
changes (e.g. Meer and West, 2016). First, the bunching approach focuses on employment
changes locally around wage levels where minimum wages are likely to play a role. When only
a small fraction of aggregate workforce is affected by the minimum wage, such a localized
approach is crucial for uncovering meaningful “first stage” wage effects of the minimum
wage—something that is not possible with the standard approach except for subgroups like
teens. Second, by decomposing the aggregate employment impact by wage bins, we are able
to assess employment changes in the upper tail of the wage distribution. This can provide an
additional falsification test, since large changes in the upper part of the wage distribution are
unlikely to reflect a causal effect of the minimum wage. Third, the bunching approach gains
precision by filtering out random shocks to jobs in the upper part of the wage distribution.
    We use hourly wage data from the 1979-2016 Current Population Survey (CPS) to estimate
the effect of the minimum wage by wage bins. We find that an average minimum wage hike
leads to a large and significant decrease in the number of jobs below the new minimum wage
during the five years following implementation. At the same time, there is clear evidence
for the emergence of excess jobs at the minimum wage. However, as expected we find no
indication for the employment changes in the upper part of the wage distribution, providing
further validation to the empirical design. We estimate that the number of excess jobs
closely matched the number of missing jobs: the employment for affected workers rose by
a statistically insignificant 2.8% (s.e. 2.9%). Our estimates also allow us to calculate the
impact of the policy on the average wages of affected workers, which rose by around 6.8% (s.e.
1.0%). The significant increase in average wages of affected workers implies an employment
elasticity with respect to own wage (or the labor demand elasticity in a competitive model)
of 0.41 (s.e. 0.43), which rules out elasticities more negative than -0.45 at the 95 percent
confidence level.
    An additional advantage of estimating the effect of the minimum wage on the frequency
distribution of wages is that we can directly assess the extent which the direct wage effects of
the minimum wage are amplified by wage spillovers. We find that spillovers extend up to
$3 above the minimum wage and represent around 40% of the overall wage increase from
minimum wage changes. Interestingly, we also find that the benefits of wage spillovers are


                                               2
not equally shared: workers who had a job before the minimum wage increase (incumbents)
experience significant wage spillovers, but we do not find any evidence of such spillovers for
new entrants. This asymmetry suggests that spillovers may reflect relative pay concerns
within the firm (Dube, Giuliano and Leonard 2018) and the value of outside options or
reservation wages of non-employed workers unlikely to play a key role in generating wage
spillovers (e.g. Flinn 2006).
    Our estimates are highly robust to a wide variety of approaches to controlling for time-
varying heterogeneity that has sometimes produced conflicting results in the existing literature
(e.g., Allegretto, Dube, Reich and Zipperer 2017; Neumark and Wascher 1992). Moreover,
the shifts in the missing and excess jobs are strongly related to the timing of minimum wage
hike—providing further support that we uncover the causal effect of the minimum wage.
Both missing jobs below the new minimum and excess jobs above were close to zero prior to
the minimum wage increase, which suggests that the treatment and the control states were
following a parallel trend. The drop in jobs below the minimum wage is immediate, as is the
emergence of the excess jobs at and slightly above. Over the five year post-treatment period,
the magnitude of the missing jobs below the new minimum wage decreases only slightly
underscoring the durability of the minimum wage changes studied here.
    To go beyond our overall assessment of the 138 case studies used for identification, we also
produce event-by-event estimates of the minimum wage changes. While we find substantial
heterogeneity in the bite of the events, the distribution of employment effects are consistent
with a null of no effect anywhere. For example, our event-by-event analysis finds that the
estimated missing jobs rose in magnitude substantially with the minimum-to-median wage
(Kaitz) index. At the same time, the number of excess jobs also rose for these events to a
nearly identical extent. As a consequence, there is no relationship between the employment
estimate and the Kaitz index up to around 55 percent, confirming that minimum wage
changes in the U.S. we study have yet to reach a level above which significant disemployment
effects emerge.
    The lack of responses in overall employment might mask some heterogeneity in response
across types of workers. Our bunching approach can be easily applied to various sub-groups.
Moreover, the localized approach around the minimum wage allows us to estimate the effect of
the policy for sub-groups where only a small fraction of workers are affected by the minimum
wage. As a result, we can provide a more complete picture on how various groups respond to
the minimum wage.
    We examine whether there is a shift from low-skill to high-skill workers at the bottom
of the wage distribution by partitioning workers into groups based on education and age.
Comparing the number of excess jobs at and above the new minimum wage and missing


                                               3
jobs below it across age-by-education groups shows no evidence that low-skilled workers
are replaced with high-skilled workers following a minimum wage increase. We also use
demographics to predict the probability of being exposed to the minimum wage increase, and
then assign workers to high, medium and low probability groups along the lines of Card and
Krueger (1995). While there is considerable variation in the bite of the policy, the employment
effects in these sub-groups are mostly close to zero and not statistically significant. The
similar responses across demographic groups also suggests that the benefit of minimum wage
policies were shared broadly.
    We are also able to provide a more comprehensive picture on responses across various
sectors of the economy. We show that the minimum wage is likely to have a negative effect
on employment in tradable sector, and manufacturing in particular—with an employment
elasticity with respect to own-wage of around -1.4—although the estimates are imprecise. At
the same time, the effect of the minimum wage is close to zero in the non-tradable sectors
(such as restaurants or retail), which employ most minimum wage workers in the U.S. today.
This evidence suggests that the industry composition of the local economy is likely to play
an important role in determining the disemployment effect of the minimum wage (Harasztosi
and Lindner 2016).
    This paper makes several key contributions to the existing literature on minimum wages.
First, our paper relates to the large and controversial literature on the employment effects
of the minimum wages . The debate has often been concentrated on the impact on teen
employment (Card, 1992; Neumark and Wascher, 1992; Allegretto et al., 2017; Neumark
et al., 2014), workers in specific sectors (Card and Krueger, 1994; Dube et al., 2010; Katz
and Krueger, 1992; Lester, 1964), or workers earning low wages prior to the minimum wage
increase (Abowd et al., 2000; Clemens and Wither, 2016; Currie and Fallick, 1996);, while the
evidence on the impact on overall employment is scant. A notable exception is Meer and West
(2016), who examine the relationship between aggregate employment at the state-level and
minimum wage changes. Different from us, they find a large negative employment estimate
using variants of the classic two-way fixed effects regression on log minimum wage. To
highlight the importance of disaggregating the aggregate employment effects into wage bins,
we also calculate the bin-by-bin employment effects in such a specification. This exercise
produces a striking finding: the specifications that indicate a large negative effect on aggregate
employment seem to be driven by an unrealistically large drop in the number of jobs at the
upper tail of the wage distribution, which is unlikely to be a causal effect of the minimum
wage. We also provide an explanation for why the classic two-way fixed effect and our
event study approach produces different results. We show that the large negative effects on
employment is driven entirely by inclusion of the 1980s in the sample—a period with very


                                                4
few minimum wage changes. However, aggregate employment changes in the 1980s turn out
to be correlated with minimum wage changes in the 2000s. Therefore, while inclusion of the
1980 biases the estimation of state fixed effects in the two way fixed effect approach, it does
not affect our event study approach that focuses on employment changes locally around the
event window.
    Second, our paper contributes to the extensive literature on the effect of the minimum
wage on overall wage inequality (Autor, Manning and Smith 2016; DiNardo, Fortin and
Lemieux 1996; Lee 1999). These papers examine shifts in the wage density and assume away
any possible disemployment effect. The key novelty of our approach is that by focusing on
the frequency distribution instead of the density, we can assess the effect on wage inequality
and employment at the same time.1 Namely, we show that the measured wage spillovers are
not an artifact of disemployment, which would truncate the wage distribution; and we show
that they are unlikely to be an artifact of measurement error. Our spillover estimates are
similar to the findings of Autor, Manning and Smith (2016) and Brochu et al. (2017), and
more limited than those in Lee (1999).
    Finally, our paper is also related to the growing literature that uses bunching to elicit
behavioral responses to public policies (Kleven 2016). Minimum wages discontinuously
increase the cost of hiring below the wage floor, while the extent of bunching provides prima
facie evidence of a causal effect of the incentive in question. However, while the standard
bunching analysis estimates the counterfactual distribution from purely cross sectional
variation (Chetty et al., 2013; Saez, 2010), here we follow the most recent literature (Best
and Kleven, 2013; Brown, 2013) and use a difference-in-differences strategy to construct the
counterfactual wage distribution.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 explains the bunching approach
and the empirical implementation, Section 3 presents the main empirical findings on overall
employment effects, wage spillovers and heterogenous responses to the minimum wage. Section
4 demonstrates the importance of assessing employment changes far above the minimum
wage and highlights problems with the classic two-way fixed effects estimation. Section 5
concludes.
   1 Ina recent working paper, Brochu et al. (2017) use the hazard rate for wages to estimate spillover effects
in the presence of disemployment effects.




                                                      5
2      Methodology and Data
2.1      The Bunching Framework
Our method identifies the effect of the minimum wage from the employment changes at
the bottom of the wage distribution. We illustrate our approach using Figure 1, which
summarizes the effect of the minimum wage on the wage distribution. The red line shows a
hypothetical (frequency) distribution of wages in the absence of the minimum wage. The
blue line depicts the actual wage distribution with a minimum wage at M W .
    In the presence of a binding minimum wage, there should be no jobs below M W . In
practice, however, some jobs observed in the data will be sub-minimum wage because of
imperfect coverage, imperfect compliance, or measurement error. Therefore, the missing
jobs below M W , given by 4b = Emp1 [w < M W ] − Emp0 [w < M W ], reflect the size of the
bite of the minimum wage.2 Here Emp1 [.] and Emp0 [.] are the actual and counterfactual
frequency distributions of wages, respectively.
    Not all missing jobs below the minimum wage are destroyed. Some or all of the jobs below
the minimum wage may be kept and their hourly pay raised to the minimum wage, creating
a spike at M W . Some jobs may be pushed slightly above the minimum wage in order to
maintain wage hierarchy within the firm, or because the minimum wage raises the bargaining
power of workers (e.g. Flinn, 2011). Moreover, a minimum wage might induce low-wage
workers to participate in job search, some of whom may find a job above the minimum wage.
However, the ripple effects of the minimum wage are likely to fade out at certain point, which
we denote by W in Figure 1. In the neoclassical model there can be some positive employment
effects in the upper tail of the wage distribution caused by labor-labor substitution. However,
the magnitude of these effects are negligible in practice.3 In models with labor market friction,
    2 When we refer to the “bite” of the minimum wage, or to the extent to which the minimum wage is

“binding,” we mean how effective the minimum wage is in raising wages at the bottom. Therefore, the bite
is a function of (1) how many workers are earning below the new minimum wage, (2) how many of those
workers are legally covered by the policy, and (3) the extent of compliance.
    3 To see this, consider a three-factor version of the Hicks-Marshall law of derived demand with: low-skilled,

minimum wage labor (L); higher skilled, non-minimum wage labor (H); and capital. The effect of a change
                                                                                          LH
in low-skilled wage on higher skilled labor demand is given by the formula ∂∂ ln       ln wL
                                                                                             = sL (σHL − η), where
sL is the share of minimum-wage labor in total production, σHL is the elasticity of substitution between
higher-skilled and low-skilled labor, and η is the output demand elasticity. Since minimum wage workers’
share of the wage bill is around 3%, and labor’s share of output is roughly 2/3, this implies a low-skilled
share of production sL ≈ 2%. Katz and Murphy (1992) estimates σHL ≈ 1.4 and η is often assumed to be 1
                                                                                 LH
(Aaronson and French, 2007). This implies a cross-wage elasticity of ∂∂ ln    ln wL
                                                                                    ≈ 0.008. For a 10% increase in
the minimum wage in our sample, we estimate hourly wages of affected workers increase by 7%. This implies a
                                                                 LH      ∂ ln LH     ∂ ln wL
minimum wage elasticity for higher-skilled employment of ∂∂lnlnM  W = ∂ ln wL × ∂ ln M W ≈ 0.008 × 0.7 = 0.0056.
Therefore, any plausible estimate of minimum wage impact on upper-tail employment should be very small.
We also empirically show the absence of an effect on the upper tail of the distribution using our event-based



                                                        6
wage spillovers also typically fade out, because workers and firms in the upper tail of the
wage distribution are operating in different labor market segments (see Van den Berg and
Ridder 1998 and Engbom and Moser 2017 for examples of such models).
    We assess the employment effect of the minimum wage on low-wage workers by summing
the missing and excess jobs, 4b + 4a. Such an estimator is analogous to the “bunching”
method developed in the recent public finance literature, which uses bunching around points
that feature discontinuities in incentives to elicit behavioral responses (Kleven, 2016). The
minimum wage creates a discontinuity (a notch) by making it very costly to hire a worker
below a certain wage level, and the changes in the frequency distribution of wages identify
the behavioral responses to this policy. As is typical with the bunching approach, the spike
at the minimum wage and the elevated mass slightly above it provides prima facie evidence
of a causal effect of the incentive in question. An additional feature of the estimator is that it
focuses on employment changes at the relevant part of the wage distribution: the sum of the
missing and excess jobs is in fact equal to the employment change below a wage threshold
                         h        i          h      i
W : 4b + 4a = Emp1 w < W − Emp0 w < W .
    There are four key advantages of focusing on the bottom of the wage distribution. First,
the bunching approach proposed here identifies the overall employment effect using changes
locally around the new minimum wage—the part of the wage distribution where we expect
the policy to play a role. This variation is highly informative, yet rarely exploited. Second,
and more importantly, our localized approach allows us to estimate the effects on overall
employment and on subgroups where the standard approaches often fail to provide meaningful
estimates on employment and wages. When only a small fraction of workers are directly
affected by the minimum wage, the effect on the average wage of such subgroups will be very
small. Without a clear wage effect, it is not clear how to interpret the size of any employment
effect found for those groups.4
    Third, our approach locates the source of the employment effects within the wage distri-
bution, and so one can use the upper tail employment changes as a falsification test.5 Since
large changes in jobs paying above $15 are unlikely to reflect the causal effect of the minimum
design in section 3.
    4 In the Online Appendix Table A.1 we demonstrate that the standard approach, which looks at the

wage and employment effects aggregated over the entire wage distribution, fails to produce positive and
statistically significant wage effects in most cases. This indicates that the standard approach fails to capture
the program effect of the minimum wage for these subgroups. At the same time, our bunching based estimates
always produce sizable and significant wage effects. The own-wage elasticity of employment estimated using
minimum wage variation is effectively a Wald-IV estimate; hence the lack of a strong “first stage” means
estimates are biased towards the OLS estimate obtained by naively regressing employment on wages (Bound,
Jaeger and Baker, 1995).
    5 This idea is similar to Autor et al. (2016) who use unrealistically large spillover effects to validate the

empirical model in use.



                                                       7
wage, reporting such employment changes in the upper tail can be highly informative about
model validity. Moreover, the potential bias from the confounding factors affecting the upper
tail can be especially large when only a small fraction of the workforce is directly affected
by the minimum wage (as is true in the U.S.). The contribution of these omitted variables
may be sizable compared to the relatively small expected effect of the minimum wage on
aggregate employment. As a result, the bias arising from shocks to the upper tail can be
particularly severe when we are interested in estimating the overall employment effect of
the minimum wage. Fourth, even if changes in the upper tail do not bias the estimates, the
bunching approach often improves the precision of estimates by filtering out random shocks
to jobs in the upper part of the wage distribution.6


2.2     Empirical Implementation
The key empirical challenge in implementing the bunching approach is to estimate the
counterfactual wage frequency distribution in absence of a minimum wage increase. We
exploit state-level variation in minimum wage changes occurring between 1979 and 2016,
and identify the counterfactual distribution using an event study design. We use a similar
framework as Autor et al. (2006) and examine employment changes within an 8 year window
around 138 prominent state-level minimum wage events, where states increased their minimum
wage by at least $0.25, and where at least 2% of the workers were directly affected by the
increase.7
    Instead of estimating the effect of these events on quarterly aggregate employment, we
disaggregate employment into $0.25 wage bins. Our basic regression specification is the
following:

                                   4   17
                         Esjt                    τk
                                                     + µsj + ρjt + Ωsjt + usjt
                                  X    X
                              =            ατ k Isjt                                                     (1)
                         Nst    τ =−3 k=−4

where Esjt is the employment in $0.25 wage bin j in state s and at quarter t, while Nst is
the size of the population in state s and quarter t. The treatment dummy Isjtτ k equals to

1 if the minimum wage was raised τ years from date t and for the $0.25 wage bins j that
fall between k and k + 1 dollars of the new minimum wage. This definition implies that
τ = 0 represents the first year following the minimum wage increase (i.e., the quarter of
   6 OnlineAppendix Table A.2 confirms that the standard errors tend to be lower with the bunching approach
compared to an approach using aggregate employment.
   7 We exclude federal increases from our primary sample of events because for these events, the change

in missing number of jobs, ∆b, is identified only from time-series variation—as there are no “control states”
with a wage floor lower then the new minimum wage. However we show below that our employment and
wage estimates are similar when we include federal events as well.


                                                     8
treatment and the subsequent three quarters), and τ = −1 is the year (four quarters) prior
to treatment. Moreover, the Isjtτ k treatment variables are not only a function of state and

time, but also of the wage bins. For instance, k = 0 represents the four $0.25 bins between
M W and M W + $0.99 and k = −1 is a “below” bin with wages paying between M W − $0.01
and M W − $1.00. Our benchmark specification also controls for state-by-wage bin and
period-by-wage bin effects, µsj and ρjt . This allows us to control for state-specific factors
in the earnings distribution and also the nation-wide evolution of wage inequality. Finally,
Ωsjt include controls for small or federal increases.8 We cluster our standard errors by state,
which is the level at which policy is assigned. Our standard errors, therefore, account for
the possibility that employment changes at different parts of the wage distribution may be
correlated within a state.
    The estimated ατ k allow us to calculate the change in employment throughout the
wage distribution in response to the policy. The change in the number jobs (per capita)
paying below the new minimum wage between event date −1 and τ can be calculated as:
P−1           P−1
  k=−4 ατ k − k=−4 α−1k . To be clear, this is a difference-in-differences estimate, as it nets
out the change in the counterfactual distribution implicitly defined by the regression equation 1.
Analogously, the change in the number of jobs (per capita) paying between the minimum wage
          P −M W           P −M W
and W is W   k=0     ατ k − Wk=0      α−1k . For our baseline estimates, we set W = M W + 4.9
                                                                                 P4         P4
                                                                                   k=0 ατ k −   k=0 α−1k
We define the excess jobs at or above the minimum wage as ∆aτ =                        EP OP −1
                                                                                                           , and
                                      P−1              P−1
                                         k=−4 ατ k −    k=−4 α−1k
the missing jobs below as ∆bτ =                EP OP −1
                                                                    . By dividing the employment changes
by EP OP −1 , the sample average employment-to-population ratio in treated states during
the year (four quarters) prior to treatment, we normalize the excess and missing jobs by the
pre-treatment total employment. The ∆aτ and ∆bτ values plot out the evolution of excess and
missing jobs over event time τ . We also report the excess and missing employment estimates
averaged over the five years following the minimum wage increase, ∆b = 15 4τ =0 ∆bτ and
                                                                              P

∆a = 15 4τ =0 ∆aτ .
        P

   Given our normalization, ∆e = ∆a + ∆b represents the bunching estimate for the percent-
age change in total employment due to the minimum wage increase. If we divide this by the
percentage change in the minimum wage averaged across our events, %∆M W , we obtain the
   8 Our  primary minimum wage events exclude very small increases. To ensure they do not confound our
main effects, we include controls for these small events. We also separately control for federal minimum wages.
In particular, separately for small events and federal events, we construct a set of 6 variables by interacting
{BELOW, ABOV E} × {EARLY, P RE, P OST }. Here BELOW and ABOV E are dummies equal to 1 for
all wage bins that are within $4 below and above the new minimum, respectively; EARLY , P RE and P OST
are dummies that take on 1 if −3 ≤ τ ≤ −2, τ = −1, or 0 ≤ τ ≤ 4, respectively. These two sets of 6 variables
are included as controls in the regression (Ωsjt in the equation 1).
    9 Online Appendix Table A.5 shows the results are robust to higher cutoffs.




                                                        9
employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage:

                              %∆Total Employment      ∆a + ∆b
                                                   =
                                    %∆M W            %∆M W
We define the percentage change in affected employment as the change in employment divided
by the (sample average) share of the workforce earning below the new minimum wage the
year before treatment, b−1 :10

                                                                      ∆a + ∆b
                           %∆Affected Employment = %∆e =
                                                                        b−1
    We also use the estimated coefficients to compute the percentage change in the average
hourly wage for affected workers. We calculate the average wage by taking the ratio of the
total wage bill collected by workers below the new minimum wage to the number of such
workers. Prior to treatment, it is equal to w−1 = wb−1/b−1 . Here the wage bill, wb−1 , and the
number of workers earning below the new minimum wage just prior to the increase, b−1 , are
averages for the full sample of events. The minimum wage increase causes both the wage bill
and employment to change. The new average wage in the post-treatment period is equal to
                             
w = wb−1 + ∆wb / b−1 + ∆e .11 Therefore, the percentage change in the average wage of
affected workers is given by:

                                     wb−1 + ∆wb
                             w        b−1 + ∆e       %∆wb − %∆e
                      %∆w =     −1 =            −1 =                                                     (2)
                            w−1         wb−1          1 + %∆e
                                        b−1

The percentage change in the average wage is obtained by taking the difference in percentage
change in wage bill and employment, and dividing by the retained employment share. This
formula implicitly assumes the average wage change of those workers exiting or entering due
to the policy is the same as the wage of affected workers those who remain employed.
  10 Notice  that we divide by the actual share of the workforce and not by the change in it. As we pointed
out earlier, these two are not the same if there is imperfect compliance, imperfect coverage, or measurement
error in wages. While both divisions are meaningful, dividing by the actual share is the more policy relevant
elasticity. This is because policy makers can calculate the actual share of workers at the new minimum wage
and use the estimates presented in this paper. However, the change in the jobs below the new minimum wage
is only known after the minimum wage increase, and so it cannot be used for a prospective analysis of the
policy’s impact.
   11 The change in wage bill can be written as a function of our regression coefficients as follows.

Averaging the coefficients over the 5 year post-treatment window, αk = 15 4τ =0 ατ,k , we can write
                                                                                    P
          P4
∆wb =
                            
            k=−3 k + M W · (αk − α−1k ), where M W is (approximately) the sample average of the new
minimum wage. We say approximately because k is based on $1 increments, and so M W is calculated as the
sample mean of [M W, M W + 1).



                                                    10
   Finally, armed with the changes in employment and wages for affected workers, we estimate
the employment elasticity with respect to own-wage (or the “labor demand elasticity” in a
competitive market):

                            %∆Affected Employment    1 ∆a + ∆b
                                                  =
                              %∆Affected Wage       %∆w b−1
We calculate the standard errors around this elasticity using the delta method.


2.3        Data and sample construction
We use the individual-level NBER Merged Outgoing Rotation Group of the Current Population
Survey for 1979-2016 (CPS) to calculate quarterly, state-level distributions of hourly wages.
For hourly workers, we use the reported hourly wage, and for other workers we define the
hourly wage to be their usual weekly earnings divided by usual weekly hours. We do not
use any observations with imputed wage data in order to minimize the role of measurement
error.12 There are no reliable imputation data for January 1994 through August 1995, so
we exclude this entire period from our sample. Our available sample of employment counts
therefore spans 1979q1 through 1993q4 and 1995q4 through 2016q4.13
    We deflate wages to 2016 dollars using the CPI-U-RS and for a given real hourly wage
assign its earner a $0.25 wage bin w running from $0.00 to $30.00.14 For each of these 117
wage bins we collapse the data into quarterly, state-level employment counts Eswt using the
person-level ORG sampling weights. We use estimates for state-level population aged 16 and
over, Nst , from the CPS-MORG (which in turn is based on the Census), as the denominator
for constructing per-capita counts. Our primary sample includes all wage earners and the
entire state population, but below we also explore the heterogeneity of our results using
different subgroups, where the bite of the policy varies.
    The aggregate state-quarter-level employment counts from the CPS are subject to sampling
  12 The  NBER CPS merged ORG data are available at http://www.nber.org/morg/. Wage imputation
status markers in the CPS vary and are not comparable across time. In general we follow Hirsch and
Schumacher (2004) to define wage imputations. During 1979-1988 and September 1995-2016, we define wage
imputations as records with positive BLS allocation values for hourly wages (for hourly workers) and weekly
earnings or hours (for other workers). For 1989-1993, we define imputations as observations with missing
or zero “unedited” earnings but positive “edited” earnings (which we also do for hours worked and hourly
wages).
  13 In general, there has been an increase in the rate of imputation over time. However, in the Online

Appendix, we show that minimum wage raises are not systematically related to changes in the imputation
rate. Event study estimates for the effect of minimum wages on the imputation rate show no substantial or
statistically significant change 3 years before and 5 years after the treatment. (See Online Appendix Table
A.3 and Online Appendix Figure A.2.)
  14 We assign all wages between $0 and $1 to a single bin and all wages above $30 to the $30 bin. The

resulting 117 wage bins are (0.00, 1.25), [1.25, 1.50), . . . , [29.75, 30.00), [30, ∞).


                                                    11
error, which reduces the precision of our estimates. To address this issue, we benchmark the
CPS aggregate employment-to-population ratio to the implied employment-to-population
ratio from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), which is a near universe
of quarterly employment (but lacks information on hourly wages). Online Appendix E explains
the QCEW benchmarking in detail. As we discuss below, the QCEW benchmarking has little
effect on our point estimates, but substantially increases their statistical precision.
    Our estimation of the change in jobs paying below and above a new minimum wage
requires us to specify minimum wage increasing events. For state-level minimum wage levels,
we use the quarterly maximum of the state-level daily minimum wage series described in
Vaghul and Zipperer (2016).15 For the 138 minimum wage events, on average, 8.6% of workers
were below the new minimum wage in the year before these 138 events and the mean real
minimum wage increase was 10.1%.16
    One concern when using $0.25 bins and CPS data is that some of the bins may be sparse
with very few or no workers. However, we stress that our employment estimate is based
on the sum of employment changes in 36 cells covering a $9 range [M W − $4, M W + $4],
summed over at least four quarters (typically twenty quarters). As a result, small or zero
employment in particular cells is not a major concern. In each state, there are, on average,
around 7 workers each quarter in each of the $0.25 bins between $5 and $15/hour in our
sample.17 Since the coefficients for our event dummies are estimated at a $1-bin-year-state
level, on average, for each of these we use around 112 individual-level observations per event.
Moreover, when we assess the total employment effects, we calculate the sum of the $1-bin
estimates between $4 below and $4 above the minimum wage, and we consider 5 year averages.
This implies that, on average, we use approximately 5,040 individual worker observations
per event. This is a well-sized sample which allows a reliable estimate of the true counts of
employment for each event. Consistent with this point, we note that our approach is very
similar to a simpler method of estimating a regression using state-by-quarter data, where
the outcomes are the number of jobs or total wage bill under, say, $15/hour divided by
population. We show below that the resulting employment and wage estimates (and standard
errors) are very similar when using the simpler method.
    Another potential concern with the data is that misreporting of wages in the CPS may
bias our estimates. If reported wages contain some measurement error, some workers earning
  15 The  minimum wage series is available at https://github.com/benzipperer/historicalminwage/
releases.
  16 All minimum wage increases including our events are shown in Online Appendix Figure A.1
  17 Overall, we have 847,314 wage bin-state-period observations, which we obtained from 4,694,104 individual

level observations, producing a count of 5.5 workers per $0.25 bin. However, the count per bin is higher in
the $5-to-$15/hour range because the upper tail wage bins are more sparse. The $5-to-$15/hour range is the
relevant one since it contains the [M W − $4, M W + $4] windows for all of our events.


                                                     12
above the minimum wage will appear to earn below it, which could attenuate the estimate
for ∆b. However, this does not affect the consistency of the estimate for ∆a + ∆b as long as
the the minimum wage only affects reported wages below W . The reason is straightforward.
Assume that 1% of the workforce mistakenly report earning below the new minimum wage
in the post-treatment period. This would lead our estimate of the missing jobs to be too
small in magnitude: ∆b  ˆ = ∆b + 0.01. However, this misreporting would also lead to an equal
reduction in the number of excess jobs above, producing the estimate ∆a     ˆ = ∆a − 0.01; this
will be true as long as these misreported workers are coming from the range [M W, W ), which
is likely to be satisfied for a wide variety of classical and non-classical measurement error
processes where the support of the measurement error is contained in [M W − W ,W − M W ].
Therefore, the employment estimate ∆a  ˆ + ∆bˆ is likely to be unaffected by measurement error
in reported wages. We also directly assess how misreporting of wages in the CPS may affect
our results in Online Appendix D, where we compare the CPS hourly wage distribution to
micro-aggregated administrative data on hourly wages from three U.S. states that collect this
information. Reassuringly, the evolution of the number of jobs paying below the minimum
wage, and the number of jobs paying up to $5 above the minimum wage in the CPS data
from these three states match quite well with their counterparts using administrative data.18


3         Results
We begin our analysis by estimating the effect of the minimum wage on the frequency
distribution of hourly wages. Figure 2 shows the results from our baseline specification (see
equation 1). We report employment changes averaged over the five year post-treatment
period, 15 4τ =0 ατ k , for each dollar wage bin (k) relative to the minimum wage. Recall that all
           P

employment changes are normalized to pre-treatment total employment in the state. Several
points should be noted.
    First, there is a clear and significant drop in the number of jobs below the new minimum
wage, amounting to 1.8% (s.e. 0.4%) of the total pre-treatment employment.19 Almost 34 of
  18 In Online Appendix E, we also structurally estimate a model of measurement error in reported wages
proposed by Autor, Manning and Smith (2016), and show that the contribution of misreporting error to the
overall variance in wages in the CPS and in administrative data on hourly wages from three U.S. states are
very similar. Furthermore, we semi-parametrically deconvolve the CPS wage distribution using the estimated
measurement error model and show that the bunching estimates using this measurement error corrected
distribution are very similar to the baseline estimates.
  19 The discrepancy between the actual number of jobs below the new minimum, which is 8.6% of total pre

treatment employment on average, and the change in the number of jobs below it, which is 1.8% on average,
can be explained by the following factors. First, some of the jobs below the minimum wage (e.g. tipped
workers) are exempted from the minimum wage in most states. Second, there are often multiple changes in
the minimum wage in a relatively short period. In these cases, the cumulative effect of the various treatments


                                                     13
this reduction occurs in the $1 wage bin just under the new minimum. Second, there is also
a clear and significant increase in jobs just at the new minimum wage (at the $0 wage bin).
Third, there is also a statistically significant increase in employment in the wage bin $3 above
the new minimum and modest, statistically insignificant increases in the $1 and $2 bins. This
pattern of employment changes is consistent with limited wage spillovers resulting from the
minimum wage increase, as suggested in Autor, Manning and Smith (2016).20 Fourth, the
excess jobs between the new minimum and $4 above it represents 2.1% (s.e. 0.3%) of the
total pre-treatment employment. Finally, the employment changes in the upper tail wage
bins, from $5 above the minimum wage to $17 or more (the final bin), are all small in size
and statistically insignificant—both individually as well as cumulatively as shown by the red
line, which represents the running sum of employment changes.
    The bunching estimate for employment change adds the missing jobs below and excess
jobs above the minimum wage: 4a + 4b. We divide this change by the jobs below the new
minimum wage (b−1 = 8.6%) to obtain a change in the affected employment of 2.8% (s.e.
2.9%), which is positive but statistically insignificant. We can also divide the employment
change ∆a + ∆b by the sample-averaged minimum wage increase of 10.1% to calculate the
employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage of 0.024 (s.e. 0.025). This estimate
is statistically insignificant, and the 95% confidence interval rules out substantial reductions
in the aggregate employment, including the baseline aggregate employment elasticity of -0.074
in Meer and West (2016) (see their Table 4). The most common minimum wage employment
elasticities are from teens; for example, Neumark and Wascher (2008) argue this falls between
-0.1 and -0.3, while Allegretto et al. (2017) argue that it is closer to zero. However, the directly
affected share of teens (43.2%) is much larger than the workforce overall (8.6%). Therefore,
to make our estimates on overall employment comparable to the estimates for teens we can
multiply our estimate and standard errors by the ratio of the shares 0.432/0.086=5.02. This
leads to an affected-share-adjusted 95% confidence interval of [-0.13, 0.37], which rules out
most of the -0.1 to -0.3 range.
    Second, using the formula in equation 2 we can also calculate the change in the average
wage and the employment elasticity with respect to own wage (i.e., the labor demand elasticity
in the competitive model). We estimate that the effect of the minimum wage on average
wages is 6.8% (s.e. 1.0%), which is statistically significant. The estimate for the elasticity of
employment with respect to own wage is 0.411 (s.e. 0.430). The confidence intervals rule out
should be considered: when we adjust for this we find the change in the number of jobs below the minimum
rises in magnitude from 1.8% to 2.5%. Third, there is some wage growth even in the absence of a minimum
wage increase, and our event study design controls for these changes.
   20 The $3 above the minimum wage is around the 23rd percentile of the wage distribution on average. Autor,

Manning and Smith (2016) finds the wage spillovers are effectively zero at around the 25th percentile.


                                                     14
any own-wage elasticities more negative than -0.450 at the 95 percent confidence level. Such
a lower bound rules out many estimates in the literature that found negative employment
elasticity (see Online Appendix Figure A.6; also, Neumark and Wascher (2008) argue that
the own-wage employment elasticity can easily be -1 or even -2). .
    Figure 3 shows the changes in the missing jobs paying below the new minimum wage
(∆bτ ), and the excess jobs paying up to $4 above the minimum wage (∆aτ ) over annualized
event time using our baseline specification. All the estimates are expressed as changes from
event date τ = −1, or the year just prior to treatment, the estimates for which are normalized
to zero. There are four important findings that we would like to highlight. First, we find a
very clear reduction in the jobs paying below the new minimum wage (shown in red) between
the year just prior to treatment (τ = −1) and the year of treatment (τ = 0)—this shows
that the minimum wage increases under study are measurably binding. Second, while there
is some reduction in the magnitude of the missing jobs in the post-treatment window, it
continues to be very substantial and statistically significant five years out, showing that
the treatments are fairly durable over the medium run. Third, the response of the excess
jobs at or above the new minimum (∆a) exhibits a very similar pattern in magnitudes, with
the opposite sign. There is an unmistakable jump in excess employment at τ = 0, and a
substantial portion of it persists and is statistically significant even five years out. Fourth,
for both the changes in the excess and missing jobs there is only a slight indication of a
pre-existing trend prior to treatment. The τ = −2 leads are statistically indistinguishable
from zero and although there is some evidence of changes three years prior to treatment, the
leading effects are very small relative to the post-treatment effect estimates. Moreover, the
slight downward trend in excess jobs, and the slight upward trend in missing jobs is consistent
with falling value of the real minimum wage prior to treatment. The sharp upward jump in
both the excess and missing jobs at τ = 0, the lack of substantial pre-treatment trends, and
the persistent post-treatment gap between the two shares all provide strong validation of
the research design. Online Appendix Figure A.4 shows analogous time paths for wages and
employment showing sharp and persistent wage effect at τ = 0 coupled with little change in
employment over the event window–either before or after treatment.
    Robustness Checks. In Table 1, we assess the robustness of the main results to including
additional controls for time-varying, unobserved heterogeneity. This is particularly important
since results in the existing literature are often sensitive to the inclusion of various versions of
time varying heterogeneity (e.g., Neumark, Salas and Wascher 2014 and Allegretto et al. 2017).
In Column (1) we report the five-year-averaged post-treatment estimates for the baseline
specification shown in Figures 2 and 3. Columns (2) and (3) add wage-bin-by-state specific
linear and quadratic time trends, respectively. Note that in the presence of 3 pre-treatment

                                                15
and 5 post-treatment dummies, the trends are estimated using variation outside of the 8 year
window around the treatment, and thereby unlikely affected by either lagged or anticipation
effects. Columns (4)-(6) additionally allow the wage-bin-period effects to vary by the 9
Census divisions. Column (6) represents a highly saturated model allowing for state-specific
quadratic time trends and division-period effects for each $0.25 wage bin.
    Overall, the estimates from the additional specifications are fairly similar to the baseline
estimate. In all cases, there is a clear bite of the policy as measured by the reduction in jobs
paying below the minimum, ∆b. Consistent with the presence of a substantial bite, there is
statistically significant increase in real wages of affected workers in all specifications: these
range between 5.7% and 6.9% with common wage-bin-period effects (columns 1, 2, 3, ), and
between 4.3% and 5.0% with division-specific wage-bin-period effects (columns 4, 5 and 6).
In contrast, the proportionate change in employment for affected workers is never statistically
significant, and is numerically smaller than the wage change, ranging between -1.9% and 3.6%
across the 8 specifications. For most part, the employment estimates are small or positive;
the only exception is column (5) with state-specific linear trends and bin-division-specific
period effects. The employment elasticities with respect to wage are -0.449 (s.e. 0.574) .
However, adding quadratic trends to the former specification (column 6) substantially reduces
the magnitude of the employment elasticity with respect to the wage to -0.003 (s.e. 0.455).
    Finally, column (7) provides employment and wage estimates using state-by-period panel,
where we regress either wage bill or employment per capita under an absolute wage threshold
(W ), and then estimate the change in affected wage and employment using the same formulae
as our baseline.21 The estimates and standard errors for affected employment (0.025, se 0.029)
and wage (0.063, se 0.011) are virtually identical to column 1, clarifying that use of wage bins
or choices around those have no impact on our key estimates. At the same time, unlike our
baseline specification, this simpler method using an absolute wage threshold cannot provide
separate estimates for excess and missing jobs.
    We also show in Online Appendix A that our results are robust to focusing only on
the events occurring in the states that do not allow tip credits; dropping occupations that
allows tipping; using full-time equivalent job counts; restrict the sample to hourly workers;
additionally using federal-level minimum wage changes for identification; using the raw CPS
data instead of the QCEW benchmarked CPS; without using population weights; and focusing
on the post-1992 period.
  21 The   threshold is W = 15, which is at least $4 above the new minimum wage in all of our events but one.




                                                      16
3.1      Heterogenous Responses to the Minimum Wage
Our bunching approach can also be applied to estimate the effect of the minimum wage on
specific subgroups.
    By demographic groups. We assess the presence of labor-labor substitution at the
bottom of the wage distribution by examining employment responses across various demo-
graphic groups.22 In Table 2 we report estimates for workers without a high school degree,
those with high school or less schooling, women, black or Hispanic individuals, and teens
using our baseline specification (see equation 1).
    As expected, restricting the sample by education and age produces a larger bite. For
example, for those without a high school degree, the missing jobs estimate, ∆b, is -6.5% while
for those with high school or less schooling it is -3.2%. These estimates for the missing jobs
are, respectively, 261% and 78% larger than the baseline estimate for the overall population
(-1.8%, from column 1 in Table 1). Nevertheless, the large variation in the missing jobs
across various demographic groups matched closely by excess jobs above the new minimum
wage.23 In all cases, except for the black or Hispanic group, the excess jobs are larger than
the missing jobs indicating a positive albeit statistically insignificant employment effect. For
black or Hispanic individuals, the difference between excess and missing jobs is negligible.
As a result, the employment elasticities with respect to own wage range between -0.086 and
0.570 for the first five demographic groups of the table. In all cases but one, the elasticities
are statistically indistinguishable from zero. The sole exception is those without a high school
degree, for whom the employment elasticity with respect to the wage is 0.475 (s.e. 0.268)
and is marginally significant at the ten percent level. The minimum wage elasticity for teens
is 0.125, which is more positive than some of the estimates in the literature, though we note
that it is not statistically significant given a standard error of 0.134.24
    In addition, we examine the effects on groups of workers with differential probability of
being exposed to the minimum wage changes. To determine the likelihood of exposure, we
  22 Existing  evidence on labor-labor substitution has typically focused on specific groups like teens (Giuliano,
2013), individual case studies (Fairris and Bujanda, 2008), or specific segments like online labor platforms
(Horton, 2018).
   23 In Online Appendix A we also show that the close match between excess jobs and missing jobs holds also

if we fully partition the workforce into 23 age-education cells.
   24 It should be noted that the teen estimates are unrelated to the use of bunching method, since the benefits

of focusing on employment changes around the minimum wage is small for groups where most workers are
low wage ones. In Online Appendix Table A.10 we show that our event study estimates are close to zero for
teens even if we use overall teen employment. At the same time, the classic two-way fixed effect specification
with log minimum wage (TWFE-logMW) generates a sizable negative estimate for teens and for overall
employment as well. In Section 4 we discuss this discrepancy and argue that the difference between our
approach and TWFE-logMW are driven by how the two empirical model affected by employment changes
occurring many years before the minimum wage hike.



                                                       17
construct a prediction model analogous to Card and Krueger (1995). We use observations
from three years prior to the 138 events that also lie outside any of the 5-year post-treatment
windows and we estimate a linear probability model of having a wage less than 125% of the
statutory minimum wage on a rich set of demographic predictors.25 We use the estimated
model to obtain predicted probabilities of being exposed to minimum wage increases for
all individuals in the sample regardless of their actual employment status. We then use
the predicted probabilities to place individuals in three groups: a “high probability” group
that contains individuals in the top 10 percent of the predicted probability distribution; a
“low probability” group that contains workers in the bottom 50 percent of the predicted
probabilities; and a middle group containing the rest.
    As expected, the high probability group shows a considerably larger bite (∆b = −9.4%)
than the middle group (∆b = −2.0%), and the low probability group (∆b = −0.4%). At the
same time the employment elasticities are very similar across the three Card and Krueger
probability groups. It is worth mentioning that the most precise estimate for the parameter
in this paper appears in column (6) of Table 2, where we look only locally around the
minimum wage and also focus on the high probability group: the confidence interval rejects
any value smaller than -0.251 and larger than 0.663. Such a confidence interval is quite narrow
and rejects many estimates in the literature—highlighting the gains from combining the
demographic profiling approach of Card and Krueger with the bunching approach advanced
in this paper. The employment elasticities for the other groups are similar in magnitude,
though less precise.26
    Overall, these findings provide little evidence of heterogeneity in the employment effect
by skill level; the lack of a reduction in overall low-wage jobs does not appear to mask a shift
in employment from low-skill to high-skill workers.
    By industrial sectors. Much of the literature has focused on specific sectors like
restaurants where the minimum wage is particularly binding—therefore making it easier
to detect a clear effect on the sectoral wage. In contrast, by focusing on changes at the
bottom of the distribution, our approach can recover employment and wage responses even
  25 We  use the exact same predictors as in Card and Krueger (1995): all three-way interactions of non-white,
gender, and teen indicators; all three-way interactions of non-white, gender, and age 20-25 indicators; less than
high school dummy variable; continuous highest grade completed variable; up to third order polynomial in
labor-market experience ; Hispanic ethnicity indicator; interactions of the education and experience variables
with gender. Cengiz (2018) shows the predictions using this Card and Krueger model compare favorably with
those from more sophisticated machine learning based methods.
  26 In Online Appendix A we show that if we estimate the impact of the events on the aggregate wage and

employment outcomes for each of the three probability groups, we can obtain a clear wage effect only for the
high probability group—capturing only around 36% of all minimum wage workers. This highlights the value
of focusing at the bottom of the wage distribution which allows us to get an overall estimate for all low wage
workers.


                                                      18
in industries where only a small fraction of workers are directly affected by the minimum
wage increase. This allows us to provide a more comprehensive assessment of the effect of
the policy across a range of industries.
    In Table 3 we report estimates for various sectors in the economy. We assign workers to
tradable and non-tradable sectors following Mian and Sufi (2014).27 The table shows that the
bite of the minimum wage varies a lot across industries. The minimum wage is highly binding
in the restaurant sector with a missing jobs estimate of 10.1%, while it does not appear to be
binding in the construction sector. The minimum wage is more binding in the non-tradable
sector (6.6%) than in the tradable sector (1.6%) or in the manufacturing sector (1.7%).
    The effect of the minimum wage on employment also varies by sector. We find that
the number of excess jobs at and above the minimum wage is smaller than the missing
jobs in the tradable sector, and so the employment effect is negative (-11.1%, s.e. 13.6%),
albeit not statistically significant. Similarly, the point estimate in the manufacturing sector
suggests that around 10.1% (s.e. 14.5%) of the jobs directly affected by the minimum wage
are destroyed. The implied employment elasticity with respect to own wage is quite large in
magnitude in both sectors (-1.910 in the tradable and -1.385 in manufacturing), although the
estimates are imprecise and statistically insignificant.
    At the same time, we find no indication for negative disemployment effects in the non-
tradable, restaurant, and retail sectors where most minimum wage workers are employed in
the U.S. The employment elasticity with respect to own wage in the non-tradable sector is
positive (0.387, s.e. 0.597), which is in stark contrast to the tradable sector, where we find
a large negative elasticity. Harasztosi and Lindner (2016) find similar sectoral patterns in
Hungary and argue, using revenue data, that the larger job losses for tradable reflect a more
elastic consumer demand in that sector.
    By pre-treatment employment status. We consider the effect of the minimum wage
separately on workers who were employed prior to the minimum wage increase (incumbent
workers) and for new entrants into the labor market. We partition our sample of wage earners
into incumbent workers and new entrants by exploiting the fact that the CPS interviews each
respondent twice, exactly one year apart.28 The partition limits our sample to the 1980-2016
  27 Mian  and Sufi (2014) define “tradable” industries as having either the sum of imports and exports
exceeding $10,000 per worker or $500 million total; their “non-tradable” sector consists of a subset of
restaurant and retail industries; “construction” consists of construction, real estate or land development-
related industries. We use the list in Mian and Sufi (2014) of 4-digit NAICS industries and Census industry
crosswalks to categorize all the industries in the CPS for 1992-2016. In our sample the shares of employment
are 13%, 14%, 10%, for tradable, non-tradable, construction, respectively. See more details in Online Appendix
D. Since consistent industrial classifications limit our sample to the 1992-2016 period, we first replicate our
benchmark analysis using all industries for this restricted sample in column (1) in Table 3. The estimated
employment and wage effects on this restricted sample are similar to the full 1979-2016 sample.
  28 All CPS respondents are interviewed for four months in the first interview period, then rotated out of



                                                     19
time period covering 137 eligible minimum wage-raising events and also restricts our time
window to one year around the minimum wage increase rather than the five years in our
baseline sample.
    Figure 4 shows the event study estimates for new entrants (panel a) and incumbents
(panel b) for each k-dollar wage bin relative to the new minimum wage. For both subgroups,
new minimum wages clearly bind, with significantly fewer jobs just below and significant
more at the new minimum. This highlight that studies that restricts its sample to incumbent
workers (e.g. Abowd et al. 2000; Currie and Fallick 1996; Clemens and Wither 2016) can
only provide a partial characterization of the full effects of the minimum wage increase, since
new entrants are also affected by the policy.
    For both groups the excess jobs closely match the missing jobs (for incumbents ∆a = 1.3%
and ∆b = −1.2% and for new entrants ∆a = 0.6% and ∆b = −0.5%) and so the net
employment changes are approximately zero. The green and blue solid lines show the running
sums of employment changes up to the corresponding wage bin for each group. The lines show
that in both cases there is little change in upper tail employment. We note that if employers
are replacing lower skilled workers with higher skilled ones, we should expect to see some
reduction in jobs for previously employed workers, perhaps offset by high skilled entrants;
the lack of job loss for incumbents provides additional evidence against such labor-labor
substitution. The affected wage increase for incumbents (9.5%, s.e. 2.0%) is significantly
larger than it is for new entrants (1.9%, s.e. 1.3% ) and some of these differences can be
explained by the lack of spillover effects for the new entrants. In the next section we return
to this issue.


3.2     Wage spillovers
So far we have focused on the employment effects of the minimum wage. However, an equally
important question is understanding the nature of the wage effects. In this section, we
quantify the direct effect of the minimum wage and the indirect effect that comes from wage
spillovers.
    We calculate the direct (or “no spillover”) wage increase by moving each missing job
under the new minimum wage exactly to the new minimum wage:
                                                   P−1
                                                      k=−4 k (αk   − α−1k )
                               %∆wno spillover =                                                        (3)
                                                             wb−1
the survey for eight months, and then rotated back into the survey for a final four months of interviews. In
the fourth month of each interview period (the “outgoing rotation group”), respondents are asked questions
about wages. Appendix Online Appendix D explains how we match workers across rotation groups.



                                                    20
The total wage increase of affected workers, %∆w, in equation 2 incorporates both this direct
effect as well as the add-on effect from wage spillovers. Therefore, the difference between the
two measures, %∆w − %∆wno spillover , provides an estimate of the size of the wage spillovers.
    Note that our spillover estimates use the frequency distribution of wages, which contrasts
with the earlier literature relying on the density of wages (see e.g. Card and Krueger 1995;
DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux 1996; Lee 1999; Autor, Manning and Smith 2016). As a result,
changes in employment—which could create an artificial spillover effect when using the wage
density—do not affect our estimates.
    We report our estimates of wage spillovers in Table 4, where the columns show estimates
of the total wage effect %∆w, the “no spillover” wage effect %∆wno spillover , and the spillover
                                                          %∆w−%∆w
                                                            no spillover
share of the total wage increase calculated as            %∆w            . The first row shows the
estimated effects for the entire workforce. Column (1) repeats the estimated total wage effect
from Column (1) in Table 1, which is 6.8% (s.e. 1.0%). Column (2) shows that in the absence
of spillovers, wages would increase by 4.1% (s.e. 0.9%). Column (3) shows that 39.7% (s.e.
11.9%) of the total wage effect is caused by the ripple effect of the minimum wage.
    In Table 4 we also report estimates for several subgroups. The share of spillovers in the
total wage increase is relatively similar for several key demographic groups, such as those
without a high school degree (37.0%), teens (34.7%), those without a college degree (40.2%),
and women (35.9%). In most cases, the spillover share is statistically significantly different
from zero at the 5 percent level. One exception is Black or Hispanic individuals, for whom
the estimated share of wage spillover is much smaller at 17.9% (s.e. 26.5%), which is less
than half of the 39.7% (s.e. 11.9%) spillover share for all workers. Although the difference
is not statistically significant, this finding nonetheless suggests that the wage gains at the
bottom may be more muted for some disadvantaged groups.29
    We also find a substantially smaller change in wages due to spillovers in the tradable
sector, though the estimates here are a bit imprecise. This highlights that wage affects are
small in the tradable sector and some of it might be possibly undone by clawbacks from
higher wage workers. The combination of this evidence and the disemployment effects suggest
that there may be more unintended consequences of minimum wages when the tradable sector
constitutes a more sizable share of the affected workforce.
    We also find a stark difference in the spillover shares of wage increases for incumbents
versus new entrants. Incumbents receive a larger total wage increase (9.5%) than the overall
workforce (6.8%), but the spillover share for incumbents and all workers is relatively similar
(42.2% and 39.7%, respectively). In contrast, the spillover share for entrants is -17.8%,
  29 The smaller spillover for Black/Hispanic workers is not due to sectoral or incumbency composition, which

are very similar to other workers (results not reported).


                                                     21
suggesting that essentially all of the wage increase received by new entrants is through the
creation of jobs at or very close to the new minimum. Larger spillovers for incumbents relative
to entrants can also be seen in Figure 4. Two points should be noted.
    First, the stark differences in the size and scope of spillovers for the incumbent and for
the new entrants are inconsistent with a simple measurement error process common to both
groups. This suggest that spillover effects found are likely to reflect real responses and not
measurement error in CPS-based wages, a possibility that is raised by Autor, Manning and
Smith (2016).30
    Second, since we find that essentially none of the wage spillovers accrue to workers who
were not employed prior to the minimum wage increase, it is unlikely that our estimates
of spillovers primarily reflect an increase in the value of the outside options or reservation
wages of non-employed workers (e.g. Flinn 2006). In contrast, the spillovers may reflect
relative-pay norms inside the firm. This is consistent with findings in Dube, Giuliano and
Leonard (2018), who study the wage adjustment using payroll data from a major retailer
following the 1996-1997 federal minimum wage increase and find that worker separations
respond to relative pay differences.


3.3       Event-specific estimates
So far, most of our evidence has come from averaging the effects across all 138 events. In this
section, we estimate treatment effects for each of the events separately, and assess how these
impacts vary when we consider minimum wage increases that are more binding.
    For this purpose, we create 138 data sets for each event h. The data sets include the
state of event j and all clean control states for 8 year panel by event time. Clean control
states are those that do not have any non-trivial state minimum wage increases in the 8 year
panel around event h; other states are dropped from data set h. We calculate event-specific
per-capita number of jobs in $1 wage bins relative to the minimum wage for each state-by-year.
Then, the regression equation is,

                                  4
                                                τ
                                                    + µskh + ρkth + Ωskth + uskth ,
                                  X
                       Yskth =           ατ kh Isth                                                       (4)
                                 τ =−3

where k indicates the k th dollar bin relative to the minimum wage. Then, Yskth is the
per-capita number of jobs in state s time t, and k th bin relative to the minimum wage in
data set h. The calculation of event-specific change in excess jobs above (∆ah ), change in
  30 Inthe Online Appendix B we implement our bunching approach using administrative data from Washing-
ton. In that data we find similar spillover effects which suggest that the spillovers are not primarily caused
by CPS-specific misreporting by survey respondents.


                                                     22
missing jobs below (∆bh ), and employment change (∆eh = ∆ah + ∆bh ) are similar to the ones
described in section 2.2. Ωjst controls for other primary, federal, and small events whose
5-year post-treatment periods take place within the data set h. It takes the value of 1 for all
post-treatment periods of these events.31
    Figure 5 panel (a) shows the non-parametric bin-scattered relationship between the event
by event estimates on missing jobs and the new minimum wage.32 To calculate the former
we use the ratio of the minimum wage to the median wage, also known as the Kaitz index
(e.g., Lee 1999, Dube 2014, Autor, Manning and Smith 2016, Manning 2016). When the
minimum wage is high relative to the median, it is expected to have a larger bite. Consistent
with that expectation, we find that events h with a higher minimum-to-median wage ratio
had substantially more missing jobs — the coefficient on Kaitzh is sizable and statistically
significant at -0.133 (s.e. 0.034). At the same time, when we consider excess jobs, we find that
the coefficient on Kaitzh has a very similar magnitude at 0.139 (s.e. 0.057). In other words,
when the minimum wage is high relative to the median, the events have a bigger bite and a
greater number of missing jobs below the new minimum, but also have a nearly equally sized
number of excess jobs at or above the new minimum. As a consequence, the employment
effect is virtually unchanged (slope = 0.006 (s.e. 0.048)) as we consider minimum wages that
range between 37% and 59% of the median wage, as shown in the bottom panel of Figure 5.
Overall, these findings suggest that that the level of the minimum wage increases in the U.S.
that we study have yet to reach a point where the employment effects become sizable.
  31 The  online Appendix Figure C.1 reports event-specific estimates for excess, missing jobs and overall
employment effect, along with (Ferman and Pinto, forthcoming) confidence intervals that are appropriate for
a single treated unit and heteroscedasticty. While there is considerable heterogeneity in the bite of the policy,
the distribution of employment estimates is consistent with the sharp null of zero effect everywhere: only
5.3% of estimates are statistically significant at the 5 percent level. In addition, the stacked event-by-event
estimates can be also used to estimate the average effect of the minimum wage across events. In Online
Appendix C we report estimates using that approach and show that estimates are very similar to our panel
regression based event study. This shows that issues about negative weighting using staggered treatments
(e.g., Abraham and Sun, 2018) are unlikely to be driving our results.
   32 We control for state-level unemployment rate at the time of the minimum wage increase, political

orientation of the state, urban share of the state, and the decade of the minimum wage increase. However,
the results are very similar if we leave out controls see Online Appendix Figure A.8.




                                                       23
4         Employment Changes along the Wage Distribution
in the Classic Two-Way Fixed Effect Regression on log
Minimum Wage
In the previous section, we estimated the impact of minimum wages on the wage distribution
using our event study specification. We found that the effect of the minimum wage was
concentrated at the bottom of the wage distribution, and reassuringly we found no indication
of considerable employment changes in the upper tail of the wage distribution (see Figure 2).
The lack of responses $4 above the minimum wage or higher also implies that the effect of
the minimum wage on aggregate employment is close to the estimated employment effect at
the bottom of the wage distribution. Such stability of upper-tail employment is consistent
with the observation that the share of workers affected by the minimum wage changes we
study is too small to affect upper tail employment to a noticeable degree.
    In this section, we estimate the effect of the minimum wage on employment throughout
the wage distribution using alternative identification strategies to illustrate the advantage
of the distributional approach in diagnosing research designs. Recent empirical literature
using the classic two-way fixed effect specification with log minimum wage (TWFE-logMW),
has found large aggregate disemployment effects in the U.S. context (see Meer and West
2016). We decompose the classic two-way fixed effects estimate of log minimum wage on
the state level employment-to-population rate. In Figure 6 we divide the total wage-earning
employment in the 1979-2016 Current Population Survey into inflation-adjusted $1-wage
bins by state and by year. Then, for each wage bin, we regress that wage bin’s employment
per capita on the contemporaneous, 4 annual lags, and 2 annual leads of log minimum
wage, along with state and time fixed effects.33 This distributed lags specification is similar
to those used in numerous papers (e.g., Meer and West 2016, Allegretto et al. 2017).34
The histogram bars show the average post-treatment effect divided by the sample average
employment-to-population rate,35 while the dashed purple line plots the running sum of the
  33 In the TWFE-logMW model, the point estimates for the leads and lags show the impact relative to the
employment in the 3rd year or earlier. Once we normalize the TWFE-logMW estimates to the first lead, we
can report 3 leads and 4 lags, similarly to our benchmark estimates.
  34 Meer and West (2016) present unweighted results on the total employment effect of the minimum wage.

Here we present estimates weighted by the population size as it is more standard in the literature and also
closer to our event study estimates. However, as we show in the Online Appendix Figure A.10, the unweighted
estimates are similar.
  35 We construct the cumulative response over event dates 0, 1, ..., 4 relative to event date -1 by successively

summing the coefficients for contemporaneous and lagged minimum wages. We then average the cumulative
responses over dates 0,1, ... , 4. This average post-treatment effect is analogous to what we did in our
event-based analysis in the previous sections.



                                                      24
employment effects of the minimum wage up to the particular wage bin. The final purple bar
represents the estimated effect on aggregate employment to population rate.
    Figure 6 panel (a) shows that, on average, minimum wage shocks are associated with
large employment changes in the real dollar bins in the $6 to $9/hour range. There is a sharp
decrease in employment in the $6/hour and $7/hour bins, likely representing a reduction
in jobs paying below new minimum wages; and a sharp rise in the number of jobs in the
$8/hour and $9/hour wage bins, likely representing jobs paying above the new minimum. At
the same time, the figure also shows consistent, negative employment effects of the minimum
wage for levels far above the minimum wage: indeed, the aggregate negative employment
elasticity (e.g. -0.137) accrues almost entirely in wage bins exceeding $15/hour.
    It strikes us as implausible that a minimum wage increase in the $8 to $9/hour range
causally leads to losses of jobs mostly at or above the median wage, even though the minimum
wage is binding far lower in the wage distribution. More plausibly, this suggests that the
specification is confounded by negative employment shocks to the upper part of the wage
distribution (possibly much earlier than the actual treatment dates), and these shocks are not
fully absorbed by the simple two-way fixed effect specifications estimated using a long panel.
For instance, as shown in Online Appendix F, the negative employment changes shown in
Figure 6 arise only for the Card and Krueger low probability group, which should not be
affected by the minimum wage. At the same time, the high and medium probability groups
exhibit no negative disemployment effect.
    How is it possible that our benchmark specification that focuses on employment changes
around the event window leads to such different results compared to the TWFE-logMW
specification? The differences in the estimates suggest that the negative employment changes
in upper part of the wage distribution in TWFE-logMW must come from outside of the
event window. Indeed, we find that the employment losses are driven by the 1980s expansion
and the 1990-91 recessions even though most of the minimum wage changes in our sample
occurred after 2000. When we restrict the regression to the 1992-2016 period—the period
where 86% (118/138) of all our events occurred—we indeed find very similar estimates across
the two specifications. Moreover, even if we limit our sample to the 39 states with no state
minimum wage increases until the late 1990s, the negative disemployment effects are driven
entirely by the inclusion of a period (1980s) long before any cross-state variation in treatment
occurred in these states (see Online Appendix Table F.3).
    We also find that the overall employment-to-population rate evolved very similarly between
the early 1990s and 2016 in high minimum wage states (those that instituted a minimum
exceeding the federal standard after the early 1990s) and low minimum wage states (where
the federal standard was always binding). This is noteworthy because the period between the


                                              25
early 1990s and 2016 is when much of the cross-sectional variation in minimum wages emerged.
Importantly, however, the employment-to-population rate had diverged between these two
groups of states during the 1980s, at least a decade before most high minimum wage states
started to raise their minimum wage. This creates a spurious correlation between employment
changes in the 1980s and minimum wage changes in the early 2000s that confounds the
TWFE-logMW specification, which is sensitive to shocks occurring long before the event
window. However, this does not affect our event study estimates, since these only consider
employment changes within the event window. This also explains why we do not find any
pre-existing trends in our event based analysis, while the TWFE-logMW in the full sample
exhibits sizable and statistically significant leads (see further details in Online Appendix F).36
    The above example illustrates that showing the effect of the minimum wage throughout
the wage distribution can provide additional falsification tests and therefore be an useful
tool for model selection. This type of model selection tool can be particularly helpful in the
context of minimum wages, where the literature has often grappled with figuring out the
“right” empirical model.


5     Discussion
We propose a novel approach that infers the employment effects of the minimum wage from
the change in the frequency distribution of wages. The key advantage of this approach is
that it allows us to assess the overall impact of the minimum wage on low-wage workers, who
are the primary target of minimum wage policies. We use an event study analysis exploiting
138 prominent minimum wage increases and provide a robust and comprehensive assessment
of how minimum wages affect the frequency distribution of wages. Second, we calculate the
number of missing jobs just below the minimum wage, the number of excess jobs at or slightly
above the minimum wage, and also the job changes in the upper tail of the wage distribution.
Our main estimates show that the number of excess jobs at and slightly above the minimum
wage closely matches the number of missing jobs just below the minimum wage, while we
find no evidence for employment changes at or more than $4 above the minimum wage. A
  36 Why   are the expansion in the 1980s and the downturn in the 1991-1992 recession related to future
minimum wage changes? Because the expansion and downturn were more pronounced for states that would
be more Democratic-leaning in the 2000s. One possibility is that the 1990-1991 recession was so severe in
some states that it changed the political landscape and opened the door for candidates supporting minimum
wages. However, another explanation is that the 1990-1991 recession just happened to be more pronounced
for Democratic-leaning states—states that would also be more inclined to raise the minimum wage starting
in the early 2000s following a long period of federal inaction. In Online Appendix F we show that this latter
explanation fits the data better. In particular, we show that the predictive power of the severity of recession
on future minimum wage increases disappears once we control for the partisan voting index (PVI) in the
2000s and instrument that variable with the PVI in 1988 (i.e., prior to the 1991-1992 recession).


                                                      26
similar pattern obtains for low-skilled workers, suggesting labor-labor substitution is unlikely
to be a factor in our setting. Moreover, we find that the level of the minimum wages that we
study—which range between 37% and 59% of the median wage—have yet to reach a point
where the job losses become sizable. However, the employment consequences of a minimum
wage that surpass the ones studied here remain an open question. Furthermore, if minimum
wage increases affect tradable sectors more, our findings suggest employment effects may be
more pronounced.
    A key advantage of tracking job changes throughout the wage distribution is that we can
transparently show the source of any disemployment effects. As a result, we can detect when
an empirical specification suggests an unrealistic impact on the shape of the wage distribution.
More importantly, the relationship between minimum wages and the wage distribution can
also be used to infer the structure of low-wage labor markets. While providing a unified
theoretical framework is beyond the scope of this paper, our empirical results on the wage
distribution together with the estimates on labor-labor substitution across demographic
groups and the heterogenous responses across sectors provide new empirical findings which
can be used to test and distinguish various theories of the low-wage labor market.




                                              27
References
Aaronson, Daniel and Eric French, “Product market evidence on the employment effects of
 the minimum wage,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25 (1), (2007), 167–200.

Abowd, John M, Francis Kramarz, Thomas Lemieux, and David N Margolis, “Minimum
 Wages and Youth Employment in France and the United States,” in “Youth Employment
 and Joblessness in Advanced Countries,” University of Chicago Press, (2000), pp. 427–472.

Abraham, Sarah and Liyang Sun, “Estimating dynamic treatment effects in event studies
 with heterogeneous treatment effects,” (2018).

Allegretto, Sylvia, Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich, and Ben Zipperer, “Credible research
  designs for minimum wage studies: A response to Neumark, Salas, and Wascher,” ILR
  Review, 70 (3), (2017), 559–592.

Autor, David H., Alan Manning, and Christopher L. Smith, “The Contribution of the
 minimum wage to U.S. wage inequality over three decades: a reassessment,” American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8 (1), (2016), 58-99.

Autor, David H, John J Donohue III, and Stewart J Schwab, “The costs of wrongful-discharge
  laws,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88 (2), (2006), 211–231.

Best, Michael Carlos and Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, “Optimal Income Taxation with Career
  Effects of Work Effort,” (2013). Working Paper.

Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina M. Baker, “Problems with Instrumental Vari-
  ables Estimation When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogeneous
  Explanatory Variable is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90 (430),
 (1995), 443–450.

Brochu, Pierre, David Green, Thomas Lemieux, and James Townsend, “The Minimum Wage,
  Turnover, and the Shape of the Wage Distribution,” (2017). Unpublished manuscript.

Brown, Kristine M, “The link between pensions and retirement timing: Lessons from California
  teachers,” Journal of Public Economics, 98 (2013), 1–14.

Card, David, “Using regional variation in wages to measure the effects of the federal minimum
  wage,” ILR Review, 46 (1), (1992), 22–37.




                                             28
   and Alan B. Krueger, “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the New
  Jersey and Pennsylvania Fast Food Industries,” American Economic Review, 84 (4), (1994),
  772-793.

  and , Myth and measurement: the new economics of the minimum wage, New Jersey:
  Princeton University Press, (1995).

Cengiz, Doruk, “Seeing Beyond the Trees: Using machine learning to estimate the impact of
  minimum wages on affected individuals,” (2018). Unpublished manuscript.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez, “Using Differences in Knowledge across
  Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings,” The American Economic
 Review, 103 (7), (2013), 2683–2721.

Clemens, Jeffrey and Michael Wither, “The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession:
  Evidence of Effects on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled Workers,”
  (2016). Unpublished manuscript.

Comte, Fabienne and Claire Lacour, “Data-driven density estimation in the presence of
  additive noise with unknown distribution,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series
 B (Statistical Methodology), 73 (4), (2011), 601–627.

Currie, Janet and Bruce C Fallick, “The Minimum Wage and the,” The Journal of Human
 Resources, 31 (2), (1996), 404–428.

den Berg, Gerard J Van and Geert Ridder, “An empirical equilibrium search model of the
  labor market,” Econometrica, (1998), 1183–1221.

Dickens, Richard, Stephen Machin, and Alan Manning, “Estimating the effect of minimum
  wages on employment from the distribution of wages: A critical view,” Labour Economics,
  5 (2), (1998), 109 - 134.

DiNardo, John, Nicole M Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, “Labor Market Institutions and the
  Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach,” Econometrica, 64 (5),
 (1996), 1001–1044.

Dube, Arindrajit, “Designing thoughtful minimum wage policy at the state and local levels.
 The Hamilton Project,” (2014).

  , Laura Giuliano, and Jonathan Leonard, “Fairness and frictions: the impact of unequal
  raises on quit behavior,” American Economic Review, (2018).


                                             29
  , T. William Lester, and Michael Reich, “Minimum wage effects across state borders:
  estimates using contiguous counties,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92 (4),
  November (2010), 945-964.

Engbom, Niklas and Christian Moser, “Earnings inequality and the minimum wage: Evidence
  from Brazil,” (2017). Unpublished manuscript.

Fairris, David and Leon Fernandez Bujanda, “The dissipation of minimum wage gains for
  workers through labor-labor substitution: evidence from the Los Angeles living wage
  ordinance,” Southern Economic Journal, (2008), 473–496.

Ferman, Bruno and Cristine Pinto, “Inference in differences-in-differences with few treated
  groups and heteroskedasticity,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, (forthcoming).

Flinn, Christopher J, “Minimum wage effects on labor market outcomes under search,
  matching, and endogenous contact rates,” Econometrica, 74 (4), (2006), 1013–1062.

  , The minimum wage and labor market outcomes, MIT press, (2011).

Giuliano, Laura, “Minimum wage effects on employment, substitution, and the teenage
  labor supply: Evidence from personnel data,” Journal of Labor Economics, 31 (1), (2013),
  155–194.

Harasztosi, Péter and Attila Lindner, “Who pays for the minimum wage?,” Mimeo. (2016).

Hirsch, Barry T and Edward J Schumacher, “Match bias in wage gap estimates due to
  earnings imputation,” Journal of Labor Economics, 22 (3), (2004), 689–722.

Horton, John J, “Price floors and employer preferences: Evidence from a minimum wage
 experiment,” (2018).

Katz, Lawrence F and Alan B Krueger, “The effect of the minimum wage on the fast-food
 industry,” ILR Review, 46 (1), (1992), 6–21.

  and Kevin M Murphy, “Changes in relative wages, 1963–1987: supply and demand factors,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (1), (1992), 35–78.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, “Bunching,” Annual Review of Economics, 8 (2016), 435–464.

Lee, David S, “Wage inequality in the United States during the 1980s: Rising dispersion or
  falling minimum wage?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (3), (1999), 977–1023.

Lester, Richard A, The Economics of Labor, 2 ed., New York: Macmillan, (1964).

                                            30
Madrian, Brigitte C and Lars John Lefgren, “An approach to longitudinally matching Current
 Population Survey (CPS) respondents,” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 26
 (1), (2000), 31–62.

Manning, Alan, “The elusive employment effect of the minimum wage,” (2016). Unpublished
 manuscript.

Meer, Jonathan and Jeremy West, “Effects of the minimum wage on employment dynamics,”
 Journal of Human Resources, 51 (2), (2016), 500-522.

Meyer, Robert H and David A Wise, “The Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Employment
 and Earnings of Youth,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1 (1), (1983), 66–100.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, “What explains the 2007–2009 drop in employment?,” Econometrica,
 82 (6), (2014), 2197–2223.

Neumark, David and William L. Wascher, Minimum wages, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
 (2008).

   and William Wascher, “Employment effects of minimum and subminimum wages: panel
  data on state minimum wage laws,” ILR Review, 46 (1), (1992), 55–81.

  , JM Ian Salas, and William Wascher, “Revisiting the Minimum Wage-Employment Debate:
  Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?,” ILR Review, 67 (3_suppl), (2014), 608–648.

Saez, Emmanuel, “Do taxpayers bunch at kink points?,” American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 2 (3), (2010), 180-212.

Solon, Gary, Steven J Haider, and Jeffrey M Wooldridge, “What are we weighting for?,”
  Journal of Human resources, 50 (2), (2015), 301–316.

Vaghul, Kavya and Ben Zipperer, “Historical state and sub-state minimum wage data,”
 Washington Center for Equitable Growth Working Paper, (2016).

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M, Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data, MIT press,
 (2010).

Wursten, Jesse, “The Employment Elasticity of the Minimum Wage: Is It Just Politics after
 All?,” (2017).




                                           31
                       Figure 1: An Illustration of the Bunching Approach
               !
               !
                       !
      Number'of'       !
      Workers'         !
      !                !                  Excess!
                       !                                                                !
                                          jobs!!
                       !                  above!
               !                          ($&)!
               !                          !                $'( = $& + $%!!
               !                                           !
               !
               !           Missing!
               !           jobs!
               !           below!
               !           ($%)!
               !           !
               !
               !
               !
                                                       !
                 !                    !"!        #!
                                                 "                                           Wage'
                 !
Notes: The figure! shows the effect of the minimum wage on the frequency distribution of hourly wages. The
                 ! the wage distribution before, and the blue solid line after the introduction of the minimum
red solid line shows
                 !
wage. Since compliance  is less than perfect, some earners are uncovered and the post-event distribution starts
before the minimum wage. For other workers, shown by the red shaded area between origin and MW (∆b),
introduction of minimum wage may increase their wages, or those jobs may be destroyed. The former group
creates the “excess jobs above” (∆a), shown by the blue shaded area between M W and W , the upper limit
for any effect of minimum wage on the earnings distribution. The overall change in employment due to the
minimum wage (∆e) is the sum of the two areas (∆a + ∆b).




                                                      32
                                                                Figure 2: Impact of Minimum Wages on the the Wage Distribution
                                                                           .02




                                                                                                                                    ∆a = 0.021 (0.003)
                                                                                                                                   ∆b = -0.018 (0.004)
           Difference between actual and counterfactual employment count




                                                                                                                %∆ affected employment = 0.028 (0.029)
                                                                                                                      %∆ affected wage = 0.068 (0.010)
                    relative to the pre-treatment total employment

                                                                           .01
                                                                           0
                                                                           -.01
                                                                           -.02




                                                                                  -4   -2   0    2     4        6    8     10       12   14   16 17+

                                                                                                Wage bins in $ relative to new MW

Notes: The figure shows the main results from our event study analysis (see equation 1) exploiting 138
state-level minimum wage changes between 1979-2016. The blue bars show for each dollar bin (relative to the
minimum wage) the estimated average employment changes in that bin during the 5-year post-treatment
relative to the total employment in the state one year before the treatment. The error bars show the 95%
confidence interval using standard errors that are clustered at the state level shown using the error bar. The
red line shows the running sum of employment changes up to the wage bin it corresponds to.




                                                                                                           33
      Figure 3: Impact of Minimum Wages on the Missing and Excess Jobs Over Time
                                                                                   .04
          Excess and missing jobs relative to the pre-treatment total employment


                                                                                   .02
                                                                                   0
                                                                                   -.02
                                                                                   -.04




                                                                                          -3   -2       -1           0         1       2        3   4
                                                                                                    Years Relative to the Minimum Wage Change

Notes: The figure shows the main results from our event study analysis (see equation 1) exploiting 138
state-level minimum wage changes between 1979-2016. The figure shows the effect of a minimum wage
increase on the missing jobs below the new minimum wage (blue line) and on the excess jobs at and slightly
above it (red line) over time. The blue line shows the evolution of the number of jobs (relative to the total
employment 1 year before the treatment) between $4 below the new minimum wage and the new minimum
wage (∆b); and the red lines show the number of jobs between the new minimum wage and $5 above it (∆a).
We also show the 95% confidence interval based on standard errors that are clustered at the state level.




                                                                                                                  34
Figure 4: Impact of Minimum Wages on the Wage Distribution by Pre-Treatment Employment
Status: New Entrants and Incumbents




                       Difference between actual and counterfactual new entrant employment count


                                                                                                   .012
                                                                                                                                                              ∆a = 0.006 (0.001)
                                                                                                                                                             ∆b = -0.005 (0.001)
                                                                                                                                          %∆ affected employment = 0.008 (0.034)
                                                                                                                                                %∆ affected wage = 0.019 (0.013)




                                                                                                   .008
                                      relative to the pre-treatment total employment

                                                                                                   .004
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   -.004
                                                                                                   -.008
                                                                                                   -.012




                                                                                                           -4   -2   0     2     4        6    8     10       12   14   16 17+

                                                                                                                          Wage bins in $ relative to new MW


                                                                                                                         (a) New entrants
                       Difference between actual and counterfactual incumbent employment count


                                                                                                   .012




                                                                                                                                                              ∆a = 0.014 (0.002)
                                                                                                                                                             ∆b = -0.013 (0.002)
                                                                                                                                          %∆ affected employment = 0.009 (0.068)
                                                                                                                                                %∆ affected wage = 0.095 (0.020)
                                                                                                   .008
                                     relative to the pre-treatment total employment

                                                                                                   .004
                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   -.004
                                                                                                   -.008
                                                                                                   -.012




                                                                                                           -4   -2   0     2     4        6    8     10       12   14   16 17+

                                                                                                                          Wage bins in $ relative to new MW


                                                                                                                         (a) Incumbents
Notes: The figure shows the main results for new entrants (panel a) and for incumbents (panel b) from our
event study analysis (see equation 1) exploiting 138 state-level minimum wage changes between 1979-2016.
The blue bars show for each dollar bin the estimated change in the number of new entrants in that bin 1-year
post-treatment relative to the total employment of the new entrants 1 year before the treatment. The green
bars show the equivalent for incumbents. Incumbent workers were employed a year prior to the minimum
wage increase, whereas new entrants were not. The error bars show the 95% confidence interval calculated
using standard errors that are clustered at the state level. The green and blue lines show the running sum of
employment changes up to the wage bin they correspond to for new entrants and incumbents, respectively.
The figures highlight that the ripple effect of the minimum wage mainly comes from incumbent workers.



                                                                                                                                     35
Figure 5: Relationship between Excess Jobs, Missing Jobs, Employment Change and the
Minimum-to-Median Wage Ratio Across Events




                                                                                          -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04
                                                                                                                                              Excess jobs, slope = 0.139 (0.057)




                        Change in employment relative to pre-treatment total employment




                                                                                                                                             Missing jobs, slope = -0.133 (0.034)
                                                                                                                                             0.40                    0.45                 0.50   0.55
                                                                                                                                                                 Minimum-to-median wage ratio


                                                                                                                                                    (a) Missing and excess jobs
                                                                                          -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04
                        Change in employment relative to pre-treatment total employment




                                                                                                                                             Emp. change, slope = 0.006 (0.048)




                                                                                                                                             0.40                    0.45                 0.50   0.55
                                                                                                                                                                 Minimum-to-median wage ratio




                                                                                                                                                      (b) Employment change

Notes: The figure shows the binned scatter plots for missing jobs, excess jobs, and total employment changes
by value of the minimum-to-median wage ratio (Kaitz index) for the 130 event-specific estimates. The 130
events exclude 8 minimum wage raising events in the District of Columbia, since individual treatment effects
are very noisily estimated for those events. The minimum-to-median wage ratio is the new minimum wage
M W divided by the median wage at the time of the minimum wage increase (Kaitz index). The bin-scatters
and linear fits control for decade dummies, state-specific unemployment rate at the time of the minimum
wage increase, the urban share of the state’s population, and an indicator for being a Republican-leaning
state. Estimates are weighted by thestate populations. The slope (and robust standard error in parentheses)
is from the weighted linear fit of the outcome on the minimum-to-median wage ratio.


                                                                                                                                                                          36
Figure 6: Impact on Employment throughout the Wage Distribution in the Two-Way Fixed
Effects Model on log Minimum Wages .1
                                   .05
               Employment elasticity
                                   0
                                   -.05
                                   -.1




                                          Employment elas. = -0.089 (0.025)
                                   -.15




                                                   $5        $10        $15        $20   $25   >$30   Total
                                                                               Wage

Notes: The figure shows the effect of the minimum wage on the wage distribution in fixed effects (TWFE-
logMW) specification. We estimate two-way (state and year) fixed effects regressions on the contemporaneous
log minimum wage, as well as on 4 annual lags and 2 annual leads. For each wage bin we run a separate
regression, where the outcome is the number of jobs per capita in that state-wage bin. The cumulative
response for each event date 0, 1,...,4 is formed by successively adding the coefficients for the contemporaneous
and lagged log minimum wages. The green histogram bars show the mean of these cumulative responses for
event dates 0, 1,...,4, divided by the sample average employment-to-population rate —and represents the
average elasticity of employment in each wage bin with respect to the minimum wage in the post-treatment
period. The 95% confidence intervals around the point estimates are calculated using clustered standard
errors at the state level. The dashed purple line plots the running sum of the employment effects of the
minimum wage up until the particular wage bin. The rightmost purple bar is the elasticity of the overall state
employment-to-population with respect to minimum wage, obtained from regressions where the outcome
variable is the state level employment-to-population rate. In the bottom left corner we also report the point
estimate on this elasticity with standard errors that are clustered at the state level. Regressions are weighted
by state population. The figure highlights that large aggregate disemployment effects are often driven by
shifts in employment at the upper tail of the wage distribution.




                                                                              37
                Table 1: Impact of Minimum Wages on Employment and Wages
                                              (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)
Missing jobs below new MW (∆b)             -0.018***    -0.018***    -0.018***     -0.016***    -0.016***     -0.015***
                                             (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)
Excess jobs above new MW (∆a)               0.021***    0.018***     0.020***       0.016***     0.014***     0.015***
                                             (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.003)

%∆ affected wages                          0.068***     0.057***      0.068***     0.049***      0.043***     0.050***      0.065***
                                            (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.012)      (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.010)
%∆ affected employment                       0.028        0.000         0.022        -0.002        -0.019       -0.000        0.027
                                            (0.029)      (0.023)       (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.023)       (0.028)

Employment elasticity w.r.t. MW              0.024        0.000         0.019        -0.001        -0.016       -0.000       0.023
                                            (0.025)      (0.020)       (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.018)      (0.019)      (0.024)
Emp. elasticity w.r.t. affected wage         0.411        0.006         0.326        -0.032        -0.449       -0.003       0.410
                                            (0.430)      (0.402)       (0.313)      (0.439)       (0.574)      (0.455)      (0.421)

Jobs below new MW (b–1 )                     0.086        0.086        0.086         0.086        0.086         0.086        0.086
%∆ MW                                        0.101        0.101        0.101         0.101        0.101         0.101        0.101
Number of events                              138          138          138           138          138           138          138
Number of observations                      847,314      847,314      847,314       847,314      847,314       847,314       14,484
Number of workers in the sample            4,694,104    4,694,104    4,694,104     4,694,104    4,694,104     4,694,104    4,694,104

Controls
Bin-state FE                                   Y            Y             Y            Y             Y            Y
Bin-period FE                                  Y            Y             Y            Y             Y            Y
Bin-state linear trends                                     Y             Y                          Y            Y
Bin-state quadratic trends                                                Y                                       Y
Bin-division-period FE                                                                 Y             Y            Y
State FE                                                                                                                          Y
Year FE                                                                                                                           Y

Notes. The table reports the effects of a minimum wage increase based on the event study analysis (see equation 1) exploiting
138 state-level minimum wage changes between 1979 and 2016. The table reports five year averaged post-treatment estimates on
missing jobs up to $4 below the new minimum wage, excess jobs at and up to $5 above it, employment and wages. Column (1)
shows the benchmark specification while Columns (2)-(6) explore robustness to bin-state time trends and bin-division-period fixed
effects. Column (7) reports the simpler methodology estimates where we calculate changes in affected wage and employment by
using state-by-quarter data, where the outcomes are the number of jobs or total wage bill under $15 per hour. Regressions are
weighted by state-quarter aggregated population. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state. Significance levels
are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
Line-by-line description.The first two rows report the change in number of missing jobs below the new minimum wage (∆b), and
excess jobs above the new minimum wage (∆a) relative to the pre-treatment total employment. The third row, the percentage change
in average wages in the affected bins, (%∆W), is calculated using equation 2 in Section 2.2. The fourth row, percentage change in
employment in the affected bins is calculated by dividing change in employment by jobs below the new minimum wage ( ∆a+∆b
                                                                                                                      b̄
                                                                                                                           ). The
                                                                                                                             −1
                                                                                         ∆a+∆b
 fifth row, employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage is calculated as %∆M      W whereas the sixth row, employment
                                                1 ∆a+∆b
 elasticity with respect to the wage, reports %∆W    b̄−1
                                                          . The  line on the number of observations shows the number of quarter-bin
 cells used for estimation, while the number of workers refers to the underlying CPS sample used to calculate job counts in these cells.




                                                             38
                 Table 2: Impact of Minimum Minimum Wages on Employment and Wages by Demographic Groups
                                                  (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)
     Missing jobs below new MW (∆b)            -0.065***      -0.032***       -0.114***       -0.023***      -0.028***       -0.094***       -0.020***      -0.004***
                                                 (0.010)       (0.007)         (0.010)          (0.005)        (0.008)         (0.010)         (0.005)       (0.001)
     Excess jobs above new MW (∆a)              0.075***      0.038***        0.127***         0.026***       0.028***        0.100***        0.021***      0.004***
                                                 (0.011)       (0.006)         (0.020)          (0.004)        (0.006)         (0.012)         (0.003)       (0.001)

     %∆ affected wages                         0.080***        0.076***       0.083***        0.072***        0.044***       0.073***        0.051***         0.060*
                                                (0.014)         (0.014)        (0.018)         (0.011)         (0.012)        (0.011)         (0.013)         (0.032)
     %∆ affected employment                      0.038           0.043          0.030           0.025           -0.004         0.015           0.015           0.011
                                                (0.024)         (0.030)        (0.032)         (0.027)         (0.044)        (0.018)         (0.048)         (0.055)

     Employment elasticity w.r.t. MW             0.097           0.061          0.125           0.025           -0.005         0.052           0.016           0.003
                                                (0.061)         (0.042)        (0.134)         (0.027)         (0.058)        (0.062)         (0.049)         (0.014)
     Emp. elasticity w.r.t. affected wage       0.475*           0.570          0.356           0.343           -0.086         0.206           0.304           0.184
                                                (0.268)         (0.386)        (0.317)         (0.362)         (1.005)        (0.233)         (0.904)         (0.841)

     Jobs below new MW (b–1 )                    0.264          0.145           0.432           0.102          0.133           0.358           0.104           0.027
     %∆ MW                                       0.103          0.103           0.102           0.101          0.100           0.103           0.103           0.103
39




     Number of events                             138            138             138             138            138             138             138             138
     Number of observations                     847,314        847,314         847,314         847,314        846,729         847,314         847,314         847,314
     Number of workers in the sample            660,771       2,248,711        287,484        2,277,624       781,003         469,226        1,830,393       2,349,485

                                               Less than     High school                                      Black or         High          Medium            Low
     Sample                                                                     Teen           Women
                                              high school      or less                                        Hispanic      probability     probability     probability

     Notes. The table reports effects of a minimum wage increase by demographic groups based on the event study analysis (see equation 1) exploiting 138 state-level
     minimum wage changes between 1979 and 2016. The table reports five year averaged post-treatment estimates on missing jobs up to $4 below the new minimum wage,
     excess jobs at and up to $5 above it, employment and wages for individuals without a high school degree (Column 1), for individuals with high school degree or less
     schooling (Column 2), for teens (Column 3), for women (Column 4), for black or Hispanic workers (Column 5). Columns (6)-(8) report the results for groups of workers
     with differential probability of being exposed to the minimum wage changes. We use the Card and Krueger (1995) demographic predictors to estimate the probability of
     being exposed (see the text for details). Column 6 shows the results for the workers who have a high probability of being exposed to the minimum wage increase,
     Column (7) for the middle probability group, and Column (8) for the low probability group. All specifications include wage bin-by-state and wage bin-by period fixed
     effects. Regressions are weighted by state-quarter aggregated population of the demographic groups. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state;
     significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.5, *** 0.01.
     Line-by-line description.The first two rows report the change in number of missing jobs below the new minimum wage (∆b), and excess jobs above the new minimum
     wage (∆a) relative to the pre-treatment total employment. The third row, the percentage change in average wages in the affected bins, (%∆W), is calculated using
     equation 2 in Section 2.2. The fourth row, percentage change in employment in the affected bins is calculated by dividing change in employment by jobs below the new
     minimum wage ( ∆a+∆b
                        b̄
                                                                                                                        ∆a+∆b
                            ). The fifth row, employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage is calculated as %∆M   W whereas the sixth row, employment elasticity
                       −1
                                        1 ∆a+∆b
     with respect to the wage, reports %∆W  b̄−1
                                                 . The line on the number of observations shows the number of quarter-bin cells used for estimation, while the number of
     workers refers to the underlying CPS sample used to calculate job counts in these cells.
               Table 3: Impact of Minimum Minimum Wages on Employment and Wages by Sectors (1992-2016)
                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)             (8)
     Missing jobs below new MW (∆b)           -0.019***     -0.016*      -0.066***         -0.003       -0.011***     -0.101***      -0.033***       -0.017**
                                                (0.004)     (0.008)       (0.007)         (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.015)       (0.003)         (0.008)
     Excess jobs above new MW (∆a)             0.020***      0.011       0.072***           0.005       0.011***       0.101***      0.041***          0.011
                                                (0.003)     (0.008)       (0.011)         (0.006)        (0.002)        (0.015)       (0.010)         (0.009)

     %∆ affected wages                        0.058***       0.058       0.056***          0.097        0.056***       0.049***      0.060***          0.073
                                               (0.011)      (0.073)       (0.014)         (0.086)        (0.013)        (0.012)       (0.021)         (0.078)
     %∆ affected employment                     0.008        -0.111        0.022           0.051          0.009          -0.001        0.062           -0.101
                                               (0.031)      (0.136)       (0.037)         (0.163)        (0.044)        (0.026)       (0.080)         (0.145)

     Employment elasticity w.r.t. MW            0.007        -0.056        0.060           0.019          0.005          -0.002        0.086           -0.052
                                               (0.027)      (0.069)       (0.103)         (0.059)        (0.026)        (0.117)       (0.111)         (0.074)
     Emp. elasticity w.r.t. affected wage       0.140        -1.910        0.387           0.530          0.166          -0.011        1.040           -1.385
                                               (0.523)      (3.922)       (0.597)         (1.311)        (0.763)        (0.542)       (1.058)         (2.956)
40




     Jobs below new MW (b–1 )                   0.087       0.050          0.270           0.036          0.057          0.434         0.136           0.050
     %∆ MW                                      0.098       0.098          0.098           0.098          0.098          0.098         0.098           0.098
     Number of events                            118         118            118             118            118            118           118             118
     Number of observations                    554,931     554,931        554,931         554,931        554,931        554,931       554,931         554,931
     Number of workers in the sample          2,652,792    358,086        384,498         274,812       1,504,643       156,634       315,397         349,749

     Sector:                                   Overall     Tradable    Nontradable     Construction       Other      Restaurants       Retail     Manufacturing

     Notes. The table reports the effects of a minimum wage increase by industries based on the event study analysis (see equation 1) exploiting 118 state-level
     minimum wage changes between 1992 and 2016. The table reports five year averaged post-treatment estimates on missing jobs up to $4 below the new minimum
     wage, excess jobs at and up to $5 above it, employment and wages for all sectors (Column 1), tradable sectors (Column 2), non-tradable sectors (Column 3),
     construction (Column 4), other sectors (Column 5), restaurants (Column 6), retail (Column 7), and manufacturing industries (Column 8). Our classification
     of tradable, non-tradable, construction and other sectors follows Mian and Sufi (2014) (see Online Appendix D for the details). Regressions are weighted by
     state-quarter aggregated population. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state; significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
     Line-by-line description.The first two rows report the change in number of missing jobs below the new minimum wage (∆b), and excess jobs above the new
     minimum wage (∆a) relative to the pre-treatment total employment. The third row, the percentage change in average wages in the affected bins, (%∆W), is
     calculated using equation 2 in Section 2.2. The fourth row, percentage change in employment in the affected bins is calculated by dividing change in employment
     by jobs below the new minimum wage ( ∆a+∆b b̄
                                                    ). The fifth row, employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage is calculated as %∆M ∆a+∆b
                                                                                                                                                      W whereas the
                                                −1
                                                                            1 ∆a+∆b
      sixth row, employment elasticity with respect to the wage, reports %∆W    b̄−1
                                                                                     . The line on the number of observations shows the number of quarter-bin cells
      used for estimation, while the number of workers refers to the underlying CPS sample used to calculate job counts in these cells.
                      Table 4: The Size of the Wage Spillovers
                               %∆ affected wage           Spillover share of wage increase
                                                                 %∆w–%∆wNo spillover
                            %∆w        %∆wNo spillover                    %∆w
Overall                   0.068***        0.041***                     0.397***
                           (0.010)         (0.009)                      (0.119)


Less than high school     0.077***        0.048***                     0.370***
                           (0.013)         (0.009)                      (0.078)
Teen                      0.081***        0.053***                     0.347***
                           (0.015)         (0.007)                      (0.059)
High school or less       0.073***        0.043***                     0.402***
                           (0.013)         (0.011)                      (0.100)
Women                     0.070***        0.045***                     0.359***
                           (0.011)         (0.010)                      (0.120)
Black or Hispanic         0.045***        0.037***                       0.179
                           (0.012)         (0.010)                      (0.265)


Tradable                    0.058          0.065**                       -0.114
                           (0.073)         (0.028)                      (1.157)
Non-tradable              0.056***        0.043***                        0.237
                           (0.014)         (0.006)                      (0.191)


Incumbent                 0.095***        0.055***                      0.422**
                           (0.020)         (0.011)                      (0.181)
New entrant                 0.019         0.023***                       -0.178
                           (0.013)         (0.006)                      (0.748)


Notes. The table reports the effects of a minimum wage increase on wages based on the event
study analysis (see equation 1) exploiting 138 state-level minimum wage changes between
1979 and 2016. The table reports the percentage change in affected wages with (Column
1) and without (Column 2) taking spillovers into account for all workers, workers without
a high school degree, teens, individuals with high school or less schooling, women, black or
Hispanic workers, in tradable industries, in non-tradable industries, those who were employed
1 year before the minimum wage increase (incumbents); and those who did not have a job 1
year before (new-entrants). The first column is the estimated change in the affected wages
calculated according to the equation 2 in Section 2.2, and the second column assumes no
spillovers (see equation 3 in Section 3.2). In the last column, the spill-over share of the wage
effect is calculated by subtracting 1 from the ratio of the estimates in the second to the first
column. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state; significance levels are *
0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.




                                             41
Online Appendix A
Additional Figures and Tables
Figure A.1 shows all minimum wage increases between 1979 and 2016. We use the time series
of state-level minimum wage changes from Vaghul and Zipperer (2016). Blue circles show the
minimum wage events that are used in the event study analysis. The light orange triangles
represent small minimum wage changes that we do not analyze (but control for). For these
changes, the minimum wage increased either by less than $0.25 (the size of our wage bins) or
by less than 2 percent of the workforce earned between the new and the old minimum wage.
Finally, the green circles indicate federal changes, which we also exclude from our primary
sample of treatments because the change in missing number of jobs, ∆b, is identified only
from time-series variation for these events as there are no “control states” with wage floors
lower than the new minimum wage. The figure highlights that around 70% (99/138) of the
minimum wage changes in our sample occurred after 2000.
    Some wages in the CPS are imputed. In most of our analysis we use only non-imputed
wages. This might be of concern if the imputation rate changes in response to the minimum
wage, or is correlated with minimum wage changes for some other reason. Figure A.2 shows
event study estimates where the outcome is the state-level imputation rate. The figure shows
that minimum wage events studied here have no apparent effect on the imputation rate.
    Our definition of "overall employment" does not include self-employed workers, who are
not covered by the minimum wage. (Note that QCEW does not include self-employed either).
The exclusion of self-employed can be problematic if minimum wages shift employees to
self-employment. Figure A.3 (“Impact of Minimum Wages on the Self- Employment”) shows
that the self-employment rate (i.e., self employed workers divided by wage and salary plus
self-employed workers) is not affected by the minimum wage. This confirms that there is not
any shift to self-employment induced by the minimum wage.
    Figure A.4 plots the evolution of wage and total employment change for affected workers
over annualized event time using our baseline specification with wage-bin-period and wage-
bin-state fixed effects. The upper graph in Figure A.4 illustrates the clear, statistically
significant rise in the average wage of affected workers at date zero, which persists over the
five year post-intervention period. In contrast, the lower panel in Figure A.4 shows that there
is no corresponding change in employment over the five years following treatment. Moreover,
employment changes were similarly small during the three years prior to treatment.
    Figure A.5 shows the effect of the minimum wage on the wage distribution when we take
into account that sometimes minimum wage increases are phased in over multiple events. In
65% of the cases we study, a primary minimum wage increase is followed by a secondary one
within 5 years, on average at $0.56 above the minimum for the primary event. In contrast
to the main results of the paper, where we show the partial effect of each event, here we
show the cumulative effect of both primary and secondary events by taking into account
the incidence and size of secondary increases averaged across our sample of events. The
cumulative effect of primary and secondary events on missing jobs is 2.5%, which is larger
than the partial effect of the primary events, which is 1.8% (see Figure 2). Therefore, the
presence of multiple events can explain some of the difference between the jobs below the
new minimum wage—which is around 8.6%—and the missing jobs below the new minimum


                                              42
wage—which is around 1.8%— in the main analysis.
    Figure A.6 compares our main estimates of own wage elasticity of employment to the
estimates in the previous literature. The estimates from the previous literature are obtained
from Harasztosi and Lindner (2016), using studies that reported both employment and wage
estimates. We report the benchmark estimates from Column 1 in Table 1 and the Card
and Krueger high probability groups from Column 6 in Table 2. The dashed line shows the
lower bound estimates of our benchmark specification. The Figure A.6 points out that our
benchmark estimates can rule out 7 out of 11 negative estimates in the literature. When we
additionally focus on the Card and Krueger high-probability group, our estimates rule out 8
of those 11 negative estimates.
    Panel (a) in Figure A.7 plots the relationship between missing jobs below (multiplied by
-1) and the excess jobs above the new minimum wage for the various subgroups in Table 2.
While there is large variation in the missing jobs across various demographic groups, they
are matched closely by excess jobs above the new minimum wage. The dashed line is the
45-degree line and depicts the locus of points where the missing and excess jobs are equal
in magnitude (∆a = −∆b). In all cases, except for the black or Hispanic group, the excess
jobs are larger than the missing jobs indicating a positive albeit statistically insignificant
employment effect. For black or Hispanic individuals, the difference between excess and
missing jobs is negligible.
    Panel (b) in Figure A.7 plots the relationship between missing jobs below (multiplied by -1)
and the excess jobs above the new minimum wage for fully partitioned education-age groups.
We use 4 education categories and 6 age categories, yielding a total of 23 education-by-age
groups.37 For each of these 23 groups, we separately estimate a regression using our baseline
specification, and calculate changes in missing (∆bg ) and excess jobs (∆ag ) for each of them.
Each grey circle represents one age-education group, while the blue squares show the binned
scatterplot. We also report the linear fit (red line) and the 45-degree (dashed) line that depicts
the locus of points where the missing and excess jobs are equal in magnitude (∆a = −∆b).
The figure can be used to assess labor-labor substitution across various demographic groups.
If there is no employment effect in any of the groups, the slope coefficient µ1 from regressing
∆ag = µ0 + µ1 × (−∆bg ) should be close to one; under this scenario, differences across groups
in the number of excess jobs at or above the minimum wage exactly mirrors the difference
in the number of missing jobs below. In contrast, if employment declines are more severe
for lower skilled groups—for whom the bite (-∆b) is expected to be bigger—then we should
expect the slope to be less than one, especially for larger values of −∆b. As shown in in Figure
A.7, the slope of the fitted line is very close to one, with µ̂1 = 1.070 (s.e. 0.075). The binned
scatter plot shows that there is little indication of a more negative slope at higher values
of −∆b. While some specific groups (e.g., individuals with less than high school education
between 30 and 40 years of age) are above the 45 degree line, others (e.g., individuals with
less than high school education between 40 and 50 years of age) are below the line. Overall,
these findings provide little evidence of heterogeneity in the employment effect by skill level.
    Figure A.8 shows the event-by-event relationship between missing jobs, excess jobs,
  37 Education categories are less than high school, high school graduate, some college and college graduate.
Age categories are teens, [20, 30), [30, 40), [40, 50), [50, 60), and 60 and above. We exclude teens with college
degrees from the sample.



                                                      43
employment change and the minimum to median wage (Kaitz index). We plot the bin-
scattered non-parametric relationship without controlling for other characteristics of the
event. The figure is very similar to our benchmark estimates in Figure 5 where we do control
for observable characteristics including urban share, decade dummies and whether the state
leans Republican.
    Figure A.9 shows the event-by-event relationship between the change in employment and
the minimum to median wage ratio (the Kaitz index). Here we show the raw (and not binned)
scatter plots, where each dot represents one of the 138 events studied in the event study. The
red circles show the 8 minimum wage changes in Washington DC, while the green circles
show the remaining 130 events. The figure highlights that events from Washington DC are
often outliers, which is not surprising given that the Washington DC sample sizes are very
small in the CPS. To alleviate the influence of outliers when comparing across events, we
decided to drop Washington DC from our event-by-event analysis in Figure 5 and in Figure
A.8. However we keep those events in the rest of the paper where we report the event study
estimates.
    Figure A.10 shows the impact of minimum wages on the wage distribution in weighted
and unweighted TWFE-logMW specifications. Panel (a) reports Figure 6 from the main text
estimated using (level) fixed effects. Panel (b) reports the unweighted version of Figure 6.
The use of weights has a modest impact on the results.
    Obtaining a meaningful “first stage” effect of the minimum wage on average wages is
essential for interpreting the estimated employment effects of the minimum wage. Table
A.1 compares the t-statistics obtained from estimates of wage elasticities using the preferred
bunching estimator, which infers the wage changes from the bin by bin estimates from
equation 1, and the estimator that runs equation 1 at the state-level and uses log of average
state level wage as the outcome variable. Both sets of estimates use the paper’s same
underlying 138 events for the minimum wage increases. In nearly every demographic group,
the bunching estimator’s wage effects are much more precisely estimated and the aggregated
estimator’s wage effects are often not distinguishable from zero at conventional levels of
statistical significance. For all workers, the t-statistic for the bunching estimator is 12 times
as large as the t-statistic from the aggregated estimator. Only in the smaller subgroup of
teens does the aggregated estimator’s precision modestly outperform that of the bunching
estimator. In almost all cases, the bunching estimator is able to estimate a wage effect
statistically different from zero at the 1 percent level of significance. The only exception is
for the low probability CK group, in which the bunching estimator estimates a positive wage
effect statistically distinguishable from zero at the 5 percent level, and where the aggregated
estimator obtains a negative and highly imprecise wage effect estimate.
    The bunching method infers job losses from employment changes around the minimum
wage. This has a potential advantage even in the absence of large upper tail employment
changes: filtering out random shocks to jobs in the upper part of the wage distribution can
improve precision of the estimates. Table A.2 compares the point estimates and standard
errors of the bunching estimator and an estimator that uses equation 1 at the state-level, and
specified group’s aggregate employment as the outcome variable for calculating the elasticity
of employment with respect to the minimum wage. For almost all the groups, the bunching
estimator is at least as precise as the aggregate estimator, sometimes substantially more so in
the case of smaller demographic groups. Row 1 shows that, for all workers, the point estimates

                                               44
of both approaches are rather similar when estimating the policy’s employment elasticity,
with the standard error of the bunching approach modestly smaller, at 88% of the aggregate
estimator. In the cases of workers with lower education, the bunching estimator’s employment
elasticity standard errors are between 65% and 76% of those from the aggregate estimator.
The last three rows of the table examine the the high probability, middle, and low probability
groups described in section 2.2. Only for the middle group does the aggregate estimator
largely outperform the bunching estimator’s precision. (As we discuss in the paragraph
above, however, for this middle group there is no significant wage effect detectable using the
aggregate approach, which makes the precision meaningless.)
    As a further check on the correlation between minimum wages and the imputation rate of
wages, Table A.3 shows the effect of the minimum wage on the imputation rate using various
alternative specifications. All specifications confirm that minimum wages have no impact on
the imputation rate.
    Table A.4 explores the robustness of the benchmark analysis shown in Column 1 of Table
1. In column (1) of Table A.4, we focus on the effect for events that take place in the 7 states
without a tip credit, where the same minimum wage is applied to tipped and non-tipped
employees.38 Even if the share of the workforce earning below the new minimum wage (9.9%)
in these states are similar to those in the primary sample, the bite of the policy is larger in the
no-tip-credit states: missing jobs are 2.7% of pre-treatment employment in the no-tip-credit
sample as compared to 1.8% in the full sample. However, the larger number of missing jobs
is almost exactly compensated by an excess number of jobs above the minimum wage, which
amount to 2.6% of pre-treatment employment. The resulting employment elasticity with
respect to own wage is −0.139 (s.e. 0.530).
    In the second column of Table A.4, we expand the event definition to include (nontrivial)
federal minimum wage increases, which produces a total of 369 events. Here we find the
missing jobs (∆b) to be slightly larger in magnitude at 2.0% of pre-treatment employment.
The wage effect for affected workers is 6.7% and statistically significant. The employment
elasticities with respect to the minimum wage and own wage are both close to zero at -0.009
(s.e. 0.019) and -0.157 (s.e. 0.32), respectively. For federal increases, the change in the
number of missing jobs below, ∆b, is identified only using time series variation, since there
are no covered workers earning below the new minimum in control states. However, ∆a + ∆b
is identified using cross-state variation, since at least for the 1996-1997 increase and especially
for the 2007-2009 increase there are many control states with covered employment $4 above
the new federal minimum wage. Overall, we find it reassuring that the key finding of a small
employment elasticity remains even when we consider federal increases.
    In column (3) of Table A.4, we consider the number of hours employed and estimate
the effect of the minimum wage on full-time equivalent (FTE) workers. These estimates are
not very different from Table 1. The actual number of FTE jobs below the minimum wage
(relative to the pre-treatment employment) is lower (b−1 =6.7% as opposed to 8.6% in Table
1), indicating that low-wage workers work fewer hours. Consistent with this, missing jobs
estimate is also smaller in magnitude when we use an FTE measure (-1.3% instead of -1.8%).
The average wage change for affected workers accounting for hours is 7.3% (s.e 1.2%), while
the employment change is 4.4% (s.e. 3.3%). After accounting for hours, the employment
  38 These   states are Alaska, California, Minnesota, Montana, Nevada, Oregon and Washington.


                                                    45
elasticity with respect to the minimum wage and the own wage are 0.029 (s.e. 0.022) and
0.601 (s.e. 442), respectively. The analogous estimates for headcount employment in Table 1
were 0.024 (s.e. 0.025) and 0.411 (s.e. 0.43).
    In column (4) of Table A.4, we restrict the sample to hourly workers; we expect these
workers to report their hourly wage information more accurately than our calculation of
hourly earnings (as weekly earnings divided by usual hours) for salaried workers. Although
the actual number of workers below the new minimum wage is close to our benchmark sample
(10.4% vs. 8.6% in Table 1) the missing jobs estimate almost doubles (3.3.% vs. 1.8% in
Table 1). As a result, the wage effects are more pronounced for this subset of workers than
the overall sample (9.4% versus 6.8% in Table 1), which is consistent with measurement
error in wages being smaller for those who directly report their hourly wages. Nevertheless,
the employment elasticities with respect to the minimum wage (0.029, s.e. 0.035) and with
respect to the own wage (0.306 s.e. 0.392) are very similar to our benchmark estimates.
    In column (5), we exclude workers in tipped occupations, as defined by Autor, Manning
and Smith (2016). Tipped workers can legally work for sub-minimum wages in most states,
and hence may report hourly wages below the minimum wage (as tips are not captured in
the reported hourly wage). As we explained in Section 2.3, such imperfect coverage creates a
discrepancy between the actual level (b̄−1 ) and the change (∆b) in the number of workers
below the new minimum wage; however, it does not create a bias in the bunching estimate
for the change in employment (∆a + ∆b). Excluding tipped workers reduces the average bite,
b̄−1 = 6.1%, while the estimate of missing jobs of -1.6% is close to our benchmark estimate
of -1.8% in Table 1. Consequently, estimated wage effects are larger by around 20% (8.2%
versus 6.8% in Table 1). However, excluding tipping workers has a negligible impact on the
employment estimates: the own-wage employment elasticity is 0.337 as opposed to 0.41 in
Table 1.
    In column (6), we present estimates using the raw CPS data instead of the QCEW
benchmarked CPS. The missing jobs estimate of -1.8% is essentially the same as the baseline
estimate. The wage (7.7%) and employment (4.6%) estimates as well as the employment
elasticities with respect to the minimum wage (0.039) and own wage (0.590) are slightly more
positive. The benefit of using the QCEW benchmarked CPS is the increased precision of
the estimates. Without benchmarking, the standard errors for the minimum wage and the
own-wage elasticities are 44% and 25% larger than those in column (1) of Table 1.
    In column (7) we provide estimates without using population weights. These results
are virtually identical to our benchmark estimates (Column (1) of Table 1). For instance,
the employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage is 0.401 (s.e. 0.418), which
is virtually identical to the weighted estimate of 0.411 (s.e. 0.430). The similarity of the
weighted and unweighted estimates is reassuring, since a substantial difference between the
two could reflect potential misspecification (Solon, Haider and Wooldridge 2015).
    In column (8), we limit the sample to 1993-2016. The similarity of the employment
elasticity with respect to the minimum wage estimates obtained from post-1992 sample and
from the baseline sample (0.006 (0.026) instead of 0.024 (0.025)) is used below in Online
Appendix F to explain differences between the findings of the event-based approach and the
TWFE-logMW specification.
    Our data is in 25-cent bins and the baseline specification treatment indicators are in
1-dollar increments. To allay any concerns, in column (9), we also check the robustness of

                                            46
our results where the treatment indicators are also in 25 cent increments. In other words,
there are 4 times as many regression coefficients for this specification as in our benchmark
specification. Obviously, the specific $0.25 wage bins estimates are noisier than the $1 bin
estimates. However, once we sum up these more nosily estimated coefficients, we obtain
estimates that are highly similar to our baseline results (0.023 (0.026) and 0.401 (0.447)
instead of 0.024 (0.025) and 0.411 (0.430), respectively).
    Table A.5 explores the sensitivity of the results using alternative thresholds, W , for
calculating the excess jobs at and above the minimum wage. In our baseline specification,
we calculate the excess jobs by adding up the impact in the interval between M W and
W = M W + $4. In the table we report results using values for W − M W between $2 and $6.
The table shows that the excess jobs estimate increases when the threshold is increased from
$2 (column 2) to $3 (column 3), but beyond that the estimates remain stable. Therefore, our
results are not sensitive to the particular value of W once we take into account the presence
of spillovers up to $3 above the minimum wage.
    In Table A.6, we consider the robustness of our results to using alternative event windows.
Column 1 repeats our baseline results using a window between event dates -3 and 4 (i.e., the
3rd year before the minimum wage increase and 4th year after). Columns 2 and 4 show that
reducing the post-treatment window end-date to 2, or extending it to 6 has little impact
on the wage or employment estimates. Similarly, columns 4 and 5 show that extending
the pre-treatment start date to -5 or reducing it to -1 also has very limited impact on the
estimates. For example, across all 5 columns, the employment elasticity with respect to the
minimum wage varies between 0.008 and 0.025; the associated standard errors vary between
0.021 and 0.027. Overall, these estimates show that our findings are not driven by our specific
choice of the event window.
    Table A.7 reports estimated wage and employment effects of the aggregate event-based
(panel A), and the bunching (panel B) estimators for the Card and Krueger predicted
probability groups. While the aggregate event-based approach considers wage and employment
of the full group, the bunching approach looks locally at wage and employment changes of
affected workers near the minimum wage. Note that the percentage change in overall average
wage will be considerably smaller than the percentage change in wage at the bottom of the
distribution. Take the case where both employment fell by 5% and wages rose by 5% for
affected workers, but affected workers were only half of total employment. Then aggregate
employment would fall by 2.5%, but average wage will rise by even less, since unaffected
workers have higher wages than affected workers. As a result the common way of calculating
employment elasticity–that takes the ratio of the employment effects and wage effect–will
be biased using the aggregate approach; and the smaller the share of affected workers in
the group (so that the average wage of the group is much larger than the wage of affected
workers), the bigger is the bias.
    Column 1 of Table A.7 shows the estimates for the high probability group. Both approaches
estimate a sizable and statistically significant wage effects with no indication of disemployment.
The wage and employment elasticities with respect to the minimum wage are 0.187 (s.e.
0.062) and 0.081 (s.e. 0.084) in panel A, respectively, using the aggregate approach; these are
consistent with the findings in panel B using the bunching estimator. However, the former
approach fails to detect a statistically significant wage effect of the policy for the middle and
the low probability groups in columns 2 and 3. The wage elasticity estimates in columns

                                               47
2 and 3 are 0.065 (s.e. 0.057) and -0.005 (s.e. 0.038). This limits the ability of using the
CK probability group approach by itself to examine the employment effects of the minimum
wage. Since the “first stage” wage effect is missing for the latter two groups, it is difficult to
assess the size of the estimated employment effects (0.057 (s.e. 0.047) and 0.001 (s.e. 0.023)
for the middle and low probability groups, respectively). On the other hand, the bunching
estimator captures a sizable and statistically significant wage effect for all of the groups
(0.051 (s.e. 0.013) and 0.060 (s.e. 0.032) for the middle, and low probability groups). By
examining changes in the frequency distribution for wages around the minimum wage, the
bunching estimator enables us to establish a causal relationship between the policy and the
employment effects for each of the groups.
    Table A.8 shows the impact of the minimum wage for incumbents and for new entrants to
the labor force. Since CPS interviews individuals twice (one year apart), we can only assess
a short term impact of the minimum wage for these two subgroups. However, columns (1)
and (2) highlight that the short term and the long term impact of the minimum wage is
very similar for the overall sample. By matching the CPS over time, we lose observations
either because matching is not possible, or because there are “bad” matches (see Online
Appendix D for details). Finally, we can only observe past employment status in the second
period, so we can only use half of the observations in the matched sample. This shrinks
our primary sample size from 4,694,104 to 1,505,192. The results from this matched sample
is shown in column (3). The missing jobs are exactly the same as in the baseline (column
1), however, the excess jobs are slightly lower (1.8% in column 3 vs. 2.1% in baseline). As
a result, the change in affected jobs is slightly smaller than in the baseline estimate, but
it is still statistically insignificant and positive in sign. Columns (4) and (5) decompose
these changes by incumbents and new entrants. Two thirds of the missing jobs come from
incumbents, while one third from new entrants. However, the change in missing jobs matches
the change in excess jobs in both groups, so the employment effects are very similar (0.9%
for incumbents and 0.8% for new entrants). At the same time, the wage effects are different,
since new entrants do not experience any spillover effects (see Figure 4).
    Table A.9 shows estimates for the event-by-event analysis presented in Figure 5 using
alternative specifications. The estimated relationship between the Kaitz index on the jobs
below, on the missing jobs, on the excess jobs, and on the employment change are similar
across various specifications, which underlines the robustness of the results presented in
Figure 5.
    Table A.10 shows the estimated employment elasticities using our event-based approach,
as well as distributed lag specifications in log minimum wage (with 4 years of lags, contem-
poraneous, and 3 years of leads) estimated in both TWFE-logMW and in first differences
(FD) specifications (see the details in Online Appendix F). We report employment estimates
on aggregate employment in (columns 1, 2 and 5) and employment under $15 (columns 3,
4 and 6) in Panel A. There is a wide range of estimates for aggregate employment, as we
pointed out in Figure 6. When we exclude employment variation in the upper tail and focus
on employment in jobs under $15, the range of estimates narrows considerably. For example,
for the weighted estimates, the employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage
is -0.020 (s.e. 0.028) in the fixed effect specification, -0.005 (s.e. 0.019) in first difference
specification, and 0.027 (s.e. 0.022) in the event-based specification. These estimates cannot
be distinguished statistically from each other, or from zero. This highlights that variability

                                               48
in the estimates is mainly driven by variation in employment above $15, which is unlikely to
reflect the causal effect of the minimum wage. Column 6 estimates event-based regressions of
the minimum wage on jobs below $15. We refer to this specification as the “simpler method”
in Section 2.3 and we report the estimates in Column 7 of Table 1. (The slight difference
between Column 6 in Table A.10 and Column 7 in Table 1 is that the former is based on
annual data while the latter is based on quarterly data.) Column 7 shows our baseline
estimates where we estimate the effect of the minimum wage on job counts in each wage
bin, calculate the missing and excess jobs and then add them up. Both the point estimates
and the standard errors are very close to each in other in the “simpler method” and in our
baseline regressions.
    Panel B of Table A.10 shows the TWFE-logMW, first difference (FD), and event-based
(EB) regressions for teens (see the details in Online Appendix F). The variability in the
estimates for teens is not driven by changes in employment in the upper tail. This is not
surprising, since most teens earn below $15, and so variation in the upper tail can only have
limited impact on the estimates. Column 6 estimates event based regression of the minimum
wage on jobs below $15. Column 7 shows our baseline estimates where we estimate the effect
of the minimum wage on job counts in each wage bin, calculate the missing and excess jobs
and then add them up. The estimates with the “simpler method” (column 6) and with our
baseline method (column 7) are very similar. In general, we find that the teen estimates
from fixed effects models tend to be more negative than the first difference ones—similar to
Allegretto et al. (2017), and to the estimates for overall employment. Moreover, event-based
estimates are much closer to those using first differencing, again mirroring the findings for
overall employment.




                                             49
                      Figure A.1: Minimum Wage Increases between 1979 and 2016


     WY   WY                                       WY    WY                             WY WY                                                              WY WY WY
     WV   WV                                       WV    WV                             WV WV                                                       WV WV WV                                        WV   WV
     WI   WI                                  WI WI      WI                             WI WI                                                WI    WI                  WI
     WA   WA                               WA WA                          WA                 WA     WA     WA           WA   WA   WA   WA  WA WA WA WA WA                       WA   WA   WA   WA   WA
     VT   VT                 VT   VT    VT    VT VT       VT                   VT   VT    VT VT
                                                                                              VT          VT            VT             VT  VT    VT    VT     VT    VT               VT   VT   VT   VT   VT
     VA   VA                                       VA     VA                            VA VA                                                              VA VA VA
     UT   UT                                       UT     UT                            UT UT                                                              UT    UT    UT
     TX   TX                                       TX     TX                            TX TX                                                              TX    TX    TX
     TN   TN                                       TN     TN                            TN TN                                                              TN    TN    TN
     SD   SD                                       SD     SD                            SD SD                                                              SD    SD    SD                           SD   SD
     SC   SC                                       SC     SC                            SC SC                                                              SC    SC    SC
     RI   RI                 RI   RI    RI    RI          RI                           RI RI             RI        RI                  RI        RI    RI                                 RI   RI   RI   RI
     PA   PA                               PA      PA     PA                            PA PA                                                          PA PA           PA
     OR   OR                                  OROR      OR                                OR OR     OR                            OR   OR  OR OR OR OR OR                            OR   OR   OR   OR        OR
     OK   OK                                       OK     OK                            OK OK                                                              OK OK OK
     OH   OH                                       OH     OH                            OH OH                                                          OH OH OH                 OH   OH   OH    OH OH
     NY   NY                                       NY     NY                            NY NY                                              NY NY NY                    NY                      NY NY NY        NY
     NV   NV                                       NV     NV                            NV NV                                                         NV NV NV NV NV
     NM   NM                                       NM     NM                            NM NM                                                              NMNM NM
     NJ   NJ                                       NJ     NJ   NJ                            NJ                                                 NJ    NJ               NJ                      NJ   NJ
     NH   NH                    NH NH NH NH        NH   NHNH                            NH NH                                                              NH NH
     NE   NE                                       NE     NE                            NE NE                                                              NE    NE    NE                           NE   NE
     ND   ND                                  ND ND       ND                            ND ND                                                              ND ND ND
     NC   NC                                       NC     NC                            NC NC                                                          NC        NC    NC
     MT   MT                                       MT     MT                            MT MT                                                          MT MTMTMTMT              MT   MT   MT   MT   MT
     MS   MS                                       MS     MS                            MS MS                                                              MS MS MS
     MO   MO                                       MO     MO                            MO MO                                                          MO MO MOMO                         MO   MO MO
     MN   MN                         MN MN MN           MN                              MN MN                                                 MN                 MN MN                           MN MN MN
     MI   MI                                       MI     MI                            MI MI                                                         MI MI      MI                              MI   MI
     ME   ME          ME   ME ME           ME ME          ME                            ME ME                                ME   ME      ME ME ME ME ME ME
     MD   MD                                       MD     MD                            MD MD                                                          MD        MD MD                              MDMD MD
     MA   MA                 MA MA MA              MA     MA                        MA MA                     MA        MA                             MA MA                                        MA MA
     LA   LA                                       LA     LA                            LA LA                                                              LA    LA    LA
     KY   KY                                       KY     KY                            KY KY                                                            KY      KY KY
     KS   KS                                       KS     KS                            KS KS                                                              KS    KS    KS
     IN   IN                                       IN     IN                            IN IN                                                              IN    IN    IN
     IL   IL                                       IL     IL                            IL IL                                          IL  IL              IL    IL    IL    IL
     ID   ID                                       ID     ID                            ID ID                                                              ID    ID    ID
     IA   IA                                     IA     IA   IA                         IA IA                                                            IA IA
     HI   HI                         HI                   HI   HI   HI                                                       HI   HI             HI    HI                                           HI   HI
     GA   GA                                       GA     GA                            GA GA                                                              GA GA GA
     FL   FL                                       FL     FL                            FL FL                                                FL FL     FL     FL    FL               FL   FL   FL    FL
     DE   DE                                       DE     DE                         DE DE
                                                                                         DE DE       DE             DE                                 DE     DE       DE                       DE    DE
     DC        DC                  DC                                    DC             DC DC                                              DC DC                 DC    DC                         DC DC DC
     CT   CT                       CT    CT              CT                             CT CT       CT        CT        CT   CT   CT   CT        CT    CT           CT    CT                   CT    CT  CT
     CO   CO                                       CO    CO                             CO CO                                                          CO CO CO                 CO   CO   CO   CO CO CO
     CA   CA                            CA                                              CA
                                                                                         CA CA CA                       CA   CA                        CA CA                                      CA     CA
     AZ   AZ                                       AZ    AZ                             AZ AZ                                                          AZ     AZ    AZ          AZ   AZ   AZ   AZ    AZ
     AR   AR                                       AR    AR                             AR AR                                                         AR         AR    AR                            AR AR
     AL   AL                                       AL    AL                             AL AL                                                              AL    AL    AL
     AK   AK                                       AK    AK                             AK AK                                     AK                                   AKAK                         AK   AK




  1979         1982   1985          1988                1991             1994           1997              2000                    2003           2006             2009               2012           2015 2016


Notes: The figure shows all minimum wage increases between 1979 and 2016. There are a total of 623
minimum wage increases. The blue circles show the primary minimum wage events used in estimating
equation 1; the light orange triangles highlight small minimum wage changes where minimum wage increased
less than $0.25 (the size of our wage bins) or where less than 2 percent of the workforce earned between
the new and the old minimum wage. The green circles indicate federal changes, which we exclude from our
primary sample of treatments because the change in missing number of jobs, ∆b, is identified only from
time-series variation for these events as there are no “control states” with wage floors lower than the new
minimum wage (see the text for details).




                                                                                             50
                                   Figure A.2: Impact of Minimum Wages on the Imputation Rate
                          .04
                          .03        .02
             Change in Imputation Rate
          -.02 -.01      0-.03
                          -.04 .01




                                           -3   -2     -1            0          1         2      3   4
                                                     Years relative to the minimum wage change


Notes: The figure shows the effect of the minimum wage on the imputation rate. In our event study analysis
we only use non-imputed hourly wages. To alleviate the concern that imputation has an effect on our
estimates, we implement an event study regression where the outcome variable is state-level imputation
rate. Events are the same 138 state-level minimum wage changes between 1979-2016 that we use in our
benchmark specification. Similarly to our benchmark specification we include state and time fixed effects in
the regression. In the Online Appendix Table A.3 we report results with other specifications. The blue line
shows the evolution of the imputation rate (relative to the year before the treatment). We also show the 95%
confidence interval based on standard errors that are clustered at the state level.




                                                                    51
                    Figure A.3: Impact of Minimum Wages on the Self-Employment Rate
                                 0.04
                                 0.03     0.01 0.02
                         Change in Self-employment
          -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01    0




                                                      -3   -2     -1            0          1         2      3   4
                                                                Years relative to the minimum wage change


Notes: The figure shows the effect of the minimum wage on the self-employment rate. In our event study
analysis we only use wage workers. To alleviate the concern that changes in self-employment rate have
effects on our estimates, we implement an event study regression where the outcome variable is state-level
self-employment rate. Events are the same 138 state-level minimum wage changes between 1979-2016 that we
use in our benchmark specification. Similarly to our benchmark specification we include state and time fixed
effects in the regression. The blue line shows the evolution of the self-employment rate (relative to the year
before the treatment). We also show the 95% confidence interval based on standard errors that are clustered
at the state level.




                                                                               52
Figure A.4: Impact of Minimum Wages on Average Wage and on Employment Over Time




                                                                             .1
                       Percentage change in wage of affected workers
                                                                             .05
                                                                             0
                                                                             -.05




                                                                                    -3   -2      -1           0          1         2      3   4
                                                                                              Years relative to the minimum wage change


                                                       (a) Evolution of the average wage of the affected workers
                                                                             .2
                       Percentage change in employment of affected workers
                                                                             .1
                                                                             0
                                                                             -.1
                                                                             -.2




                                                                                    -3   -2      -1           0          1         2      3   4
                                                                                              Years relative to the minimum wage change


                                                                   (b) Evolution of the employment of the affected workers
Notes: The figure shows the main results from our event study analysis (see equation 1) exploiting 138
state-level minimum wage changes between 1979-2016. Panel (a) shows the effect on the average wage over
time, which is calculated using equation 2. Panel (b) shows the evolution of employment between $4 below
the new minimum wage and $5 above it (relative to the total employment 1 year before the treatment), which
is equal to the sum of missing jobs below and excess jobs at and slightly above the minimum wage, ∆b + ∆a.
The figure highlights that minimum wage had a positive and significant effect on the average wage of the
affected population, but there is no sign of significant disemployment effects.




                                                                                                            53
Figure A.5: Change in Employment by Wage Bins after Aggregating Multiple Treatment
Events
                                                                           0.03



                                                                                                                                     ∆a = 0.028 (0.004)
                                                                                                                                    ∆b = -0.025 (0.005)
           Difference between actual and counterfactual employment count




                                                                                                                 %∆ affected employment = 0.030 (0.041)
                                                                                                                       %∆ affected wage = 0.091 (0.013)
                                                                           0.02
                    relative to the pre-treatment total employment

                                                                           0.01
                                                                           0
                                                                           -0.01
                                                                           -0.02
                                                                           -0.03




                                                                                   -4   -2   0    2     4        6    8     10       12   14   16 17+

                                                                                                 Wage bins in $ relative to new MW


Notes: This figure replicates Figure 2 in the main text, but calculates a cumulative effect when there are
multiple events in the 5-year post-treatment window. Overall, 65% of the time, a primary minimum wage
increase is followed by a secondary one within 5 years, on average at $0.56 above the minimum for the primary
event. Figure 2 shows the partial effect of each event. Here we show the cumulative effect of all events within
a 5-year post-treatment window by taking into account the incidence and size of secondary increases averaged
across our sample of events. The blue bars show for each dollar bin (relative to the minimum wage) the
estimated average employment changes in that bin during the 5-year post-treatment relative to the total
employment in the state one year before the treatment. The red line is the running sum of the bin-specific
impacts. Adjusting for multiple events increases the estimate for missing jobs below the new minimum from
1.8% to 2.5%. Therefore, some of the difference between jobs below the new minimum wage, which is around
8.6%, and the missing jobs below the new minimum wage can be explained by multiple events following each
other.




                                                                                                            54
Figure A.6: Employment Elasticity with Respect to Own Wage in the Literature and in this
Paper

                 This paper - CK high prob group
                             This paper - baseline

                                       Sabia 2008
                                       Perira 2003
                      Neumark and Nizalova 2007
                             Kim and Taylor 1995
                                 Hirsch et al 2015
                                    Giuliano 2013
                               Fang and Lin 2015
        Erickssov and Pytlikova 2004, Czech Rep.
           Ericksson and Pytlikova 2004, Slovakia
                                 Dube et al. 2007
                                 Dube et al. 2010
                          Currie and Fallick 1996
                                  Card et al. 1994
                                      Card 1992b
                                       Card 1992a
                            Campolieti et al. 2006
                            Burkhauser et al. 2000
                             Bell 1997, Colombia
                             Allegretto et al. 2011
                               Addison et al. 2010
                                                      -2   -1.5        -1   -.5     0       .5      1      1.5        2
                                                           Estimated Employment Elasticity With Respect To Own Wage



Notes: This figure summarizes the estimated employment elasticity with respect to wage and compares it
to the previous estimates in the literature. The estimates in the literature are collected by Harasztosi and
Lindner (2016). The two estimates from our paper is the benchmark estimate on overall employment (Column
1 in Table 1) and the estimates for the Card and Krueger high probability group Column 6 in Table 2. The
dashed vertical line shows the lower bound of our benchmark estimates. The benchmark estimates can rule
out 7 out of the 11 negative estimates provided in the previous literature.




                                                                  55
             Figure A.7: Impact of the Minimum Wage by Demographic Groups




                                                                                         .16
                       Excess jobs relative to the pre-treatment total employment (∆a)
                                                                                                                                                      Teen




                                                                                         .12
                                                                                                                                 High prob.

                                                                                         .08
                                                                                                                        LTHS

                                                                                                   HSL
                                                                                         .04



                                                                                               Women   B/H
                                                                                                         Medium prob.
                                                                                                     Low prob.
                                                                                         0




                                                                                               0                   .04                   .08                  .12                 .16
                                                                                                   Magnitude of missing jobs relative to the pre-treatment total employment (-∆b)

                                                                                                                                          45 degree line


                                                                                         (a) Effect of the minimum wage by demographic groups
                                                                                                                                                                LTHS; [16, 20)
                       Excess jobs relative to the pre-treatment total employment (∆a)
                                                                                         .12




                                                                                               Slope = 1.070 (0.075)



                                                                                                                                             HSG; [16, 20)
                                                                                         .08




                                                                                                                                  LTHS; [20, 30)
                                                                                                                                                                 SC; [16, 20)

                                                                                                                 LTHS; 60+
                                                                                                         LTHS; [30, 40)
                                                                                               LTHS; [50, 60)
                                                                                         .04




                                                                                                                     SC; [20, 30)
                                                                                                                              LTHS; [40, 50)
                                                                                         0




                                                                                                    Coll; [50, 60)
                                                                                               0                          .04                          .08                       .12
                                                                                                   Magnitude of missing jobs relative to the pre-treatment total employment (∆b)

                                                                                                                             Linear fit                45 degree line


                                                                       (b) Effect of the minimum wage by age-education groups
Notes: Both figures show the excess jobs (relative to the pre-treatment total employment in that group)
above the new minimum wage (∆a) and magnitude of missing jobs below it (−∆b) for various demographic
groups. The black dash line in both of the graphs are the 45 degree line indicating the locus of points where
the excess number of jobs above and the missing jobs below the new minimum wage are exactly the same,
and so the employment effect is zero. Estimates above that line indicate positive employment effects, and
estimates below the line indicate negative ones. Panel (a) shows the estimates for demographic groups in
Table 2: those with less than high school (LTHS) education, high school or less (HSL) education, women,
teen, black or Hispanic workers (B/H), and groups with low, medium and high probability of being exposed
to the minimum wage increase. Panel (b) shows the estimates for education-by-age groups generated from 6
age and 4 education categories. The small light gray and black points correspond to each of the groups, while
the large blue squares show the non-parametric bin scattered relationship between the excess jobs (∆a) and
the magnitude of missing jobs (−∆b). The red line shows the linear fit. A slope of that line below one would
indicate the presence of labor-labor substitution across age and eduction groups.

                                                                                                                                     56
Figure A.8: Relationship between Excess Jobs, Missing jobs, Employment Change and the
Minimum-to-Median Wage Ratio Across Events (Replicating Figure 5 in the Main Text
without using Controls)




                                                                                           -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04
                                                                                                                                               Excess jobs, slope = 0.143 (0.048)




                         Change in employment relative to pre-treatment total employment




                                                                                                                                              Missing jobs, slope = -0.094 (0.032)
                                                                                                                                              0.40                     0.45                 0.50   0.55
                                                                                                                                                                   Minimum-to-median wage ratio


                                                                                                                                                     (a) Missing and excess jobs
                                                                                           -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04
                         Change in employment relative to pre-treatment total employment




                                                                                                                                              Emp. change, slope = 0.050 (0.043)




                                                                                                                                              0.40                     0.45                 0.50   0.55
                                                                                                                                                                   Minimum-to-median wage ratio




                                                                                                                                                        (b) Employment change
Notes: This figure replicates Figure 5 in the main text without using controls in the regression. The figure
shows the binned scatter plots for missing jobs, excess jobs, and total employment changes by value of the
minimum-to-median wage ratio (Kaitz index) for the 130 event-specific estimates. The minimum-to-median
wage ratio is the new minimum wage M W divided by the median wage at the time of the minimum wage
increase (Kaitz index). The 130 events exclude 8 minimum wage raising events in the District of Columbia,
since those events are very noisily estimated in the CPS. The bin scatters and linear fits plot the relationship
without any control variables. Estimates are weighted by the state populations. The slope (and robust
standard error in parentheses) is from the weighted linear fit of the outcome on the minimum-to-median wage
ratio.



                                                                                                                                                                              57
Figure A.9: Relationship between Employment Change and the Minimum-to-Median Wage
Ratio Across Events, Scatterplot




                                              .4
                          Change in employment relative to
                           pre-treatment total employment
                             0       .1         .2
                                              -.1     .3




                                                             0.30               0.40                   0.50                    0.60
                                                                                             MWtomed

                                                                    130 state-level events               D.C. events
                                                                    Linear fit of the 130 events         Linear fit including D.C. events



                                                                     (a) Population weighted
                                              .4
                          Change in employment relative to
                           pre-treatment total employment
                             0       .1         .2
                                              -.1     .3




                                                             0.30               0.40                   0.50                    0.60
                                                                                             MWtomed

                                                                    130 state-level events               D.C. events
                                                                    Linear fit of the 130 events         Linear fit including D.C. events



                                                                              (a) Unweighted


Notes: The figure shows the population weighted and unweighted scatter plots of the estimated percentage
change in employment in [M W − $4, M W + $5) bins of each of the 138 events during the 5-year post-
treatment relative to the 1-year pre-treatment period against the minimum-to-median wage ratio. The
estimated employment change of each event is created from 138 regressions corresponding to each event, as
explained in Section 3.3. The red circles indicate D.C. events, and the green circles the remaining 130 events.
The lines are linear fits. The green line employs the 130 events; while the red one all events.




                                                                                           58
Figure A.10: Impact on Employment throughout the Wage Distribution in the Two-Way
Fixed Effects Model on log Minimum Wages - Weighted and Unweighted Estimates




                                                  0.1
                              Employment elasticity
                                                  0
                                                  -0.1


                                                               Employment elas. = -0.089 (0.025)
                                                  -0.2




                                                                        $5        $10        $15       $20       $25   >$30   Total
                                                                                                    Wage



                                                                                    (a) Weighted
                                                        0.1
                                    Employment elasticity
                                                        0
                                                        -0.1




                                                               Employment elas. = -0.122 (0.035)
                                                        -0.2




                                                                        $5         $10        $15          $20   $25   >$30   Total
                                                                                                    Wage



                                                                                 (b) Unweighted


Notes: The figure shows the effect of the minimum wage on the wage distribution using fixed effects
specifications (TWFE-logMW), with and without population weights. Both panels estimate two-way (state-
bin and year) fixed effects regressions on contemporaneous as well as 2 annual leads, and 4 annual lags
of log minimum wage (panel (a) is the same as Figure 6 in the main text). For each wage bin we run
a separate regression, where the outcome is the number of jobs per capita in that state-wage bin. The
cumulative response for each event date 0, 1, ..., 4 is formed by successively adding the coefficients for
the contemporaneous and lagged log minimum wages. The green bars show the mean of these cumulative
responses for event dates 0, 1, ..., 4, divided by the sample average employment-to-population rate —and
represents the average elasticity of employment in each wage bin with respect to the minimum wage in
the post-treatment period. The 95% confidence intervals around the point estimates are calculated using
clustered standard errors at the state level. The dashed purple line plots the running sum of the employment
effects of the minimum wage up until the particular wage bin. The rightmost purple bar in each of the graphs
is the elasticity of the overall state employment-to-population rate with respect to minimum wage, obtained
from regressions where outcome variables are the state level employment-to-population rate. In the bottom
left corner we also report the point estimate on this elasticity with standard errors that are clustered at the
state level. Regressions in panels (a) are weighted by state population; whereas the ones in panels (b) are not
weighted.                                              59
Table A.1: T-statistics for the Wage Effects of the Minimum Wage - Bunching and Aggregate
Approaches
                                                 Bunching       Aggregated
                     All workers                    6.942          0.577

                     Less than high school          5.526          1.359

                     High school or less            5.487          0.549

                     Teens                          4.603          4.965

                     Women                          6.261          0.796

                     Black or Hispanic              3.585          0.584

                     High prob. group               6.822          3.003

                     Middle group                   3.973          1.140

                     Low prob. group                1.866         –0.136

                      Notes. Each cell reports the t-statistic from the esti-
                      mated wage effect with respect to the minimum wage for
                      various demographic groups. The bunching approach is
                      the preferred specification in this paper, estimating the
                      wage effect from bin-specific employment changes near
                      the relevant minimum wage. The aggregated approach
                      uses as the outcome overall aggregate employment. For
                      the bunching case, the wage effect is the estimated per-
                      centage change of affected workers. For the aggregated
                      case, the wage effect is the elasticity of the wage with
                      respect to the minimum wage. Regressions are weighted
                      by state averaged population of the demographic groups.
                      T-statistics are obtained by dividing the estimated wage
                      effects by robust standard errors clustered by state.




                                               60
Table A.2: Precision of the Employment Elasticities with Respect to the Minimum Wage -
Bunching and Aggregate Approaches
                                                                   Ratio of bunching to
                                  Bunching       Aggregated
                                                                aggregated standard errors
        All workers                  0.024          0.016                   0.878
                                    (0.025)        (0.029)

        Less than high school        0.097          0.178*                  0.654
                                    (0.061)        (0.094)

        High school or less          0.061          0.041                   0.756
                                    (0.042)        (0.055)

        Teens                        0.125          0.128                   1.011
                                    (0.134)        (0.132)

        Women                        0.025         –0.006                   0.825
                                    (0.027)        (0.033)

        Black or Hispanic          –0.005          –0.004                   0.716
                                   (0.058)         (0.082)

        High prob. group             0.052          0.081                   0.876
                                    (0.062)        (0.071)

        Middle group                 0.016          0.057*                  1.443
                                    (0.049)        (0.034)

        Low prob. group              0.003          0.001                   0.558
                                    (0.014)        (0.026)

        Notes. Columns 1-2 report the separately estimated employment elasticity with respect to
        the minimum wage for the bunching and aggregate approaches, for various demographic
        groups. Column 3 reports the ratio of the bunching to aggregate approach standard
        errors. The bunching approach is the preferred specification in this paper, using wage-
        bin-specific employment per capita changes as the outcome. The aggregate approach uses
        overall employment per-capita as the outcome. Robust standard errors in parentheses
        are clustered by state; significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.




                                                 61
Table A.3: Impact of Minimum Wages on the Imputation Rate in Various Regression
Specifications
                              (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
 ∆ imputation rate          -0.000     0.001      0.001     0.002      -0.004     -0.002    -0.002     -0.001
                           (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)

 # observations             7,242      7,242      7,242     7,242      7,242      7,242     7,242      7,242
 Mean of the dep. var       0.249      0.249      0.249     0.249      0.280      0.280     0.280      0.280

 Controls
 State trends                            Y                    Y                     Y                    Y
 Division-by-year FE                                Y         Y                               Y          Y

 Weighted                                                                Y          Y         Y          Y

  Notes. The table reports 5-year averaged change in the imputation rate of the CPS from 1979 to 2016 after
  the primary 138 events. The dependent variable is the imputation rate, defined as the number of imputed
  observations divided by the number of employed observations. The estimates are calculated by employing an
  event based approach, where we regress state imputation rates on quarterly leads and lags on treatment
  spanning 12 quarters before and 19 quarters after the policy change. All specifications include state, and
  quarter fixed effects. Columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 controls for state linear trends; whereas columns 3, 4, 7, and 8
  allow census divisions to be affected differently by macroeconomic shocks. The regressions are not weighted
  in columns 1-4; and they are population weighted in columns 5-8. Robust standard errors in parentheses are
  clustered by state; significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.




                                                    62
       Table A.4: Robustness of the Impact of Minimum Wages to Alternative Workforce, Treatment and Sample Definitions
                                                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)            (9)
     Missing jobs below new MW (∆b)             -0.027***       -0.020***       -0.013***       -0.033***      -0.016***       -0.018***       -0.017***         -0.019***     -0.016***
                                                  (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.008)        (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.003)          (0.004)       (0.004)
     Excess jobs above new MW (∆a)               0.026***       0.019***        0.016***         0.036***       0.017***        0.022***        0.019***         0.020***      0.019***
                                                  (0.002)        (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.007)        (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.002)          (0.003)       (0.002)

     %∆ affected wages                          0.065***        0.067***        0.073***        0.094***        0.082***        0.077***        0.070***         0.058***       0.069***
                                                 (0.007)         (0.012)         (0.012)         (0.020)         (0.014)         (0.011)         (0.010)          (0.011)        (0.010)
     %∆ affected employment                       -0.009          -0.010          0.044           0.029           0.028           0.046           0.028            0.007          0.028
                                                 (0.034)         (0.021)         (0.033)         (0.035)         (0.039)         (0.042)         (0.030)          (0.029)        (0.030)

     Employment elasticity w.r.t. MW              -0.010          -0.009          0.029           0.029           0.017           0.039           0.022            0.006          0.023
                                                 (0.036)         (0.019)         (0.022)         (0.035)         (0.024)         (0.036)         (0.024)          (0.026)        (0.026)
     Emp. elasticity w.r.t. affected wage         -0.139          -0.157          0.601           0.306           0.337           0.590           0.401            0.122          0.401
                                                 (0.530)         (0.326)         (0.442)         (0.392)         (0.496)         (0.536)         (0.418)          (0.495)        (0.447)

     Jobs below new MW (b–1 )                     0.099           0.083           0.067           0.104          0.061           0.087           0.079             0.087         0.086
     %∆ MW                                        0.093           0.096           0.101           0.101          0.101           0.101           0.100             0.097         0.101
     Number of events                               44             369             138             138            138             138             138               116           138
63




     Number of observations                      847,314         847,314         847,314         847,314        847,314         847,314         847,314           531,063       847,314
     Number of workers in the sample            4,694,104       4,694,104       4,561,684       2,824,287      4,402,488       4,694,104       4,694,104         2,503,803     4,694,104

                                                                                                                                                                                 Primary,
                                                  No tip
                                                                 State &                                                                                                        treatment
     Set of events                                credit                        Primary         Primary         Primary         Primary         Primary          Primary
                                                                 Federal                                                                                                        in 25-cent
                                                  states
                                                                                                                                                                               increments
                                                                                                 Hourly       Non-tipped                                        All workers,
     Sample                                    All workers     All workers        FTE                                          CPS-Raw        Unweighted                       All workers
                                                                                                 workers      occupations                                        post-1992

     Notes. The table reports robustness checks for the effects of a minimum wage increase based on the event study analysis (see equation 1) exploiting minimum wage changes between
     1979 and 2016. All columns except column (2) are based on state-level minimum wage changes. The table reports five year averaged post-treatment estimates on missing jobs up to $4
     below the new minimum wage, excess jobs at and up to $5 above it, employment and wages. Column (1) reports estimates for the 44 events which occured in states that do not allow
     tip credit. Column (2) reports estimates using 369 state or federal minimum wage increases. Column (3) uses full time equivalent job counts and so takes changes in hours worked into
     account. Column (4) uses workers who directly reported being hourly workers in the survey. Column (5) uses workers in non-tipped occupations only. Column (6) does not use the
     QCEW benchmarking, and instead reports the estimates calculated using the raw CPS counts (see Section 4.2 for details). All regressions are weighted by state-quarter aggregated
     population except Column (7), where we report unweighted estimates. Column (8) only considers minimum wage events that happened on or before 2012q1 to ensure a full five
     year post-treatment period. Column (9) shows the results for the post-1992 sample. Column (10) defines treatment indicators in 25 cent increments. All specifications include wage
     bin-by-state and wage bin-by period fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state; significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
     Line-by-line description.The first two rows report the change in number of missing jobs below the new minimum wage (∆b), and excess jobs above the new minimum wage (∆a) relative
     to the pre-treatment total employment. The third row, the percentage change in average wages in the affected bins, (%∆W), is calculated using equation 2 in Section 2.2. The fourth
     row, percentage change in employment in the affected bins is calculated by dividing change in employment by jobs below the new minimum wage ( ∆a+∆b
                                                                                                                                                       b̄
                                                                                                                                                           ). The fifth row, employment
                                                                                                                                                           −1
                                                                   ∆a+∆b                                                                                 1 ∆a+∆b
      elasticity with respect to the minimum wage is calculated as %∆M W whereas the sixth row, employment elasticity with respect to the wage, reports %∆W b̄−1 . The line on the number
      of observations shows the number of quarter-bin cells used for estimation, while the number of workers refers to the underlying CPS sample used to calculate job counts in these cells.
Table A.5: Impact of Minimum Wage Increase on the Average Wage and Employment of
Affected workers - Robustness to Alternative Wage Windows
                                                               Alternative wage window
                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)
 Missing jobs below new MW (∆b)               -0.018***    -0.018***    -0.018***    -0.018***     -0.018***
                                               (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.004)
 Excess jobs above new MW (∆a)                0.018***     0.021***     0.021***     0.020***       0.021***
                                               (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.002)

 %∆ affected wages                            0.046***     0.064***     0.068***      0.068***     0.081***
                                               (0.009)      (0.008)      (0.010)       (0.013)      (0.012)
 %∆ affected employment                         -0.002       0.029        0.028         0.024        0.033
                                               (0.025)      (0.031)      (0.029)       (0.031)      (0.034)

 Employment elasticity w.r.t. MW                -0.001       0.025        0.024         0.020        0.028
                                               (0.021)      (0.027)      (0.025)       (0.026)      (0.029)
 Emp. elasticity w.r.t. affected wage           -0.038       0.452        0.411         0.349        0.410
                                               (0.539)      (0.479)      (0.430)       (0.443)      (0.390)

 Jobs below new MW (b–1 )                       0.086        0.086        0.086        0.086         0.086
 %∆ MW                                          0.101        0.101        0.101        0.101         0.101
 Number of event                                 138          138          138          138           138
 Number of observations                        847,314      847,314      847,314      847,314       847,314
 Number of workers in the sample              4,694,104    4,694,104    4,694,104    4,694,104     4,694,104

 Upper endpoint of wage window (W ):          MW+$2         MW+$3        MW+$4        MW+$5        MW+$6

 Notes. The table reports the effects of a minimum wage increase based on the event study analysis (see
 equation 1) exploiting 138 state-level minimum wage changes between 1979-2016. The table reports five
 year averaged post-treatment estimates on missing jobs up to $4 below the new minimum wage, excess jobs,
 employment and wages. The different columns explore the robustness of the results to alternative upper end
 points, W , for calculating excess jobs. The first column limits the range of the wage window by setting the
 upper limit for calculating the excess jobs to W = $2, and the last column expands it until W = $6. All
 specifications include wage bin-by-state and wage bin-by period fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by
 state-quarter aggregated population. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state; signifi-
 cance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
 Line-by-line description.The first two rows report the change in number of missing jobs below the new min-
 imum wage (∆b), and excess jobs above the new minimum wage (∆a) relative to the pre-treatment total
 employment. The third row, the percentage change in average wages in the affected bins, (%∆W), is cal-
 culated using equation 2 in Section 2.2. The fourth row, percentage change in employment in the affected
 bins is calculated by dividing change in employment by jobs below the new minimum wage ( ∆a+∆b  b̄
                                                                                                     ). The
                                                                                                    −1
                                                                                            ∆a+∆b
  fifth row, employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage is calculated as %∆M        W whereas the
                                                                         1 ∆a+∆b
  sixth row, employment elasticity with respect to the wage, reports %∆W b̄        . The line on the number of
                                                                               −1
  observations shows the number of quarter-bin cells used for estimation, while the number of workers refers to
  the underlying CPS sample used to calculate job counts in these cells.




                                                    64
Table A.6: Impact of Minimum Wage Increase on the Average Wage and Employment of
Affected workers - Robustness to Alternative Time Windows
                                                      (1)             (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)
        Missing jobs below new MW (∆ b)           -0.018***        -0.021***   -0.018***   -0.018***   -0.018***
                                                    (0.004)         (0.004)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)
        Excess jobs above new MW (∆ a)             0.021***        0.021***    0.019***    0.021***    0.019***
                                                    (0.003)         (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)

        %∆ affected wages                          0.068***        0.065***    0.064***    0.068***     0.067***
                                                    (0.010)         (0.010)     (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.009)
        %∆ affected employment                       0.028           0.010       0.022       0.029        0.013
                                                    (0.029)         (0.025)     (0.031)     (0.032)      (0.029)

        Employment elasticity w.r.t. MW              0.024           0.008       0.018       0.025        0.011
                                                    (0.025)         (0.021)     (0.027)     (0.027)      (0.025)
        Emp. elasticity w.r.t. affected wage         0.411           0.148       0.335       0.427        0.197
                                                    (0.430)         (0.380)     (0.461)     (0.445)      (0.436)

        Jobs below new MW (b–1 )                    0.086            0.086       0.086       0.086       0.086
        %∆ MW                                       0.101            0.101       0.101       0.101       0.101
        Number of events                             138              138         138         138         138
        Number of observations                     847,314          847,314     847,314     847,314     847,314
        Number of workers in the sample           4,694,104        4,694,104   4,694,104   4,694,104   4,694,104

        Time window                                 [-3, 4]         [-3, 2]     [-3, 6]     [-5, 4]      [-1, 4]

         Notes. The table reports the effects of a minimum wage increase based on the event study analysis (see
         equation 1) exploiting 138 state-level minimum wage changes between 1979-2016. The table reports aver-
         aged post-treatment estimates on missing jobs up to $4 below the new minimum wage, excess jobs at and
         up to $5 above it, employment and wages. The different columns explore the robustness of the results
         to alternative time windows. The first column reproduces our baseline estimate in Table 1 column 1.
         Compared to the baseline specification, columns 2 and 3 change the post-treatment period to 2 and 6
         years, respectively. Similarly, in columns 4 and 5, we start the pre-treatment window from 5 years and one
         year prior to the event. All specifications include wage-bin-by-state and wage-bin-by-period fixed effects.
         Regressions are weighted by state-quarter aggregated population. Robust standard errors in parentheses
         are clustered by state; significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
         Line-by-line description.The first two rows report the change in number of missing jobs below the new
         minimum wage (∆b), and excess jobs above the new minimum wage (∆a) relative to the pre-treatment
         total employment. The third row, the percentage change in average wages in the affected bins, (%∆W), is
         calculated using equation 2 in Section 2.2. The fourth row, percentage change in employment in the af-
         fected bins is calculated by dividing change in employment by jobs below the new minimum wage ( ∆a+∆b
                                                                                                          b̄
                                                                                                               ).
                                                                                                                 −1
                                                                                                     ∆a+∆b
         The fifth row, employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage is calculated as %∆M      W whereas
                                                                                    1 ∆a+∆b
         the sixth row, employment elasticity with respect to the wage, reports %∆W b̄       . The line on the num-
                                                                                         −1
         ber of observations shows the number of quarter-bin cells used for estimation, while the number of workers
         refers to the underlying CPS sample used to calculate job counts in these cells.




                                                              65
Table A.7: Impact of Minimum Wages on Employment and Wages for Card and Krueger
Probability Groups - Bunching and Aggregate approaches
                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)
          Panel A: Aggregate


          %∆ average wage                            0.020***         0.007           -0.001
                                                      (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.004)
          %∆ employment                                0.008          0.006           0.000
                                                      (0.009)        (0.005)         (0.002)
          Employment elasticity wrt wage               0.435          N/A              N/A
                                                      (0.371)

          Panel B: Bunching


          %∆ affected wages                          0.073***       0.051***         0.060*
                                                      (0.011)        (0.013)         (0.032)
          %∆ affected employment                       0.015          0.015           0.011
                                                      (0.018)        (0.048)         (0.055)
          Emp. elasticity w.r.t. affected wage         0.206          0.304           0.184
                                                      (0.233)        (0.904)         (0.841)

          Jobs below new MW (b–1 )                    0.358           0.104          0.027
          %∆ MW                                       0.102           0.102          0.101
          Number of events                             138             138            138
          Number of observations                     847,314         847,314        847,314

          Group:                                    High prob.    Middle prob.     Low prob.

           Notes. The table reports the wage and employment elasticities with respect to the min-
           imum wage for the high , middle, and the low probability groups using the Card and
           Krueger predictive model of exposure to minimum wage changes. Both panels A and B
           are based on the 138 state level events and an event-based approach with five year post-
           treatment period. Panel A reports the estimates for aggregate employment and wages
           for the three groups. Panel B reports the estimated employment and wage effect for af-
           fected workers using the bunching approach. Regressions are weighted by state averaged
           population of the relevant demographic group. Robust standard errors in parentheses
           are clustered by state; significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.




                                                    66
Table A.8: Impact of Minimum Wage Increase by Pre-Treatment Employment Status: New
Entrants and Incumbents
                                                                                          Matched CPS
                                                (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
 Missing jobs below new MW (∆b)             -0.018***         -0.023***     -0.018***       -0.012***       -0.005***
                                              (0.004)          (0.004)       (0.003)          (0.002)         (0.001)
 Excess jobs above new MW (∆a)               0.021***         0.025***      0.018***         0.013***        0.006***
                                              (0.003)          (0.004)       (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.001)

 %∆ affected wages                           0.068***         0.073***       0.059***       0.095***          0.019
                                              (0.010)          (0.011)        (0.013)        (0.020)         (0.013)
 %∆ affected employment                        0.028            0.023          0.009          0.009           0.008
                                              (0.029)          (0.024)        (0.046)        (0.068)         (0.034)

 Employment elasticity w.r.t. MW               0.024            0.019         0.006           0.003           0.003
                                              (0.025)          (0.021)       (0.032)         (0.026)         (0.011)
 Emp. elasticity w.r.t. affected wage          0.411            0.311         0.145           0.094           0.431
                                              (0.430)          (0.320)       (0.747)         (0.704)         (1.682)

 Jobs below new MW (b–1 )                     0.086             0.086         0.072           0.042           0.384
 %∆ MW                                        0.101             0.101         0.103           0.103           0.103
 Number of events                              138               138           137             137             137
 Number of observations                      847,314           847,314       733,941         733,941         733,941
 Number of workers in the sample            4,694,104         4,694,104     1,505,192       1,373,696        131,496

                                                                           All matched                         New
 Sample:                                   All workers     All workers                     Incumbents
                                                                             workers                         entrants
 Time window:                                 5 years          1 year         1 year          1 year          1 year

  Notes. The table reports 1 year post-treatment estimates of employment and wages of the affected bins for all workers
  (incumbents and new entrants) using state-quarter-wage bin aggregated CPS data from 1979-2016, and matched CPS
  data from 1980-2016. Incumbent workers are employed in the 4th interview month of CPS, and new entrants are not
  employed in the 4th interview month. The first column replicates column 1 in Table 1 for comparability. The second
  column includes all workers in the primary CPS sample and employs the baseline specification, but reports only the first
  year effects. The third and fourth columns use matched CPS and consider only the first year effects on incumbent, and
  new-entrant workers. Specifications include wage bin-by-state, wage bin-by period, and state-by-period fixed effects.
  Regressions are weighted by state-quarter aggregated population. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered
  by state; significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
  Line-by-line description.The first two rows report the change in number of missing jobs below the new minimum wage
  (∆b), and excess jobs above the new minimum wage (∆a) relative to the pre-treatment total employment. The third
  row, the percentage change in average wages in the affected bins, (%∆W), is calculated using equation 2 in Section 2.2.
  The fourth row, percentage change in employment in the affected bins is calculated by dividing change in employment
  by jobs below the new minimum wage ( ∆a+∆b
                                           b̄
                                                ). The fifth row, employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage
                                           −1
                    ∆a+∆b                                                                                     1 ∆a+∆b
  is calculated as %∆M  W whereas the sixth row, employment elasticity with respect to the wage, reports %∆W b̄−1 .
  The line on the number of observations shows the number of quarter-bin cells used for estimation, while the number of
  workers refers to the underlying CPS sample used to calculate job counts in these cells.




                                                         67
     Table A.9: Robustness of the Relationship Between Employment Changes and the Minimum-to-Median Wage Ratio (Kaitz
     Index) Across Events
                                            Jobs below new MW              Missing jobs              Excess jobs          Employment change
                                                    (b–1 )                    (∆b)                      (∆a)                  (∆a + ∆b)
                                               (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
             Panel A: Main estimates


             Minimum-to-median ratio        0.314***     0.361***     -0.094***     -0.133***    0.143***     0.139**     0.050        0.006
                                             (0.063)      (0.056)      (0.032)       (0.034)      (0.048)     (0.057)    (0.043)      (0.048)

             Panel B: With D.C.


             Minimum-to-median ratio        0.312***     0.358***      -0.075**     -0.111***    0.149***     0.148**     0.074        0.037
                                             (0.061)      (0.055)       (0.035)      (0.037)      (0.048)     (0.057)    (0.049)      (0.055)
68




             Panel C: Unweighted


             Minimum-to-median ratio        0.275***     0.286***     -0.112***     -0.128***    0.142***    0.134***     0.031        0.006
                                             (0.035)      (0.035)      (0.024)       (0.026)      (0.037)     (0.041)    (0.038)      (0.042)

             Number of observations
             Panels A, C                       130          130           130          130          130         130        130          130
             Panel B                           138          138           138          138          138         138        138          138

             Controls                                        Y                          Y                        Y                       Y

              Notes. The table reports the effect of the minimum-to-median wage ratio (Kaitz index) on four outcomes: jobs below the new minimum
              wage, missing jobs, excess jobs, and the total employment change. The minimum-to-median wage ratio is the new minimum wage
              divided by the state-level median wage. Odd columns reports simple linear regression estimates. Even columns include the controls in
              Table A.9. Regressions are weighted by state-populations. Robust standard errors are in parentheses; significance levels are * 0.10, **
              0.05, *** 0.01.
                      Table A.10: Employment Elasticities of Minimum Wage from Alternative Approaches
                                                                 Continuous treatment -
                                                                                                                                 Event based
                                                                        ln(MW)
                                                (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)          (6)          (7)
                                           Fixed Effects    First Difference    Fixed Effects    First Difference
     Panel A: Overall
     Employment elasticity wrt MW            -0.089***            0.027             -0.020             -0.005          0.016        0.027        0.024
                                              (0.025)            (0.031)           (0.028)            (0.019)         (0.029)      (0.022)      (0.025)

     Panel B: Teen
     Employment elasticity wrt MW            -0.238***            0.094            -0.210**            0.080           0.163        0.152        0.125
                                              (0.088)            (0.122)            (0.091)           (0.120)         (0.115)      (0.107)      (0.134)
      Aggregate                                  Y                  Y                                                    Y
      Under $15                                                                       Y                  Y                            Y
     [M W–$4, M W + $5)                                                                                                                            Y

                                                                                                                                               Wage-bin-
69




                                                 State-              State-           State-              State-       State-       State-
     Data aggregation                                                                                                                            state-
                                                  year                year             year                year         year         year
                                                                                                                                                quarter

      Notes. The table reports estimated overall (panel A) and teen (panel B) employment elasticities of minimum wage from alternative approaches. All
      columns show average post-treatment elasticities calculated from regressions of state-level employment to population rate on contemporaneous and 4
      annual lags and 2 annual leads of log minimum wages. We use state-by-year aggregated CPS data from 1979-2016. Columns (1) and (3) estimate
      two-way (state and year) fixed effect regresions, while in columns (2) and (4) we employ first differences. Column (3) and (4) exclude workers with
      hourly wages greater than $15. Columns (5)-(7) report estimates employment elasticities using an event study framework where we exploit the same
      138 events as in our benchmark specifications. In column (5), we use state by quarter aggregated CPS data. In column (6) we directly estimate the
      effect of the minimum wage on jobs below $15. We refer to this specification as simpler method in Section 4.2., since it directly estimate the sum of
      missing and excess jobs. Finally, column (7) shows estimates from the bunching approach (same as in column 1 of Table 1, and column 3 of Table 2).
      In all cases we show estimates with and without population weighting. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state; significance levels are *
      0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
Online Appendix B
Washington State Case Study
In this Appendix, we report estimates using administrative data on hourly wages for a case
study of a large state-level minimum wage increase. The state of Washington increased its
real hourly minimum wage by around 22% from $7.51 to $9.18 (in 2016 dollars) in two steps
between 1999 and 2000. Moreover, this increase in the real minimum wage was persistent,
since subsequent increases were automatically indexed to the rate of inflation. In addition to
the size and permanence of this intervention, Washington is an attractive case study because
it is one of the few states with high quality administrative data on hourly wages.39 Using
hourly wage data, we can easily calculate the actual post-reform wage distribution (blue
line in Figure 1). However, the key challenge implementing the bunching method is that we
do not directly observe the wage distribution in the absence of the minimum wage increase
(red line in Figure 1). To overcome this challenge, the previous literature constructed the
counterfactual by imposing strong parametric assumptions (Meyer and Wise 1983) or simply
used the pre-reform wage distribution as a counterfactual (Harasztosi and Lindner 2016).40
Here we improve upon these research designs by implementing a difference-in-differences style
estimator.
    In particular, we discretize the wage distribution, and count per-capita employment for
each dollar wage bin k. For example, the $10 wage bin includes jobs paying between $10 and
$10.99 in 2016$. We normalize these counts by the pre-treatment employment-to-population
rate in Washington,
                                                  1      EW A,k,P ost
                               eW A,k,P ost = E
                                                W A,P re N
                                                           W A,P ost
                                                   NW A,P re
        E
where NWWA,k,tA,t
                  is per-capita employment for each dollar wage bin k in state Washington at
time t, and NW A,t is the size of the population. We use administrative data on hourly wages
from Washington State to calculate eW A,k,P ost .
   We calculate the post treatment counterfactual wage distribution for each wage bin,
 CF
eW A,k,P ost , by adding the (population-weighted) average per capita employment change in
the 39 states that did not experience a minimum wage increase during the 1998-2004 time
period to the Washington state’s pre-treatment per-capita wage distribution. After the
appropriate normalization, this leads to the following expression:
  39 The  state of Washington requires all employers, as part of the state’s Unemployment Insurance (UI)
payroll tax requirements, to report both the quarterly earnings and quarterly hours worked for all employees.
The administrative data covers a near census of employee records from the state. One key advantage of the
bunching method proposed here is that there is no need for confidential or sensitive individual-level data for
implementation. Instead, we rely here on micro-aggregated data on employment counts for 5-cent hourly
wage bins. Workers with hourly wages greater than $50 are censored for confidentiality purposes. We deflate
wages to 2016 dollars using the CPI-U-RS.
  40 As shown in Dickens, Machin and Manning (1998), estimates using the Meyer and Wise 1983 approach is

highly sensitive to the parameterization of the wage distribution.




                                                     70
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   !
                        1               EW A,k,P re                      1    Es,k,P ost Es,k,P re 
 eCF
                                                                    X
  W A,k,P ost =     EW A,P re
                                  ×                         +                            −          
                                            NW A,P re                     39   N           N
                                                                                                   
                                                                s∈Control        s,P ost     s,P re
                    NW A,P re           |      {z       }       |                {z                   }
                    |   {z   }
                  normalization       Pre-treament                       Change in control
                                         in WA                                states

where E  skt
        Ns,t is per-capita employment for each dollar wage bin k in state s at time t, and Nst
is the size of the population (age 16 or over) in state s at time t. To calculate the third part
of this expression, the change in control states, we use hourly wage data from the Outgoing
Rotation Group of the Current Population Survey (CPS). We will discuss the data in more
detail in Section 2.3. For the second part of the expression, the pre-treatment Washington
wage distribution, we use administrative data on hourly wages. However, in Appendix Figure
B.4 we show that when we use the CPS, we get very similar results. Finally, the first part of
this expression, the normalization, is to express the counterfactual employment counts in
terms of pre-treatment total employment in Washington. It is worth highlighting that our
normalization does not force the area below the counterfactual wage distribution to be the
same as the area below the actual wage distribution—in other words, the minimum wage can
affect aggregate employment.
    In Figure B.1, panel (a) we report the actual (blue filled bar) and the counterfactual
(red empty bars) frequency distributions of wages, normalized by the pre-treatment total
employment in Washington. We define the pre-treatment period as 1996-1998, and the post-
treatment period as 2000-2004. The post-treatment actual wage distribution in Washington
state (blue filled bars) shows that very few workers earn less than the mandated wage, and
there is a large spike at the new minimum wage at $9. The post-treatment counterfactual
distribution differs considerably. That distribution indicates that in the absence of the
minimum wage increase, there would have been more jobs in the $7 and $8 bins, but fewer
jobs at the $9 bin and above. Compared to the counterfactual wage distribution, the actual
distribution is also elevated $1 and $2 above the minimum wage, which suggests that minimum
wages induce some modest spillover effects. At the same time, the ripple effect of the minimum
wage fades out above $12, and no difference is found between the actual and counterfactual
distribution above that point. Such a relationship between the actual and counterfactual
distributions closely resembles the illustration of the bunching method shown in Figure 1.
    The difference between the actual, eW A,k,P ost , and the counterfactual, eCF W A,k,P ost , fre-
quency distributions of wages represents the causal effect of the minimum wage on the wage
distribution. This difference can be expressed as:




                                                    71
                                                               
                                       1                        EW A,k,P ost   EW A,k,P re
 eW A,k,P ost − eCF
                 W A,k,P ost =      EW A,P re
                                                  ×                           −
                                                                    NW A,P ost         NW A,P re
                                                               
                                    NW A,P re                   |                 {z               }
                                   |   {z   }
                                 normalization                      Change in treatment                    
                                                                                                       !
                                                           X      1     EW A,k,P ost EW A,k,P re 
                                                  −                                 −            
                                                       s∈Control
                                                                 39      Ns,P ost     Ns,P re    
                                                       |                         {z                    }
                                                                      Change in control
                                                                                              (B.5)
which is the classic difference-in-differences estimator underlying the core estimates in the
paper. Standard errors are calculated using the procedure proposed by Ferman and Pinto
(forthcoming). Appropriate for a single treated unit, their procedure extends the cluster
residual bootstrap by correcting for sample-size based heteroskedasticity—an important issue
given the very different sample sizes across states in the CPS, and because Washington is
based on administrative data.
    The blue bars in Panel (b) of Figure B.1 report the differences in job counts for each
wage bin. The difference-in-differences estimate shows a clear drop in counts for wage bins
just below the new minimum wage. In the upper part of the table we report our estimate of
                                                                   P$8
missing jobs, 4b, which is the sum of employment changes, k=$5           eW A,k,P ost − eCF
                                                                                         W A,k,P ost ,
between $5 and $8—i.e., under the new minimum wage. These missing jobs paying below
$9 represent around 4.6% of the aggregate pre-treatment Washington employment. We
also calculate the number of excess jobs paying between $9 and $13, 4a, which is equal
    P$13
to k=$9    eW A,k,P ost − eCF
                           W A,k,P ost . The excess jobs represent around 5.4% of the aggregate
pre-treatment Washington employment.
    As we explained in the previous section, the effect of the minimum wage on low-wage jobs
is equal to the sum of the missing jobs below and the excess jobs above the new minimum
wage of $9. We find that the net employment change is positive—the increase amounted
to 0.8% of the pre-treatment aggregate employment in Washington. This reflects a 6.1%
(s.e. 10.9%) increase in employment for the workers who earned below the new minimum
wage in 1998. We also find that average wages of affected workers at the bottom of the
wage distribution increased by around 9.0% (s.e.18.8%) Coming from a single case study, the
precision of these estimates is much lower than in the pooled event study estimates presented
in the main paper.
    In Panel (b) of Figure 2, the red line shows the running sum of employment changes up
to each wage bin. The running sum drops to a sizable, negative value just below the new
minimum wage, but returns to around zero once the minimum wage is reached. By around
$2 above the minimum wage, the running sum reaches a small positive value and remains flat
thereafter—indicating little change in upper tail employment. This strengthens the case for
a causal interpretation of these results.
    Finally, we also explore the evolution of missing jobs (red line) and excess jobs (blue line)
over time in panel (a) in Online Appendix Figure B.3. The figure shows that excess and



                                                 72
missing jobs are close to zero before 1999, and there are no systematic pre-existing trends.41
Once the minimum wage is raised in two steps between 1999 and 2000, there is a clear and
sustained drop in jobs below the new minimum wage (relative to the counterfactual). Since
the minimum wage is indexed to inflation in Washington, the persistence of the drop is not
surprising. The evolution of excess jobs after 2000 closely matches the evolution of missing
jobs. As a result, the net employment change—which is the sum of missing and excess
jobs—is close to zero in all years following the minimum wage increase (see panel (b) in
Figure B.3).




  41 There  is a one-time, temporary, drop in excess jobs and an increase in missing jobs in 1996, which likely
reflects the fact that the 1996 federal minimum increase from $4.25 to $4.75 only affected control states, since
Washington’s minimum wage was already at $4.90 (in current dollars). However, the 1997 federal minimum
wage increase to $5.15 affected both Washington and controls states and hence restored the difference in
excess and missing jobs prior to Washington’s state minimum wage increase in 1999 and 2000.


                                                      73
            Figure B.1: Employment by Wage Bins in Washington between 2000-2004

                                                                                                                                Wage bins in 2016$
                                                                                                    5    7        9       11    13 15 17 19              21       23   25   26+




                                                                                                                                                                                        relative to the pre-treatment total employment ($26+ bin)
                                                                                            .06




                                                                                                                                                                                  .25
                            relative to the pre-treatment total employment
                             Actual and counterfactual employment count




                                                                                                                                                                                               Actual and counterfactual employment count
                                                                                            .05




                                                                                                                                                                                  .24
                                                                                            .04




                                                                                                                                                                                  .23
                                                                                            .03




                                                                                                                                                                                  .22
                                                                                            .02




                                                                                                                                                                                  .21
                                                                                            .01




                                                                                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                                                                                                  .19
                                                                                            0




                                                                                                    -4   -2       0    2    4     6      8    10 12 14                 16   17+
                                                                                                                      Wage bins relative to $9 in 2016$

                                                                                                                                    Actual distribution
                                                                                                                                    Counterfactual distribution


                        (a) The actual and counterfactual frequency distribution of wages
                                                                                                                                        Wage bins in 2016$
                                                                                                    5         7       9        11       13   15      17    19          21    23     25 26+
                                                                                            0.04
                            Difference between actual and counterfactual employment count




                                                                                                                                                                   ∆a = 0.054 (0.017)
                                                                                                                                                                  ∆b = -0.046 (0.016)
                                                                                                                                               %∆ affected employment = 0.061 (0.188)
                                     relative to the pre-treatment total employment




                                                                                                                                                     %∆ affected wage = 0.090 (0.108)
                                                                                            0.02
                                                                                            0.00
                                                                                            -0.02
                                                                                            -0.04




                                                                                                    -4       -2       0        2     4       6       8      10   12          14     16 17+
                                                                                                                               Wage bins relative to $9 in 2016$


          (b) The difference between the actual and counterfactual frequency distribution of wages
Notes: We examine the effect of the 1999-2000 minimum wage change in Washington state on the frequency distribution of
wages (aggregated in $1 bins), normalized by the 1998 level of employment in Washington. The minimum wage was raised from
$7.51 to $9.18 (in 2016 values) and it was indexed by inflation afterwards. Panel (a) shows the actual (purple solid bars) and
counterfactual (red outlined bars) wage frequency distribution after the minimum wage increases in Washington. The actual
distribution (post treatment) plots the average employment between 2000 and 2004 by wage-bin relative to the 1998 total
employment in Washington using administrative data on hourly wages between 2000-2004. The counterfactual distribution
adds the average change in employment between 2000 and 2004 in states without any minimum wage change to the mean
1996-1998 job counts (see the text for details). The $26+ bin (the bin that is $17+ above the new minimum wage) contains all
workers earning above $26, and its values shown on the right y-axis. Panel (b) depicts the difference between the actual and the
counterfactual wage distribution. The blue bars show the change in employment at each wage bin (relative to the 1998 total
employment in Washington). The red line shows the overall employment changes up to that wage bin. The upper right panel
shows the estimates on missing jobs below $9, 4b; on the excess jobs between $9 and $13, 4a, and on the estimated employment
and wage effects. The standard errors are calculated using the method proposed by Ferman and Pinto (forthcoming).

                                                                                                                                          74
Figure B.2: Comparison of Per-capita Employment Counts of Washington and the Counter-
factual




                                         0.03 0.06 0.09 0.12 0.15 0.18 0.21
                                                                                                     8.4% MW inc.        10.3% MW inc.
          Employment counts per capita

                                         0




                                                                              1992   1994        1996             1998      2000         2002            2004
                                                                                                                  Year

                                                                                       WA, [$5, $8]                          WA, [$9, $13]
                                                                                       Counterfactual, [$5, $8]              Counterfactual, [$9, $13]


Notes: The figure shows the evolution of the number of jobs per capita with hourly wages between $5 and $8,
and $9 and $13 in Washington and in the counterfactual, with data aggregated in $1 bins. The counterfactual
jobs are calculated using states without any minimum wage change during the 1998-2004 time period. In
particular, we add the average change in per capita employment between $5 and $8 (and between $9 and $13)
in the control states to the mean 1996-1998 job counts in Washington state (see the text for details). The two
vertical dashed black lines at 1998 and 1999 show the that the minimum wage was raised in 1999 and 2000
in two steps from from $7.51 to $9.18 (in 2016 values). The minimum wage was indexed to inflation after
2001. We exclude all observations with imputed wages in the CPS in forming the counterfactual employment
counts, except for years 1994 and 1995. Since determining imputed wages is not possible for those years, we
use all observations in 1994 and 1995.




                                                                                                          75
Figure B.3: Impact of Minimum Wages on Missing and Excess Jobs, and Employment Change
Over time in the Washington Case Study


                                                                                                                                   8.4% MW inc.       10.3% MW inc.




                                                                                                  0.05
                        Excess and missing jobs relative to
                         pre-treatment total employment
                                                                                                  0.00
                                                                                                  -0.05




                                                                                                          1992       1994    1996             1998       2000         2002   2004
                                                                                                                                              Year



                                                                                                                 (a) Missing and excess jobs over time
                        Change in employment relative to pre-treatment total employment




                                                                                                                               8.4% MW inc.          10.3% MW inc.
                                                                                          0.05
                                                                                          0.00
                                                                                          -0.05




                                                                                                   1992            1994     1996            1998         2000         2002   2004
                                                                                                                                            Year


                                       (b) Employment change over time
Notes: The figure shows the evolution of missing jobs, excess jobs, and total employment change over time in
Washington state, with data aggregated in $1 bins. In Panel (a), the red line represents the missing jobs—the
difference between the actual and counterfactual wage distribution between $5 and $8; while the light blue
line shows the excess jobs that is the difference between the actual and counterfactual frequency distributions
for wages between $9 and $13. In Panel (b), we report the employment change over time (the sum of excess
jobs and missing jobs). The counterfactual distribution is calculated by adding the average job change in the
control states to the mean 1996-1998 job counts in Washington (see the text for details). The two vertical
dashed black lines at 1998 and 1999 show the that the minimum wage was raised in 1999 and 2000 in two
steps from from $7.51 to $9.18 (in 2016 values). The minimum wage was indexed to inflation after 2001. We
exclude all observations with imputed wages in the CPS in forming the counterfactual employment counts,
except for years 1994 and 1995. Since determining imputed wages is not possible for those years, we use all
observation in 1994 and 1995.

                                                                                                                                        76
Figure B.4: Employment by Wage Bins in Washington between 2010-2004 (Replication of
Figure B.1 using CPS data)

                                                                                                                            Wage bins in 2016$
                                                                                                5    7        9       11    13 15 17 19              21       23   25   26+




                                                                                                                                                                                    relative to the pre-treatment total employment ($26+ bin)
                                                                                        .06




                                                                                                                                                                              .23
                        relative to the pre-treatment total employment
                         Actual and counterfactual employment count




                                                                                                                                                                                           Actual and counterfactual employment count
                                                                                        .05




                                                                                                                                                                              .22
                                                                                        .04




                                                                                                                                                                              .21
                                                                                        .03




                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                        .02




                                                                                                                                                                              .19
                                                                                        .01




                                                                                                                                                                              .18
                                                                                                                                                                              .17
                                                                                        0




                                                                                                -4   -2       0    2    4     6      8    10 12 14                 16   17+
                                                                                                                  Wage bins relative to $9 in 2016$

                                                                                                                                Actual distribution
                                                                                                                                Counterfactual distribution


                                                                                                                                    Wage bins in 2016$
                                                                                                5         7       9        11       13   15      17    19          21    23     25 26+
                                                                                        0.04
                        Difference between actual and counterfactual employment count




                                                                                                                                                                   ∆a = 0.047
                                                                                                                                                                  ∆b = -0.035
                                                                                                                                               %∆ affected employment = 0.108
                                 relative to the pre-treatment total employment




                                                                                                                                                     %∆ affected wage = 0.083
                                                                                        0.02
                                                                                        0.00
                                                                                        -0.02
                                                                                        -0.04




                                                                                                -4       -2       0        2     4       6       8      10   12          14     16 17+
                                                                                                                           Wage bins relative to $9 in 2016$


Notes: The figure replicates Figure B.1 that examine the effect of the 1999-2000 minimum wage change
in Washington on the frequency distribution of wages (aggregated in $1 bins), normalized by the 1998
level of employment in Washington. The minimum wage was raised from $7.51 to $9.18 (in 2016 values)
and it was indexed by inflation. Panel (a) shows the actual (purple solid bars) and counterfactual (red
outlined bars) frequency wage distribution after the minimum wage increases in Washington. The actual
distribution (post treatment) plots the average employment between 2000 and 2004 by wage-bin relative to
the 1998 total employment in Washington using CPS data on hourly wages between 2000-2004 (instead of
using administrative data as in Figure B.1. The counterfactual distribution adds the average change in
employment between 2000 and 2004 in states without any minimum wage change to the mean 1996-1998 job
counts (see the text for details). The 26+ bin contains all workers earning above $26, and its values shown on
the right y-axis. Panel (b) depicts the difference between the actual and the countefactual wage distribution.
The blue bars shows the change in employment at each wage bin (relative to the 1998 total employment in
Washington). The red line shows the overall employment changes up to that wage bin. The upper left panel
shows the estimates on missing number of jobs between $5 and $8, 4b; on the excess number of jobs between
$9 and $13, 4a, and on the estimated employment and wage effects.

                                                                                                                                      77
Online Appendix C
Event-by-event analysis
While the baseline estimates in this paper are an average effect across 138 events estimated
by equation (1), our event-by-event analysis estimates separate treatment effects for each of
the events. To do so, we first create event-specific annual state panel datasets using the same
real wage bin-state-specific employment counts as before. Then we calculate event-specific
estimates using separate regressions for each event.
    Each event h-specific dataset includes the treated state and all other clean control states
for an 8-year panel by event time (t = −3, ..., 4) with the minimum wage increase at t = 0.
Clean controls are those without any non-trivial minimum wage increase within the 8-year
event window. With these data we calculate event-specific per-capita state outcomes over
time Ysth : missing jobs bsth , between the new minimum and $4.00 below; excess jobs asth ,
between the minimum and $4.00 above; total affected employment esth = asth + bsth ; and
upper tail jobs more than $4.00 above the new minimum. For each event, we have a similar
regression equation to the one used in our baseline estimates
                                  4
                                                τ
                                                    + µsh + ρth + Ωsth + usth ,
                                  X
                        Ysth =           ατ hk Isth                                                 (C.6)
                                 τ =−3
where Ωjsh is an indicator that controls for other primary, federal, and small events whose
5-year post-treatment periods take place within the data set h. (Ωsth = 1 for post-treatment
periods of these events.) Just like our baseline estimates, we calculate the event-specific change
in excess jobs above (∆aj ), change in missing jobs below (∆bh ), and employment change
(∆eh = ∆ah + ∆bh ) relative to the first year prior to treatment. For instance, the change in
                                                                               P4          P4
                                                                                  k=0 αh,τ −    α
the excess number of jobs is given by ∆ah =         5  τ =0 ∆ahτ
                                                    1 P4
                                                             =       1 P4
                                                                     5  τ =0
                                                                                     k=0 h,−1
                                                                               EP OP −1
                                                                                              .
    Figure C.1 shows the resulting estimated employment changes for each event, along
with 95% confidence intervals obtained according to the procedure proposed by Ferman
and Pinto (forthcoming). Appropriate for a single treated unit, their procedure extends the
cluster residual bootstrap by correcting for heteroskedasticity—an important issue given
the very different sample sizes across states in the CPS. Given the very small sample sizes
for Washington D.C. in the CPS, we exclude these minimum wage increases from the
event-by-event analysis, for a total of 130 events. The figure shows estimates for missing,
excess, and total employment changes, where filled in markers represent statistically significant
employment changes at the 5 percent level. There is clear evidence of sizable but heterogeneous
bites across events: 83% (108) of the missing jobs estimates are negative, and 25% (32) of
the events are statistically significant at the 5 percent level. At the same time 21% (27) of
the excess jobs estimates are statistically significant, while 78% (100) are positive in sign.
Therefore, while there is considerable heterogeneity in the bite of the policy, the distribution
of employment estimates is consistent with the sharp null of zero effect everywhere: only 7
(or 5.3%) of events yield statistically significant overall employment changes: 1 is negative
and 6 are positive, and the median estimate is very close to zero.
    We can also use the event-by-event estimates to assess whether the lack of leading effects
and upper tail employment changes hold event-by-event, and not just on average. Figure


                                                    78
C.2 shows leading and upper tail employment changes for 129 events; here one event from
Connecticut in 1981 is dropped because it lacks a third leading term. Only 5.4% (7) of the
events experience a statistically significant upper tail effects at the 5 percent level, while
7.7% (10) the events experience statistically significant leading effects. Overall, these results
are reassuring as they show that the lack of upper tail or leading effects in aggregate is not
driven by a mix of unusual positive and negative individual effects. Rather, our findings are
consistent with the sharp null of zero upper tail and zero leading effects everywhere.
    We also stack all of the event-specific data to calculate an average effect across all the
events using the a single set of treatment effects ατ k
                                4
                                             τ
                                                 + µhks + ρhkt + Ωhkst + uhkst .
                                X
                     Yhkst =           ατ k Ihst                                           (C.7)
                               τ =−3
    This provides an alternative to our baseline panel specification that uses a more stringent
criteria for admissible control groups, and is not more robust to possible problems with a
staggered treatment design in presence of heterogeneous treatment effects. In particular, by
aligning events by event-time (and not calendar time), it is equivalent to a setting where
the events happen all at once and are not staggered; this prevents negative weighting of
some events that may occur with a staggered design (Abraham and Sun, 2018). Moreover,
by dropping all states with any events within the 8 year event window, we further guard
against bias due to heterogeneous treatment effects. Moving to the stacked-by-event approach
(column 2 in Table C.1) continues to produce a sizable and statistically significant positive
wage effect, but an employment effect that is statistically indistinguishable from zero. The
minimum wage employment elasticity using the stacked-by-event approach (column 2) is
0.001 (s.e. 0.002) which is fairly similar to the estimate of 0.024 (0.25) in the baseline panel
specification (column 1). The own wage elasticity is 0.018 (s.e. 0.546) in column 2 as opposed
to 0.411 (s.e., 0.430) in the baseline column 1; here the more stringent stacked-by-event
approach is somewhat less precise, though it still rules out an own wage elasticity more
negative than -0.88 at the 90% confidence level. The time paths for missing jobs, excess jobs
and employment are reported in Figure C.3; again these are quite similar to the baseline
Figures 3 and A.4 and show a sharp and persistent change in missing and excess jobs on the
event date, and a flat employment time path before and after the event.
    In column (3) we consider the case were we manually average the 138 estimates where
each event is weighted by population. The point estimates are very similar to column (2),
providing further assurance against the problematic (e.g., negative) implicit weights in the
panel estimate. Finally, in column (4) we further refine the sample by only considering events
that have a full five year post-treatment sample (i.e., events that occurred on 2012q1 or
earlier). The point estimates are quite close to column (2), even though, as expected, the
standard errors are now somewhat larger. This shows that the small size of our estimates in
columns (1) - (3) is not driven by a lack of a sufficiently long post-treatment period in some
of the events.




                                                   79
Figure C.1: Event-specific Excess Jobs Above, Missing Jobs Below, and Employment Change
Estimates

             130                                                                                        130
             120                                                                                        120
             110                                                                                        110
             100                                                                                        100
             90                                                                                         90
             80                                                                                         80
             70                                                                                         70
     Event




                                                                                                Event
             60                                                                                         60
             50                                                                                         50
             40                                                                                         40
             30                                                                                         30
             20                                                                                         20
             10                                                                                         10
              0                                                                                          0
                   -.2         -.1                  0                 .1              .2                      -.2          -.1                 0                .1   .2
                                     Actual estimate and the 95% CI                                                              Actual estimate and the 95% CI




                         (a) Missing jobs below (∆b)                                                                (b) Excess jobs above (∆a)
                                                          130
                                                          120
                                                          110
                                                          100
                                                          90
                                                          80
                                                          70
                                                  Event




                                                          60
                                                          50
                                                          40
                                                          30
                                                          20
                                                          10
                                                           0
                                                                -.2        -.1                  0                     .1              .2
                                                                                 Actual estimate and the 95% CI



                                                            (c) Employment change (∆a + ∆b)

Notes: The figure shows the event-specific point (square markers) and confidence interval (gray horizontal
bars) estimates for missing jobs below (∆b), excess jobs above (∆a), and employment change (∆a + ∆b). The
point estimates are calculated using equation C.6, and the confidence intervals are obtained according to
the procedure proposed by Ferman and Pinto (forthcoming). The vertical gray dash line indicates the null
hypothesis of no effect, and it is rejected with 95% confidence if the confidence intervals do not contain 0.
There are 130 events (D.C. events are dropped due to the measurement error concerns). 44/130, 25/130, and
7/130 events yield statistically significant estimates (filled markers) for missing jobs below, excess jobs above,
and employment change.




                                                                                           80
Figure C.2: Leading estimates and upper tail falsification tests for event-specific estimates

                                    130
                                    120
                                    110
                                    100
                                    90
                                    80
                                    70



                            Event
                                    60
                                    50
                                    40
                                    30
                                    20
                                    10
                                     0
                                          -.2          -.1                  0                   .1              .2
                                                             Actual estimate and the 95% CI


                          (a) Leading employment change (∆a−3 + ∆b−3 )
                                    130
                                    120
                                    110
                                    100
                                    90
                                    80
                                    70
                            Event




                                    60
                                    50
                                    40
                                    30
                                    20
                                    10
                                     0
                                                 -.2             -.1               0                 .1         .2
                                                             Actual estimate and the 95% CI

                                                                   Pτ =4 P
                                                                       τ =0       k≥5 ατ k −α−1k
                                          (b) Upper tail (                    EP OP −1
                                                                                                            )
Notes: The figure shows the event-specific point (square markers) and confidence interval (gray horizontal
                                                             Pτ =4 P
                                                                                                          k≥5 ατ k −α−1k
bars) estimates for leading (∆a−3 + ∆b−3 ), and upper tail (                                  τ =0
                                                                                                                           ) employment change.
                                                                                                     EP OP −1
The point estimates are calculated using equation C.6, and the confidence intervals are obtained according to
the procedure proposed by Ferman and Pinto (forthcoming). The vertical gray dash line at 0 indicates the
null hypothesis of no effect, and it is rejected with 95% confidence if confidence intervals do not contain 0.
There are 129 events (D.C. events are dropped due to the measurement error concerns and the minimum
wage event that takes place in Connecticut in 1981 does not have the third leading term.). 7/129, and 7/129
events yield statistically significant estimates (filled markers) for leading, and upper tail employment change.




                                                                     81
Figure C.3: Impact of Minimum Wages on the Missing and Excess Jobs, and Employment
Over Time; Stacked Analysis Missing and Excess Jobs




                                                                                                    .03
                         Excess and missing jobs relative to the pre-treatment total employment


                                                                                                    .02
                                                                                                    .01
                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                    -.01
                                                                                                    -.02




                                                                                                             -3        -2       -1           0          1        2       3   4
                                                                                                                             Years relative to the minimum wage change


                                                                                                        (a) Evolution of the missing and excess jobs
                                                                                                  .2
                        Percentage change in employment of affected workers
                                                                                                  .1
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  -.1
                                                                                                  -.2




                                                                                                        -3        -2           -1           0          1         2       3   4
                                                                                                                            Years relative to the minimum wage change


                       (b) Evolution of the employment of the affected workers
Notes: The figure shows the main results from our stacked analysis (see equation 7) exploiting 138 state-level
minimum wage changes between 1979-2016. Panel (a) shows the effect of a minimum wage increase on the
missing jobs below the new minimum wage (blue line) and on the excess jobs at and slightly above it (red
line) over time. The blue line shows the evolution of the number of jobs (relative to the total employment
1 year before the treatment) between $4 below the new minimum wage and the new minimum wage (∆b);
and the red lines show the number of jobs between the new minimum wage and $5 above it (∆a). Panel (b)
shows the evolution of employment between $4 below the new minimum wage and $5 above it (relative to the
total employment 1 year before the treatment), which is equal to the sum of missing jobs below and excess
jobs at and slightly above the minimum wage, ∆b + ∆a. We also show the 95% confidence intervals based on
standard errors that are clustered at the state level.


                                                                                                                                          82
                           Table C.1: Stacked Data Estimates
                                               (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
Missing jobs below new MW (∆b)             -0.018***        -0.017***          -0.017        -0.015***
                                             (0.004)         (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.003)
Excess jobs above new MW (∆a)               0.021***        0.017***           0.019          0.015***
                                             (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.003)

%∆ affected wages                           0.068***        0.048***           0.060         0.042***
                                             (0.010)         (0.012)          (0.014)         (0.013)
%∆ affected employment                        0.028           0.001            0.022           -0.001
                                             (0.029)         (0.026)          (0.041)         (0.030)

Employment elasticity w.r.t. MW               0.024           0.001            0.019           -0.001
                                             (0.025)         (0.022)          (0.035)         (0.024)
Emp. elasticity w.r.t. affected wage          0.411           0.018            0.367           -0.017
                                             (0.430)         (0.546)          (0.613)         (0.713)

Jobs below new MW (b–1 )                      0.086           0.086           .086             0.086
%∆ MW                                         0.101           0.101           .101             0.108
Number of events                               138             138             138               98
Number of observations                       847,314         983,934         983,934          838,584

                                                                                             Primary,
Set of events                               Primary         Primary          Primary          until
                                                                                             2012q1
                                          All workers,
                                                           All workers,    All workers,    All workers,
Data                                       state-by-
                                                             stacked         stacked         stacked
                                           wage-bin
                                                             Pooled          Manual           Pooled
Specification                               Baseline
                                                             stacked        averaging         stacked

Notes. The table reports the effects of a minimum wage increase based on the event study analysis (see
equation 1) and alternative variants of stacked analysis (see equations 6 and 7) exploiting 138 state-level
minimum wage changes between 1979 and 2016. The table reports five year averaged post-treatment
estimates on missing jobs up to $4 below the new minimum wage, excess jobs at and up to $5 above it,
employment and wages. The first column reproduces column (1) of Table 1 for comparison purposes.
Column (2) uses equation 7. Column (3) uses equation 6 and manually averages each event-by-event
estimates. Column (4) uses the same regression equation as column (2), but uses only events that have
occurred on or before 2012q1 to ensure a full five year post-treatment sample. Robust standard errors
in parentheses are clustered by event-by-state in columns (1), (2), and (4). In column (3), we employ
the procedure proposed by Ferman and Pinto (forthcoming) to obtain the standard errors. Significance
levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.




                                                  83
Online Appendix D
Data Appendix
The primary data set we use in the event study analysis is the individual-level NBER Merged
Outgoing Rotation Group of the Current Population Survey for 1979-2016 (CPS). We use
variables EARNHRE (hourly wage), EARNWKE (weekly earnings), and UHOURSE (usual
hours) to construct our hourly wage variable. For the period after 1995q4, we exclude
observations with imputed hourly wages (I25a>0) among those with positive EARNHRE
values, and exclude observations for which usual weekly earnings or hours information is
imputed (I25a>0 or I25d>0) among those with positive EARNWKE values. There is no
information on the imputation between 1994q1 and 1995q3 so we exclude these observations
entirely. For the years 1989-1993, we follow the methodology of Hirsch and Schumacher
(2004) to determine imputed observations.
    The CPS is a survey, where only a subset of workers is interviewed each month; therefore,
there is sampling error in the dataset. In addition, as we do not use observations with imputed
hourly wages in most of our analysis, the employment counts of the raw CPS data are biased
downwards. To reduce the sampling error and also address the undercounting due to dropping
imputed observations, our primary sample combines the CPS wage densities with the true
state-level employment counts from the QCEW (E). Specifically, in the QCEW benchmarked
                                                                  QCEW           CP S
                                                               Ew                        E
CPS, the employment counts for a wage bin w is calculated as             = fcw          ×N , where
                                                               d
                                                               N
    CP S                                                                CP S
fcw      is the (discretized) wage density estimated using the CPS: fˆw      = P rob(w ≤ wage <
w + 0.25). We also do a similar benchmarking of NAICS-based industry-and-state-specific
QCEW employment (between 1990 and 2016) when we conduct sectoral analysis.
     In addition, we use micro-aggregated administrative data on hourly wages from Washington
state for the case study in Section B.5. This data was provided to us as counts of workers in
(nominal) $0.05 bins between 1992 and 2016 by the state’s Employment Security Department.
We convert this data into $0.25 (real 2016 USD) hourly wage bins for our analysis using
the CPI-U-RS. We also use similar micro-aggregated administrative data from Minnesota
and Oregon for conducting comparison of data quality and measurement error in Online
Appendix E.

Matched CPS
The CPS outgoing rotation groups are structured so that an individual reports her wage
twice, one year apart, in 4th and 8th sample months. We employ the longitudinal aspect of
the CPS when separately estimating the impacts of the minimum wage on new entrant and
incumbent workers. This requires matching two CPS files. We exactly follow the procedure
proposed by Madrian and Lefgren (2000), and use household id (HHID), household number
(HHNUM), person line number in household (LINENO), month in sample (MINSAMP), and
month and state variables to match observations in two consecutive CPS files. We confirm
the validity of matches by evaluating reported sex, race, and age in the two surveys. If sex or
race do not match, or if individual’s age decreases by more than 1 or increases by more than
2, we declare them as “bad matches” and exclude from the matched sample. Additionally,
since matching is not possible from July to December in 1984 and 1985, from January to

                                              84
September in 1985 and 1986, from June to December in 1994 and 1995, or from January to
August in 1995 and 1996, we exclude these periods. On average, 72% of the observations
in the CPS are matched: around 25% of the individuals in are absent in the 8th sample
month, while an additional 3% are dropped because they are bad matches. We determine
the incumbency of individual from employment status information in the 4th sample month.
Similar to our primary CPS sample, we drop observations with imputed wages in the 8th
sample month. Overall, the number of worker-level observations is smaller in the matched
sample because we only use the 8th sample month in the matched sample, as opposed to
both 4th and 8th sample months in the baseline sample.

Industry classifications
Following Mian and Sufi (2014), we use an industry classification with four categories (tradable,
non-tradable, construction, and other) based on retail and world trade. According to the
classification, an industry is “tradable” if the per worker import plus export value exceeds
$10,000, or if the sum of import and export values of the NAICS 4-digit industry is greater
than $500 million. The retail sector and restaurants compose “non-tradable” industries,
whereas the “construction” industries are industries related to construction, land development
and real estate. Industries that do not fit in either of these three categories are pooled and
labeled as “other”. We merge the CPS with Mian and Sufi (2014) industry classification using
the IND80 and IND02 variables in the CPS.




                                               85
Online Appendix E
Comparison of Administrative Data to CPS
In our event study analysis, we use the Current Population Survey (CPS), which provides
information on wages for a large sample of individuals, after benchmarking to aggregate state-
level employment counts in the QCEW. There is therefore sampling error in our estimated
job counts in each wage bin. In this section we assess the accuracy of CPS based jobs counts
by comparing administrative data on job counts from three states with reliable information
on hourly wages (Minnesota, Oregon, and Washington).
    In Section E.1, we compare the performance of the raw CPS and the QCEW-benchmarked
CPS in predicting the counts of workers earning less than $15 in the administrative data from
Minnesota, Oregon and Washington. We show that counts from the QCEW-benchmarked
CPS are much closer to the counts from the administrative data than those from the raw CPS:
the mean squared prediction error is substantially smaller when we use QWEW-benchmarked
CPS data. In Section E.2, we show that the wage distribution from the QCEW-benchmarked
CPS closely matches the distribution from the administrative data from the three states. In
particular, we show that the number of workers reporting earnings under the state minimum
wage is similarly small in both the administrative data and the CPS, which is an important
indication of the degree of misreporting in the CPS. In section E.3 we implement structural
estimation to further assess the importance of wage misreporting in the administrative data
and in the QCEW-benchmarked CPS along the lines of Autor, Manning and Smith (2016).
Our estimates show that the implied misreporting is of a similar magnitude in the two data
sources. In section E.4 we deconvolve the QCEW-benchmarked CPS using the estimated
measurement error model of Autor, Manning and Smith (2016), and provide estimates using
this measurement-error-corrected frequency distribution.

E.1 Assessing the Accuracy of the Raw versus the QCEW- bench-
marked CPS
We compare the administrative data with the raw CPS, and the QCEW-benchmarked CPS.
Because the CPS is a survey, it has substantially greater sampling error than the QCEW
which is a near-census of all workers in a state. Also, since we are not using observations
with imputed hourly wages in our data sets, state-level employment counts of the raw CPS
data are biased downwards. To address both these problems, our primary sample combines
the CPS wage distribution with state-level employment counts in the QCEW. We label the
data with the QCEW adjustment as the “QCEW-benchmarked CPS”, and the raw CPS as
“CPS-Raw.”42
  42 We  note that the QCEW and CPS have slightly different employment concepts. The CPS measures
employment in a reference week while the QCEW measures employment at any time in a quarter. So CPS
employment may be slightly lower than QCEW since some people work only parts of a quarter. Therefore,
the QCEW-benchmarked CPS is closer to the QCEW employment concept. At the same time, any such
gap is likely picked up by the state and time fixed effects. To confirm this, we we implement an event study
regression where the outcome variable is the gap between CPS and QCEW employment. Events are the
same 138 state-level minimum wage changes between 1979-2016 that we use in our benchmark specification.
Similar to our benchmark specification we include state and time fixed effects in the regression. The blue line


                                                     86
    First, we establish here that QCEW benchmarking of aggregate employment is likely
to improve the accuracy of our counts by wage bin. The employment count for wage bin
w, Ew , can be rewritten as the product of the (discretized) wage density, fw = P rob(w ≤
wage < w + 0.25), and the employment , E, so Ew = fw × E. The raw CPS-based estimate
for per-capita count is EwCP S = fwCP S × E CP S . The QCEW benchmarked CPS uses the
state-level employment counts from the QCEW which has no measurement error given that
includes the near universe of workers; so formally, EwQCEW = fwCP S × E. It follows that the
mean squared prediction error (M SP E) is lower for the QCEW benchmarked CPS than for
the raw CPS, if the measurement errors for fwCP S are uncorrelated with E CP S . The latter
condition holds if the source of the error is sampling.
    Since the bunching approach proposed here mainly focuses on job changes at the bottom
of the wage distribution, we assess whether the raw CPS or the QCEW-benchmarked CPS
does a better job in predicting the number of workers earning less than $15. For each
quarter t, we calculate the average per-capita numbers of workers earning less than $15 in
the 20 subsequent quarters (i.e., between tand t + 20); we also calculate the average for the 4
preceding quarters (i.e., between tand t − 4). Then, we subtract the latter from the former
and we refer to this as the transformed counts. The employment changes in Table 1 show the
average employment changes in the 20 subsequent quarter after the minimum wage relative
to the 4 preceding quarters. Therefore, the transformed counts are closely related to the
employment estimates shown in Table 1.
    In figure E.1 panels (a) and (b), we show the scatterplot of the transformed counts (per
capita) from the administrative data against those from QCEW-benchmarked CPS and the
raw CPS, respectively. In addition to a visual depiction, we also regress the transformed
administrative counts on the transformed CPS-Raw, and QCEW-benchmarked CPS counts.
To assess the accuracy of the data, we use two measures: R2 and the slope (β̂). A perfect
match between the CPS and the administrative data would yield R2 = β̂ = 1, or a zero
mean-squared prediction error (MSPE). If the CPS correctly predicts the administrative
counts on average, but each prediction possesses some error, then R2 < 1 and β̂ = 1. On
the other hand, if there is a bias in the CPS counts, then β̂ 6= 1. The QCEW-benchmarked
counts are better predictors of the administrative counts than are the raw CPS counts: for
the former, the estimated slope is 0.778 and the R2 is 0.643. In contrast, the raw CPS has a
larger bias (β̂ = 0.564) and variance (R2 = 0.322).
    In table E.1, we report the ratio of the MSPE using the raw CPS counts to the MSPE
using the QCEW-benchmarked CPS. Besides reporting the MSPE for the transformed count
(the 20 subsequent quarter average minus the 4 preceding quarter average) of workers under
$15, we also report the MSPEs for underlying components. Namely, we calculate the MSPEs
using counts of workers earnings less than $15/hour as well as counts of workers in each $0.25
bins—each averaged over either 4 or 20 quarters. A MSPE ratio above one indicates that the
QCEW-benchmarked CPS performs better in predicting the administrative data than the
raw CPS. The table shows that this is indeed the case: QCEW-benchmarked CPS performs
better in all cases, especially for the aggregated employment counts under $15/hour.
shows the evolution of the gap in the employment rate (relative to the year before the treatment) between
the CPS and QCEW. As Figure E.5 shows, there is no systematic change in the gap between CPS-QCEW
employment following treatment.



                                                   87
E.2 Comparison of the Wage Distribution in the CPS and in the
Administrative Data
We assess the sampling and misreporting errors in the CPS by comparing the frequency
distribution of hourly wages in the QCEW benchmarked CPS and in the administrative
data. In Figure E.2 we plot 5-year averaged per-capita employment counts in $3 bins relative
to the minimum wage. We compare the distributions at this aggregation level, since our
main estimates on excess and missing jobs in Table 1 show 5 year employment changes
in $3 to $5 bins relative to the minimum wage. The red squares show the distribution in
the administrative data while the blue dots show the distribution calculated using QCEW-
adjusted CPS. We report the wage distributions in each each states separately, as well as in
the three states together.
    The distributions from the CPS closely match the distributions in the administrative data
in all states and in all three five-years periods (2000-2004, 2005-2009, and 2010-2014). A
similar number of jobs are present just below the minimum wage in the two data sources,
albeit in some cases there are slightly more in the CPS (e.g. in WA 2005-2009). When
we pool all three states, the CPS and the administrative data exhibit virtually the same
distribution below the minimum wage. Note that in all three of these states, there is no
separate tipped minimum wage, and nearly all workers are covered by the state minimum
wage laws. Therefore, the presence of jobs paying below the minimum wage may reflect
misreporting. If this is the case, then Figure E.2 suggests that the extent of misreporting is
quite similar in the CPS and in the administrative data. We formally test this in the next
section. At the same time, we should point out that some of the sub-minimum wage jobs may
reflect true under-payment. Either way, it is encouraging that the extent of sub-minimum
wage jobs in the CPS is very similar to what is found in high quality administrative wage
data.
    The figures also highlight that the [0,3) bin—which includes workers at and up to $3 above
the minimum wage—contains a somewhat larger number of workers in the administrative
data than in the CPS for Washington state; however, for Oregon and Minnesota, the CPS
closely matches the number of workers in that bin. As a result, when we pool all three states
together, we find that the CPS tends to underestimate the number of jobs at and slightly
above the minimum wage. However, this difference is quite stable over time, as further
shown below in Figure E.3; as a result, our difference-in-difference estimates are unlikely to
be affected by this gap between the two counts. Finally, the CPS tends to place slightly
more workers in the middle-income bin ([M W + $6, M W + $21)), and fewer workers at the
high-income bin ([M W + $21, ∞)).
    Figure E.3 plots the time paths of the number of jobs below the minimum wage [M W −
$5, M W ), and jobs at and above the minimum wage ([M W, M W + $5) relative to the state-
level population from both the administrative data and the CPS. Consistent with the previous
findings, the job counts below and above in both of the data sets follow very similar paths.
When we pool the data across all three states, the evolution of the jobs below the minimum
wage lines up perfectly across the two series. The level of jobs at and slightly above the
minimum wage is slightly higher in the CPS, but again, the differences are quite stable over
time. As a result, the difference-in-difference estimator implemented in this paper is unlikely
to be affected by the small discrepancy between the administrative and the CPS data.

                                              88
E.3 Assessment of Misreporting of Wages Using Structural Esti-
mation
To compare the potential measurement error in the CPS and in the administrative data
for these states, we also implement a structural estimation approach developed by Autor,
Manning and Smith (2016). Following Autor, Manning and Smith (2016), we assume that in
the absence of the minimum wage, both the observed and the true latent wage distributions
are log-normal.43 A portion (γ) of the workers report their wages correctly, while others
report it with some error. In the absence of a minimum wage, the observed (log) wage can
be written as
                                       v ∗ = w∗ + D
where v ∗ is the observed and w∗ is the true latent (log) wage of the worker that would prevail
in the absence of a minimum wage. D is a binary variable that is equal to 1 when the wage is
misreported, and 0 otherwise. Therefore, P (D = 0) = γ measures the probability of reporting
wages accurately. When the wage is misreported, the distribution of the (logged) error is
                                  2                     ∗ ∗
again normal, with ∼ N (0, 1−ρρ2
                                    ), where ρ2 = cov(v  ,w )
                                                    var(v ∗ ) , reflects the correlation between the
observed and true latent distributions. Both parameters ρ and γ determine how misreporting
distorts the observed wage distribution. Here 1 − γ measures the rate of misreporting, while
 1−ρ2
   ρ2
       measures the variance of the error conditional on misreporting.
      We can summarize the overall importance of misreporting by comparing the standard
deviation of the true latent distribution (σw ) and the observed latent distribution (σ). When
 σw                                                                                         σw
  σ = 1, misreporting does not affect the dispersion in observed wages. But when σ = 0.5,
say, misreporting causes the observed wage distribution’s standard deviation to be twice as
large that it would if wages were always accurately reported. Autor, Manning and Smith
(2016) notes that the ratio can be approximated by ρ and γ as follows:
                                           σw
                                              = γ + ρ(1 − γ)
                                            σ
    We estimate the model parameters γ and ρ for both the administrative data and the CPS.
One additional complication in the administrative data is that sometimes small rounding
errors in hours can shift a portion of workers to the wage bin below the MW; this will tend to
over-state the measurement error in the administrative data (at least in terms of estimating
1 − γ). For this reason, we present two sets of estimates. First we keep the data as is by using
wage bins relative to the minimum wage, [M W, M W + $0.15). Second, we additionally show
estimates using re-centered $0.25 wage bins around the minimum wage. The re-centered
$0.25 bin that includes the minimum wage is now defined as [M W − $0.10, M W + $0.15).
The subsequent re-centered bins are defined as [M W + $0.15, M W + $0.40), etc., while the
preceding bins are defined as [M W − $0.35, M W − $0.10), etc.
    Our analysis covers the 1990-2015 period for Washington, and the 1998-2015 period for
Minnesota and Oregon: the start dates reflect the earliest years the administrative data are
  43 Thelatent wage distribution refers to the distribution that would prevail in the absence of a minimum
wage. The wage is called “observed” when it reflects both the true value as well as the reporting error.
Note, however, that the “latent observed” wage distribution is only observed in practice in the absence of a
minimum wage.


                                                    89
available for each state. Since none of these three states allow tip credits, we do not drop
tipped workers from our sample, and use all workers in our analysis.
    Table E.2 reports the misreporting rate (1 − γ), the variance of the error term, and the
ratio of the true and observed standard deviations. In panel A, where we re-center the wage
bins, and find that the misreporting rate 1 − γ is slightly smaller in the CPS (.23) than in the
administrative
              data (0.28).44 However, conditional on misreporting, the variance of the errors
  1−ρ2
   ρ2
          is somewhat larger in the CPS (1.46) than in the administrative data (1.25). Putting
these two parts together, we find that the ratios of the true to observed standard deviations
σw
 σ are quite similar in the two datasets: 0.92 in the CPS and 0.91 in the administrative
data. In panel B, where we use un-centered wage bins, the CPS estimates are virtually
unchanged. However, due to the rounding errors in hours in the administrative data, the
estimated misreporting
                       rate (1-γ) increases while the variance of the error conditional on
                  1−ρ2
misreporting       ρ2
                          falls. Overall, the ratio of the true and observed standard deviations
for administrative data in panel B (0.90) remains very similar to those reported in panel A
(0.91) and to the CPS estimates (0.92).
    Overall, the structural estimation results suggest that the extent to which there is misre-
porting of wages, they are of similar magnitude in the CPS and in high quality administrative
wage data. This provides additional support for the validity of our bunching estimates using
CPS data.

E.4 Estimates using deconvolved, measurement-error corrected
CPS-ORG
In the previous section, we obtained the functional form of the distribution of misreporting
error (D) in the CPS-ORG. Given an empirical distribution of the observed noisy wage
v = w + D, and an empirical distribution of the error D, we can obtain an estimated
distribution of the the error-free wage, w, using the non-parametric deconvolution procedure
proposed by Comte and Lacour (2011). Given an empirical sample of errors D drawn from
an arbitrary distribution (estimated in the previous section), and the sample of noisy observed
wages v, the procedure recovers a measurement error corrected distribution. The deconvolution
is based on the insight that the inverse-Fourier transform of the unknown distribution of w is a
function of the estimable characteristic functions of v and D. Estimation is performed using
penalized deconvolution contrasts and data-driven adaptive model-selection, and implemented
using the R package deamer.45
    Figure E.4 plots the wage distributions of the CPS-ORG and the measurement error
corrected (deconvolved) CPS-ORG (MEC-CPS) in $1 bins relative to the minimum wage
averaged over time and states. We make three observations. First, the share of jobs paying
below the current minimum wage is smaller in CPS-MEC. This is expected, since the Autor,
   44 The CPS estimate is largely in line with Autor, Manning and Smith (2016) who estimate the misreporting

rate around 20% between 1979 and 2012 using 50 states.
   45 We separately estimate the distribution of true wages for each state-by-quarter using the same distribution

function for the measurement error. Estimating annual distribution functions for the error following Autor et
al. (2016) produces virtually the same results.



                                                       90
Manning and Smith (2016) approach uses the share below the minimum wage to estimate
the extent of measurement error; so a successful reduction in measurement error should
reduce the share earning below the minimum. Numerically, while 2.67% of the workers report
working below the minimum wage in the CPS, after the measurement error correction it
decreases to 1.57%. Second, the share of workers in the dollar bin of the current minimum
wage are similar in both samples, suggesting that the raw CPS performs relatively well in
reporting the share of workers at or up to $0.99 above the minimum. Third, individuals in
the raw CPS are more likely to report their wages as $17 higher than the current minimum
wage. The CPS-MEC, on the other hand, find that there are more individuals with hourly
wages between $1 and $16.99 above the minimum after taking the misreporting error into
account.
    In Table E.3, we compare the baseline estimates with those obtained using the deconvolved
data. Column (1) reproduces the baseline estimates reported in Table 1 column (1). Column
(2) reports the results using deconvolved data46 The missing and excess jobs estimates are
quite similar across columns 1 and 2. The baseline missing jobs estimate of −0.018 (s.e. 0.004)
in column 1 is very similar to the measurement error corrected estimate of -0.017(s.e. 0.004) in
column 2. The baseline excess jobs estimates for both columns 1 and 2 are 0.021 (s.e. 0.003).
This corroborates our argument that the employment estimates are not substantially affected
by measurement error in reported wages. While the baseline employment elasticity with
respect to the minimum wage is 0.028 (s.e. 0.029) in column 1, it is 0.037 (s.e. 0.031) after
measurement error correction in column 2. The wage effect estimates are also quite similar
when we use the deconvolved data. The baseline percentage change in affected wage is
0.068 (s.e. 0.010) in column 1, whereas it is 0.075 (s.e. 0.012) in column using deconvolved
data. Overall, these findings underscore that our results are quite robust to the presence of
misreporting error in wages..




  46 The deconvolved data uses a slightly different sample that excludes the quarters of events due to the
existence of two spikes in those periods. By assumption, the latent wage distribution is log-normal and
observed wage distribution can only have one mass point due to the minimum wage. However, if there is
a minimum wage event in the quarter, then it is likely that observed wage distribution will have two mass
points. In those cases, the deconvolution procedure does not perform well. However, in practice the estimates
including the quarter of events are very similar (results not reported).


                                                     91
Figure E.1: Comparison of Administrative with QCEW-benchmarked CPS, and CPS-Raw
Counts of Workers Earning less than $15




                                    0.10
                                                            2
                                                         R = 0.643
                                                      Slope = 0.778




                                    0.05
                         Admin data
                            0       -0.05
                                    -0.10




                                                    -0.10             -0.05            0                  0.05     0.10
                                                                              QCEW-benchmarked CPS

                                                                              Fitted line         45-degree line


                    (a) Administrative data against QCEW-benchmarked CPS
                                    0.10




                                                            2
                                                         R = 0.322
                                                      Slope = 0.564
                                             0.05
                         Administrative data
                                 0  -0.05
                                    -0.10




                                                    -0.10             -0.05                0              0.05     0.10
                                                                                        CPS-Raw

                                                                              Fitted line         45-degree line


                                                     (b) Administrative data against CPS-Raw


Notes: This figure plots per-capita counts of workers earning less than $15 in administrative data against
QCEW-benchmarked CPS in panel A, and CPS-Raw in panel B. To construct a measure that is comparable
to the baseline employment estimate, we transform the counts, and subtract the average number of workers
earning less than $15 (per capita) in the 4 preceding quarters from that in the 20 subsequent quarters. The
blue circles indicate each observation, the red straight line the fitted line, and the black dash line the 45-degree
line. We report the estimated R2 and slope from a simple linear regression in the box.




                                                                                      92
                                                     Figure E.2: Frequency Distributions in the Administrative and CPS data

                                                                            WA, 2000-2004                                                                                                                            MN, 2000-2004
             0.20




                                                                                                                                                      0.20
Employment counts per capita




                                                                                                                                         Employment counts per capita
                       0.16




                                                                                                                                                                0.16
              0.12




                                                                                                                                                       0.12
      0.08




                                                                                                                                               0.08
0.04




                                                                                                                                         0.04
             0




                                                                                                                                                      0
                                   <-6        [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+                                        <-6        [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+

                                                                      Wage bins relative to the MW                                                                                                             Wage bins relative to the MW

                                                                                CPS          Admin                                                                                                                       CPS          Admin



                                                                              WA, 2005-2009                                                                                                                            MN, 2005-2009
                      0.20




                                                                                                                                                               0.20
         Employment counts per capita




                                                                                                                                                  Employment counts per capita
                                0.16




                                                                                                                                                                         0.16
                       0.12




                                                                                                                                                                0.12
               0.08




                                                                                                                                                        0.08
         0.04




                                                                                                                                                  0.04
                      0




                                                                                                                                                               0




                                        <-6    [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+                                            <-6    [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+

                                                                           Wage bins relative to the MW                                                                                                             Wage bins relative to the MW

                                                                                  CPS          Admin                                                                                                                       CPS          Admin



                                                                              WA, 2010-2014                                                                                                                            MN, 2010-2014
                      0.20




                                                                                                                                                               0.20
         Employment counts per capita




                                                                                                                                                  Employment counts per capita
                                0.16




                                                                                                                                                                         0.16
                       0.12




                                                                                                                                                                0.12
               0.08




                                                                                                                                                        0.08
         0.04




                                                                                                                                                  0.04
                      0




                                                                                                                                                               0




                                        <-6    [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+                                            <-6    [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+

                                                                           Wage bins relative to the MW                                                                                                             Wage bins relative to the MW

                                                                                  CPS          Admin                                                                                                                       CPS          Admin




                                                                                                                                        93
                                                  Figure cont’d: Frequency Distributions in the Administrative and CPS data
                                                                              OR, 2000-2004                                                                                                                  OR, MN, WA; 2000-2004
              0.20




                                                                                                                                                       0.20
 Employment counts per capita




                                                                                                                                          Employment counts per capita
                        0.16




                                                                                                                                                                 0.16
               0.12




                                                                                                                                                        0.12
       0.08




                                                                                                                                                0.08
 0.04




                                                                                                                                          0.04
              0




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                    <-6        [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+                                        <-6        [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+

                                                                       Wage bins relative to the MW                                                                                                             Wage bins relative to the MW

                                                                                 CPS          Admin                                                                                                                       CPS          Admin



                                                                                OR, 2005-2009                                                                                                                  OR, MN, WA; 2005-2009
                       0.20




                                                                                                                                                                0.20
          Employment counts per capita




                                                                                                                                                   Employment counts per capita
                                 0.16




                                                                                                                                                                          0.16
                        0.12




                                                                                                                                                                 0.12
                0.08




                                                                                                                                                         0.08
          0.04




                                                                                                                                                   0.04
                       0




                                                                                                                                                                0




                                         <-6    [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+                                            <-6    [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+

                                                                            Wage bins relative to the MW                                                                                                             Wage bins relative to the MW

                                                                                   CPS          Admin                                                                                                                       CPS          Admin



                                                                                OR, 2010-2014                                                                                                                  OR, MN, WA; 2010-2014
                       0.20




                                                                                                                                                                0.20
          Employment counts per capita




                                                                                                                                                   Employment counts per capita
                                 0.16




                                                                                                                                                                          0.16
                        0.12




                                                                                                                                                                 0.12
                0.08




                                                                                                                                                         0.08
          0.04




                                                                                                                                                   0.04
                       0




                                                                                                                                                                0




                                         <-6    [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+                                            <-6    [-6, -3) [-3, 0)    [0, 3)     [3, 6)    [6, 9) [9, 12) [12, 15) [15, 18) [18, 21) 21+

                                                                            Wage bins relative to the MW                                                                                                             Wage bins relative to the MW

                                                                                   CPS          Admin                                                                                                                       CPS          Admin



Notes: This figure plots 5-year averaged per-capita administrative and QCEW-benchmarked CPS employment
counts of Washington, Minnesota, Oregon, and the three states combined from 2000 to 2014 in $3 bins
relative to the minimum wage. The red squares indicate the administrative data, and the blue circles the
QCEW-benchmarked CPS counts.




                                                                                                                                         94
                                        Figure E.3: Comparing Administrative and CPS data; Time path

                                                              WA                                                                                                   MN
              0.20




                                                                                                                   0.20
 Employment counts per capita




                                                                                                      Employment counts per capita
                        0.16




                                                                                                                             0.16
               0.12




                                                                                                                    0.12
       0.08




                                                                                                            0.08
 0.04




                                                                                                      0.04
              0




                                                                                                                   0



                                1990   1995            2000          2005           2010       2015                                  1998   2001        2004         2007   2010          2013   2015
                                                              Year                                                                                                 Year

                                              Admin - at & above            CPS - at & above                                                       Admin - at & above       CPS - at & above
                                              Admin - below                 CPS - below                                                            Admin - below            CPS - below



                                                              OR                                                                                          OR & WA & MN
                                                                                                                   0.20
 0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16 0.20
 Employment counts per capita




                                                                                                      Employment counts per capita
                                                                                                      0.04  0.08    0.12     0.16
              0




                                                                                                                   0




                                1995      2000                2005              2010           2015                                  1998   2001        2004         2007   2010          2013   2015
                                                              Year                                                                                                 Year

                                              Admin - at & above            CPS - at & above                                                       Admin - at & above       CPS - at & above
                                              Admin - below                 CPS - below                                                            Admin - below            CPS - below


Notes: This figure plots the time paths of the number of jobs below the minimum wage [M W − $5, M W ),
and jobs at and above the minimum wage ([M W, M W + $5) relative to the state-level population from both
the administrative data and the CPS in three states (MN, OR, WA) separately, and all together.




                                                                                                 95
  Figure E.4: Wage Distributions in the CPS and the Measurement Error Corrected CPS
                       0.30
                       0.20
                       0.10
                       0.00




                              -4   -2   0     2      4        6        8      10   12   14   16 17+
                                              Wage bins in $ relative to the MW

                                            CPS     Measurement error corrected CPS



Notes: This figure plots the national wage distributions of the CPS and measurement error corrected CPS
combined from 1979 to 2016 in $1 bins relative to the minimum wage. The measurement error correction
process uses the estimates in Table E.2, and the procedure described in Comte and Lacour (2011). The red
squares indicate the share of workforce in the particular wage bin in the measurement error corrected CPS
data, and the blue circles in the raw CPS.




                                                          96
Figure E.5: Impact of Minimum Wages on the Gap in Employment Between QCEW and
CPS
                                           0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04
           Employment rate difference between QCEW and CPS-ORG
          -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01      0




                                                                 -3   -2     -1            0          1         2      3   4
                                                                           Years relative to the minimum wage change


Notes: The figure shows the effect of the minimum wage on the gap in employment rate between QCEW
and CPS. In our event study analysis we use QCEW-benchmarked employment. The CPS and the QCEW
have somewhat different employment concepts: the CPS asks about employment in a reference week, while
the QCEW measures any employment during the quarter. To alleviate the concern that the differences in
concepts has an effect on our estimates, we implement an event study regression where the outcome variable
is the gap between CPS and QCEW employment. Events are the same 138 state-level minimum wage changes
between 1979-2016 that we use in our benchmark specification. Similar to our benchmark specification we
include state and time fixed effects in the regression. The blue line shows the evolution of the gap in the
employment rate (relative to the year before the treatment) between the CPS and QCEW. We also show the
95% confidence interval based on standard errors that are clustered at the state level.




                                                                                          97
         Table E.1: MSPE Ratios of CPS-Raw to QCEW-Adjusted CPS
                                                                           MSPE ratio:
Data structure
                                                                         Raw/Benchmarked
Employment count by $0.25 bins, averaged across 4 quarters                      1.637

Employment count by $0.25 bins, averaged across 20 quarters                     3.875

Employment count under $15, averaged across 4 quarters                          7.212

Employment count under $15, averaged across 20 quarters                         7.394

Transformed employment count under $15: average of 20
                                                                                2.141
subsequent quarters minus the average of 4 preceding quarters

Notes. This table reports estimated mean squared prediction error (MSPE) ratios of the raw
CPS to the QCEW-benchmarked CPS. For each dataset (raw and QCEW-benchmarked), the
MSPE comes from predicting the (per-capita) administrative counts with the CPS based ones.
The first two lines report the results from state-by-quarter-by-25-cent-wage-bin aggregated, and
the last three lines state-by-quarter aggregated data. The transformed count is designed to be
comparable to our baseline employment estimates, which compares employment in the 20 quarter
following an event to the 4 quarter prior to the event. In all cases, we only consider wage bins
under $15/hour in real, 2016$.




                                             98
Table E.2: Structural Estimation of the Autor, Manning and Smith (2016) Model of Mea-
surement Error in Wages: Evidence from CPS and Administrative Data

                         Misreporting rate     Conditional error variance      Ratio of std. deviations of true
                                                                               to observed latent distribution
                                                           1 -ρ2                               σw
       Dataset                   1-γ                        ρ2                                  σ

 A. Re-centered $0.25 wage bins


 CPS                            0.232                      1.462                             0.916
 Administrative data            0.277                      1.251                             0.908

 B. $0.25 wage bins


 CPS                            0.218                      1.484                             0.920
 Administrative data            0.343                      1.076                             0.895

 Notes. We assess the misreporting in the CPS and in the administrative data by implementing Autor et al. (2016).
 To alleviate the effect of rounding of hours worked information in the administrative data we re-center the $0.25
 wage bins around the minimum wage in Panel A, while in Panel B we report estimates using wage bins that are
 not re-centered around the minimum wage. This latter is what we use in our main analysis. We report 1-γ, the
 misreporting rate, in Column 1; (1 − ρ2 )/ρ2 , the variance of the error conditional on misreporting in Column 2;
 and the ratio of the standard deviation of the true latent distribution (w) and the observed latent distribution in
 Column 3.




                                                   99
Table E.3: Impact of Minimum Wages on Employment and Wages Using Deconvolved Data
                                                                  (1)           (2)
                   Missing jobs below new MW (∆b)             -0.018***     -0.017***
                                                                (0.004)      (0.004)
                   Excess jobs above new MW (∆a)               0.021***     0.021***
                                                                (0.003)      (0.003)

                   %∆ affected wages                           0.068***     0.075***
                                                                (0.010)      (0.012)
                   %∆ affected employment                        0.028        0.046
                                                                (0.029)      (0.038)

                   Employment elasticity w.r.t. MW               0.024        0.037
                                                                (0.025)      (0.031)
                   Emp. elasticity w.r.t. affected wage          0.411        0.613
                                                                (0.430)      (0.502)

                   Jobs below new MW (b–1 )                     0.086         0.082
                   %∆ MW                                        0.101         0.101
                   Number of events                              138           138
                   Number of observations                      847,314       831,285

                   Sample
                   Measurement error corrected                                  Y

                    Notes. The table reports the effects of a minimum wage increase
                    based on the event study analysis (see equation 1) exploiting 138
                    state-level minimum wage changes between 1979 and 2016. The ta-
                    ble reports five year averaged post-treatment estimates on missing
                    jobs up to $4 below the new minimum wage, excess jobs at and up
                    to $5 above it, employment and wages. Column (1) reproduces the
                    baseline estimates in Table 1 column (1). Column (2) estimates
                    the same parameters, but uses the data deconvolved according to
                    the procedure proposed by Comte and Lacour (2011). In column
                    (2), we also exclude the quarters of events due to the existence of
                    two spikes in those periods, as explained in footnote 46. To im-
                    plement the procedure, we rely on the estimates in Table E.2. All
                    specifications include wage-bin-by-state and wage-bin-by period
                    fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by state-quarter aggregated
                    population. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by state;
                    significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
                    Line-by-line description.The first two rows report the change in
                    number of missing jobs below the new minimum wage (∆b), and
                    excess jobs above the new minimum wage (∆a) relative to the pre-
                    treatment total employment. The third row, the percentage change
                    in average wages in the affected bins, (%∆W), is calculated using
                    equation 2 in Section 2.2. The fourth row, percentage change in
                    employment in the affected bins is calculated by dividing change
                    in employment by jobs below the new minimum wage ( ∆a+∆b      b̄−1
                                                                                       ).
                    The fifth row, employment elasticity with respect to the minimum
                                            ∆a+∆b
                    wage is calculated as %∆M    W whereas the sixth row, employment
                                                                     1 ∆a+∆b
                    elasticity with respect to the wage, reports %∆W    b̄−1
                                                                              . The line
                    on the number of observations shows the number of quarter-bin
                    cells used for estimation, while the number of workers refers to the
                    underlying CPS sample used to calculate job counts in these cells.




                                                  100
Online Appendix F
Bias in the Classic Two-Way Fixed Effects Panel Regres-
sion with Log Minimum Wage
This Appendix establishes that the classic two-way fixed effects panel regression on log
minimum wage provides biased estimates of the employment effect of the policy. When
implemented over the same time period as our primary specification, the two-way fixed effects
estimator with log minimum wage (TWFE-logMW) obtains a large negative estimate for
overall employment changes, in contrast to the small positive and statistically insignificant
estimate of the employment effect for low-wage workers obtained by the first difference (FD)
specification, and the event based specifications (EB). In the main text, we showed that
the negative employment changes in the TWFE-logMW specification mainly comes from
the employment changes at the upper tail of the wage distribution, which suggests that the
aggregate employment changes are unlikely to reflect the causal effect of minimum wages.
Furthermore, this highlights how understanding the sources of disemployment throughout the
wage distribution can serve as an useful tool for model selection. In this section we document
additional problems with the TWFE-logMW specification and provide further evidence to
understand the discrepancy between TWFE-logMW and the event study based benchmark
(EB) estimates.
    We begin our analysis by assessing the contribution of various factors that drive the
differences in estimates between our benchmark EB and the TWFE-logMW specifications.
We establish that the differences between the two estimates is not driven by using discrete
versus continuous treatment, or any artifact of binning the wages. Table F.1 compares the
employment elasticities with respect to the minimum wage of the benchmark EB (see Table 1
and Figure 2) and the TWFE-logMW estimator (Figure 6), as well as several intermediate
forms that bridge the two specifications. Column 1 reproduces our baseline estimate of the
policy elasticity which considers employment changes locally within a $9 window around the
new minimum wage using the regression specification in equation 1. In Column 2 we use the
event study design, but estimate the effect on overall, below $15, and above $15 employment
counts per capita using aggregated state-level treatment variation. The resulting employment
elasticity of 0.027 for the below $15 group is very similar to our baseline employment elasticity.
Reassuringly, we see little employment change for higher wage workers earning above $15.
The resulting overall employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage, 0.016, is
very close to our benchmark estimate. In column 2 we also report results for the 3 Card
and Krueger (CK) probability groups using demographic predictors (see Section 3.1 for the
details). Here too, all of the point estimates are small, and in particular there is little change
in employment for those workers predicted to have higher wages. There is also no sizable
disemployment effect for predicted low-wage and and middle-wage groups, which capture
most minimum wage workers,
    The EB estimator uses a discrete, binary indicator for minimum wage changes, while the
TWFE-logMW uses continuous treatment. In Column 3 and 4 we provide intermediate results
that continue to use the 8-year event windows, but use a continuous treatment measure. In
particular, we multiply the wage-bin-state-specific treatment indicators in EB by the change
in log minimum wage; column 3 uses the $9 window around the minimum wage, while column

                                               101
4 simply considers employment under $15, employment above $15, overall employment, and
the three CK groups. This latter EB-logMW specification can be written as follows:
                                  4
                           Est   X
                                         τ
                               =     βτ Ist 4 log M Ws,t−τ + µs + ρt + ust                             (F.1)
                           Nst τ =−3
As in our benchmark specification, we report the 5 year averages in employment change from
the year prior to treatment: 15 4τ =0 βτ − β−1 . We find that moving from the discrete to
                                P

continuous treatment measure has little effect on the estimated employment elasticity.
   In contrast, Column 5 estimates a TWFE-logMW specification of the following form:
                                    4
                             Est   X
                                 =     ατ log M Ws,t−τ + µs + ρt + ust                                 (F.2)
                             Nst τ =−2
The cumulative responses can be calculated as βτ = τj=−3 αj by successively summing
                                                                  P

the coefficients. Again, we report the 5 year averages in employment change from the year
prior to treatment: 15 4τ =0 βτ − β−1 .47 The TWFE-logMW estimate is the same as what is
                       P

reported in Figure 6. The overall employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage
is large, negative, and statistically distinguishable from zero (-0.089., s.e. 0.025). In Figure
F.1 we also show the effect of the minimum wage on the wage distribution by the Card and
Krueger (CK) probability groups. The negative overall effect in the TWFE-logMW model is
concentrated on the “wrong” workers: namely, the large employment change occurs for wage
bins over $15 per hour, and there is a large employment response for only the workers least
demographically likely to be earning near the minimum wage. The TWFE-logMW estimate
is driven entirely by high wage employment or employment likely to be high wage.
    The main difference between equation F.1 and F.2 is that the EB-logMW focuses on
employment changes within the 8-year event window around the minimum wage changes,
while the TWFE estimates are more sensitive to underlying long-term trends or persistent
shocks to employment, including those that are far away from the actual treatment events.
We additionally estimate a first-difference (FD) specification:
                                    4
                             Est   X
                                                   τ
                           4     =     ατ 4 log M Ws,t−τ + µs + ρt + ust                               (F.3)
                             Nst τ =−3

The cumulative responses can be calculated as βτ = τj=−3 αj by successively summing
                                                                  P

the coefficients. Again, we report the 5 year averages in employment change from the year
prior to treatment: 15 4τ =0 βτ − β−1 . This latter specification is consistent under the same
                      P

strict exogeneity assumptions as the TWFE estimated in levels; however, the small sample
  47 Because  of this normalization, we report the “3rd year or earlier” estimate as −β−1 , even though there
are 2 actual leads in the regression. This 3rd lead is analogous to the 5th lag, which refers to estimates the
“5th year or later;” both of these are “binned up” and represent estimates at the end point or outside of the
event window. Since we report estimates for 8 different event dates, we refer to this specification as having
a 8-year event window. This is slightly different from the EB specification where the coefficient estimates
are relative to all observations outside of the event window (before and after); this is why a 8-year event
window in that specification requires estimating 3 leads and 4 lags. In practice, however, the inclusion of an
additional lead in the TWFE-logMW specification makes very little difference.



                                                     102
properties differ substantially when the number of units (N ) is small (Wooldridge, 2010).
Our sample has a relatively small N with 51 states and DC, and we have an outcome variable
that is highly persistent (the raw autocorrelation in state EPOP is 0.97; conditional on state
and year fixed effects it is 0.86). This opens up the possibility that small sample biases may
be quite different for the TWFE-logMW model estimated in levels than the FD specification.
    Figure A.10 shows that the impact of minimum wages on the wage distribution differs
considerably in the fixed effects and first difference specifications. Panel (a) and (c) reports
pre-reform effects. We do not expect the minimum wage changes to have an effect on the
wage distribution one year before the minimum wage was increased. This is more or less the
case in the first difference specifications; however, in the fixed effect specifications there are
significant changes in the wage distribution even before the minimum wage was raised. This
suggests that the fixed effect results are likely to reflect pre-existing trends and not the only
the causal effect of the minimum wage. Panels (b) and (d) report the post reform effects.
As we see in the main text, the drop in overall employment in the fixed effect specification
is driven by changes in the upper part of the wage distribution. Contrary to that, the first
difference specifications shows more muted employment responses in the upper tail of the
wage distribution, and there is no indication for significant disemployment effects overall.
    Table F.2 shows the fragility of the TWFE-logMW specification by using different methods
of controlling for long-term trends and persistent shocks to employment confounded with
minimum wage increases. Column 1 reports the EB-logMW specification, whose event
window by definition minimizes the influence of long-term trends; as a result, the estimated
employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage is small, 0.008. Column 2 reports
small employment effects using a first-differenced specification, which by focusing on higher-
frequency variation reduces the role of long-term trends and persistent shocks.
    Columns 3 through 6 of Table F.2 report the results of the TWFE-logMW specification with
various control sets. Column 3 repeats for reference the baseline TWFE-logMW specification
with no additional controls. Column 4 shows that simply controlling for long-term trends
with state-specific linear trend terms shrinks the overall employment effect to close to zero.
Column 5 instead adds average major industry and broad occupation shares from 1979-1980
(interacted with time periods) to the TWFE-logMW specification. These shares account for
shocks to upper tail employment that are predicted by historical industrial/occupational
patterns in the state. The employment estimate in column 5 is also close to zero and not
statistically significant.
    In column (6), we control for partisan leanings by including a variable that captures
state-level differences in the presidential vote share of two major party candidates. This
variable accounts for that state-level political leanings might affect both the minimum wage
and employment in ways that are unrelated to each other (Wursten, 2017). In this case, the
partisan voting index decreases the magnitude of the overall employment estimate by 70%,
from -0.089 in column (3) to -0.027 in column (6). Overall, Table F.1 highlights the fragility
of the two-way fixed estimate suggesting a large overall employment effect. Allowing for
richer controls for time-varying heterogeneity produces results that are very similar to the
baseline estimates.
    Figure F.3 panel (a) shows another problem with the TWFE-logMW specification. This
figure plots the time path of employment elasticities with respect to the minimum wage
for the TWFE-logMW. Since increases in nominal minimum wages, log(M W ), are always

                                               103
permanent, the last lag in the distributed lag model reflects the “long term effect” - the
weighted average of effect at or after 4 years following a minimum wage increase. Moreover,
since we normalize the estimates relative to the one year before the minimum wage, −α−1
measures the average employment occurring at 3 (or more) years prior to the minimum wage
increase. The time path of the estimates shows that the TWFE-logMW estimator obtains a
spurious, positive leading effect three (or more) years prior to the minimum wage increase.
This shows that there were large employment reductions substantially prior to minimum wage
increases, which can impart a bias on the treatment effect estimated using the TWFE-logMW
model; moreover, because we are “binning up” the leads and lags at -3 and +4, respectively,
biases associated with these binned estimates can impart a bias on the estimated leads and
lags, producing a spurious dynamic pattern even within the event window. These sizable
and statistically significant pre-treatment and post-treatment effects disappear once we add
state-specific linear trends (see panel b).
    Figure F.4 plots the time path of the employment elasticities separately for workers
earning below $15 per hour (panel a) and above $15 per hour (panel b). The pattern of
positive leads and the overall downward trend in employment preceding the minimum wage
change comes from workers earning above $15 per hour. Lower wage workers, earning under
$15/ hour, see little change in employment before or after the minimum wage increase.
    Finally, and importantly, Table F.3 provides a evidence that demonstrates that the
disemployment detected by the TWFE-logMW estimator is not caused by the minimum wage
changes, but rather is driven entirely by employment shocks in the 1980’s (much earlier than
the minimum wage changes). Column 1 uses the entire 1979-2016 period and shows the overall
employment elasticities with respect to the minimum wage from the classic first difference
estimator (panel A), and first-differenced version (panel B). Panel C reports estimates from
our events-based approach. As before, the TWFE-logMW estimator stands out in estimating
a large, statistically significant overall employment decline due to minimum wage changes, in
contrast to the first-difference. However, when we restrict the sample to the 1993-2016 period,
the TWFE-logMW estimates become small and stastitically indistinguishable from zero,
and are quite similar to the first-difference and event-based estimates. This is noteworthy
because there were few state minimum wage changes prior to 1993. At the same time, we
note that our event based estimates are highly robust to the choice of sample (panel C), as
are estimates using the first-differenced specification (panel B).
    Falsification test. We also perform a falsification exercise to demonstrate the bias in
the TWFE-logMW estimates using the 1979-2016 sample. As the first step of the falsification
exercise, column 3 shows results using the full 1979-2016 sample of data, but excluding
the ten states that experienced any minimum wage increases prior to 1993. The pattern
of results remains the same in column 3, with the TWFE-logMW specification estimating
large employment declines due to the minimum wage. In columns 4 and 5, we decompose
the estimate in column 3. In column 4, we use actual employment data until 1992 for the
forty states that did not have any minimum wage event 1979-1992. For 1993-2016, we set
employment outcomes to exactly 0 in all states. Because there were no minimum wage events
prior to 1993 in this sample, and because the employment outcomes are exactly constant
after 1993, the causal employment effect should be zero. Yet, column 4 shows that the
TWFE-logMW specification still estimates a sizable negative employment effect, in contrast


                                             104
to the first-differenced and event-based specifications. Put differently, minimum wage events
in 1993 and onwards appears to affect employment changes in 1979-1992. Column 5 does
the opposite, and replaces all employment outcomes before 1993 with 0, and uses the actual
employment rate in 1993-2016. In this case, variations in the variable of interest and the
dependent variable take place in the same time period, and both the TWFE-logMW and the
FD specifications indicate no disemployment effect. Finally, in column 6 we show that the
spurious negative results in column 4 are not due to anticipation effects: here we consider
states without minimum wage events prior to 1996 (instead of 1993 as in column 4); this
reduces the sample to 39 instead of 40 states but the results are similar. Finally, in contrast
to the TWFE-logMW case (panel A), our EB estimates (panel C) easily pass this falsification
test.
    To summarize, our falsification test shows that estimated disemployment in the TWFE-
logMW specification is entirely due to employment shocks in the 1980s that were correlated
with future minimum wage increases decades later, thereby affecting the estimation of the
state fixed effects. This is why the restriction to an explicit event window as in the EB
specification guards against the bias afflicting the TWFE-logMW specification. This is
also why the inclusion of state trends or controls for historical industry/occupation shares
interacted with periods substantially reduces the likely bias in that specification.

The Partisan Tilt of the 1990-1991 Recession and the Confounder
Why are state-level employment rates in 1979-1992 are correlated with minimum wage events
in post-1996? To understand what drives this correlation we plot the time paths of the
minimum wage (Panel (a)) and employment rates (Panel (b)) of the low and high minimum
wage states in Figure F.5. The 15 states where the federal minimum wage laws applies during
1996-2016 are classified as low minimum wage states, and the remaining 36 states as high
minimum wage states. Figure F.5 shows that the employment rate of the latter states are
elevated relative to the former between the mid-1980s and the early 1990s, even as the level of
minimum wages were almost the same across the two set of states in this period. The elevated
employment level in the mid-1980s affects the estimation of the state fixed effects in the
TWFE-logMW model covering 1979-2016. However, the divergence between low minimum
wage and high minimum wage states ended quickly by 1990-1991 recession. Since then the
employment rates follow parallel trends, even though there is a clear divergence in the level
of the minimum wage between low and high minimum wage states in the 2000’s. The timing
of divergence between high and low minimum wage states highlights that the bias in the
TWFE-logMW estimates is related to the differential impact of the 1990-1991 recession on
(future) low and high minimum wage states.
    Why is the drop in employment in the 1990-1991 recession related to future minimum
wage changes in the 2000s? It is possible that the 1990-1991 recession was so severe in some
states that it changed the political landscape and opened up the door for parties supporting
minimum wages. Another explanations could be that 1990-1991 recession happened to be
more pronounced for Democratic-leaning states—states that would also be more inclined to
raise the minimum wage in the early 2000s following a long period of federal inaction. Table
?? aims to test the empirical relevance of these explanations by examining the determinants
of having a state-level minimum wage higher than the federal level in the post-1996s using a

                                             105
linear probability model. Column (1) shows that states that are harder hit by the 1990-1991
recession are more likely to have a state-level minimum wage after 1996, confirming our
previous observation about Figure F.5. The model reports that for each percentage point
decline in employment rate in 1990-1991, the probability of a state to be a high minimum wage
state increases by 4.2% (s.e. 1.3%). However, including political leanings variables in columns
(2) and (3) substantially decrease the estimate and renders it statistically indistinguishable
from zero. In column (2), the unionization rate in the 1980s variable substantially decreases
the size of the 1990s shock estimate and renders it statistically insignificant. In column (3),
we include the average of the Partisan Voting Index (PVI) in 2000s. The PVI shows the
shows the difference between Republican Party and Democratic Party candidates’ vote shares
in the state. To address potential concerns related to long-run effects of the recession on
political leanings, we instrument the average PVI in the 2000s with that of the 1988. In this
case, the coefficient of the severity of the recession has changed its sign, become negative and
statistically insignificant. This suggests that the severity of the 1990-1991 recession did not
have a causal impact on future state-level minimum wage changes.
    Overall, these findings clarify that the large, negative TWFE-logMW estimate is driven
by upper tail shocks in the 1980s—substantially prior to most minimum wage increases we
study. Moreover, these shocks are predicted by a state’s historical industrial/occupational
structure. Importantly, these shocks died out substantially prior to most minimum wage
changes we study: indeed, as we have shown, these shocks do not produce any pre-existing
trends or upper tail employment changes within the 8-year window used in our event-based
analysis. However, they do substantially bias the TWFE-logMW estimator that is sensitive
to underlying long-term trends or persistent shocks occurring many years before the actual
treatment events.




                                              106
Figure F.1: Impact of Minimum Wages on the Wage Distribution by Predicted Probability
Groups for Fixed Effects Specification




                                                            0.1
                                        Employment elasticity
                                                            0
                                                            -0.1
                                                            -0.2   Employment elas. = -0.014 (0.009)


                                                                            $5        $10        $15      $20   $25   >$30   Total
                                                                                                       Wage



                                           (a) High probability group (top 10%)
                                                            0.1
                                        Employment elasticity
                                                            0
                                                            -0.1




                                                                   Employment elas. = 0.027 (0.035)
                                                            -0.2




                                                                            $5        $10        $15      $20   $25   >$30   Total
                                                                                                       Wage



                                      (b) Middle probability group (10%-50%)
                                                            0.1
                                        Employment elasticity
                                                            0
                                                            -0.1




                                                                   Employment elas. = -0.103 (0.038)
                                                            -0.2




                                                                            $5        $10        $15      $20   $25   >$30   Total
                                                                                                       Wage


                                      (c) Low probability group (bottom 50%)

Notes: The figure shows the effect of the minimum wage on the wage distribution of the three Card and Kruger probability
groups in fixed effects specification (TWFE-logMW). All panels estimate the regression on the contemporaneous log minimum
wage, as well as on 4 annual lags and 2 annual leads. For each wage bin we run a separate regression, where the outcome
is the number of jobs per capita in that state-wage bin. The cumulative response for each event date 0, 1,...,4 is formed by
successively adding the coefficients for the contemporaneous and lagged log minimum wages. The green histogram bars show
the mean of these cumulative responses for event dates 0, 1,...,4, divided by the sample average employment-to-population rate
—and represents the average elasticity of employment in each wage bin with respect to the minimum wage in the post-treatment
period. The 95% confidence intervals around the point estimates are calculated using clustered standard errors at the state level.
The dashed purple line plots the running sum of the employment effects of the minimum wage up until the particular wage
bin. The rightmost purple bar in each of the graphs decomposes the post-averaged elasticity of the overall state employment-
to-population with respect to minimum wage by the groups, where the latter is obtained from the regressions where outcome
variable is the state level employment-to-population rate. All regressions are weighted by the sample average state population.



                                                                                                  107
Figure F.2: Impact of Minimum Wages on the Wage Distribution for Fixed Effects and First
Differences specifications
                     0.1




                                                                                                                    0.1
 Employment elasticity




                                                                                                Employment elasticity
                     0




                                                                                                                    0
                     -0.1




                                                                                                                    -0.1
                            Employment elas. = 0.061 (0.025)                                                               Employment elas. = -0.089 (0.025)
                     -0.2




                                                                                                                    -0.2
                                     $5        $10        $15      $20   $25   >$30   Total                                         $5        $10        $15      $20   $25   >$30   Total
                                                                Wage                                                                                           Wage




                         (a) Fixed Effect Model (Pre Reform)                                    (b) Fixed Effect Model (Post Reform)
                     0.1




                                                                                                                    0.1
 Employment elasticity




                                                                                                Employment elasticity
                     0




                                                                                                                    0
                     -0.1




                                                                                                                    -0.1




                            Employment elas. = -0.049 (0.029)                                                              Employment elas. = 0.027 (0.031)
                     -0.2




                                                                                                                    -0.2




                                     $5        $10        $15      $20   $25   >$30   Total                                         $5        $10        $15      $20   $25   >$30   Total
                                                                Wage                                                                                           Wage




(c) First Differences Model (Pre Reform)                                                      (d) First Differences Model (Post Reform)


Notes: The figure shows the three year the pre reform (panel a and c) and post reform effects (panel b and d) of the minimum
wage hikes on the wage distribution in fixed effects (TWFE-logMW) and first difference (FD) specifications. Panels (a) and (b)
estimate two-way (state-bin and year) fixed effects regressions on contemporaneous as well as 2 annual leads, and 4 annual lags
of log minimum wage. In Panels (c) and (d) we employ first difference regressions on contemporaneous as well as 2 annual leads,
and 4 annual lags of the log change in the minimum wage. For each wage bin we run a separate regression, where the outcome
is the number of jobs per capita in that state-wage bin. The pre reform effect is formed by adding the first and the second
leading coefficients and multiplying the sum by -1: when the cumulative response at τ = −1 is normalized to 0, this represents
the three year leading effect relative to the date −1. For the fixed effects specification (panel a), the three year leading effect
estimate represents three or more years prior to treatment; for the first difference specification (panel c), this estimate represents
exactly three years prior to treatment. The cumulative response for each event date 0, 1, ..., 4 is formed by successively adding
the coefficients for the contemporaneous and lagged terms. The green bars show the post reform effects calculated by the mean
of these cumulative responses for event dates 0, 1, ..., 4, divided by the sample average employment-to-population rate —and
represents the average elasticity of employment in each wage bin with respect to the minimum wage in the post-treatment
period. (panel (b) is the same as Figure 6 in the main text). The 95% confidence intervals around the point estimates are
calculated using clustered standard errors at the state level. The dashed purple line plots the running sum of the employment
effects of the minimum wage up until the particular wage bin. The rightmost purple bar in each of the graphs is the elasticity
of the overall state employment-to-population rate with respect to minimum wage. In the bottom left corner we also report the
point estimate on this elasticity with standard errors that are clustered at the state level. Regressions are weighted by state
population.




                                                                                              108
Figure F.3: Estimated Impacts of Minimum Wages on Employment Over Time Using
Alternative Specifications



                                           0.2
                                           0.1
                                 Employment elasticity
                                     -0.1  -0.2
                                           -0.3 0




                                                         ≤ -3   -2    -1     0            1      2   3   ≥4
                                                                           Event time in years


                                                                     (a) Fixed effects
                                           0.2
                                           0.1
                                 Employment elasticity
                                   -0.1    -0.2
                                           -0.30




                                                         ≤ -3   -2    -1     0            1      2   3   ≥4
                                                                           Event time in years


                                                          (b) Fixed effects with Linear trends

Notes: The figure shows the effect of the minimum wage on employment over time in the fixed effects (panel (a)) and in the fixed
effects augmented with state-specific linear trends (panel (b)) models. All panels estimate regressions of state-level employment
rate on the state-level contemporaneous log minimum wage, as well as on 4 annual lags and 2 annual leads. The blue markers
show cumulative employment elasticities by event date. These cumulative effects are calculated by successively summing the
coefficients on leads and lags of log minimum wage, and then dividing them by the sample average employment-to-population
rate. Furthermore, the cumulative elasticity at event date -1 is normalized to 0; this is why the figure shows a 3rd year or
earlier (≤ −3) estimate.The red error bars indicate the 95% confidence intervals around the point estimates, calculated using
clustered standard errors at the state level. All regressions are weighted by sample average state population.




                                                                             109
Figure F.4: Impact of Minimum Wages on Lower- and Upper-tail Employment Over Time
for Fixed Effects Specification




                                           0.2
                                           0.1
                                 Employment elasticity
                                   -0.1    -0.2
                                           -0.30




                                                         ≤ -3    -2    -1     0            1      2   3   ≥4
                                                                            Event time in years


                                                                (a) Fixed Effects; Below $15
                                           0.2
                                           0.1
                                 Employment elasticity
                                      -0.1 -0.2
                                           -0.3  0




                                                         ≤ -3    -2    -1     0            1      2   3   ≥4
                                                                            Event time in years


                                                            (b) Fixed Effects; At or above $15

Notes: The figure shows the effect of the minimum wage on the number of jobs below (panel (a)), and at or above $15 (panel
(b)) over time in the fixed effects (TWFE-logMW) specification. Panels (a) and (b) estimate regressions of state-level total
number of jobs below, and at or above $15 over state population on the state-level contemporaneous log minimum wage, as
well as on 4 annual lags and 2 annual leads. The blue markers show cumulative employment elasticities by event date. These
cumulative effects are calculated by successively summing the coefficients on leads and lags of log minimum wage, and then
dividing them by the sample average employment-to-population rate. Furthermore, the cumulative elasticity at event date -1
is normalized to 0; this is why the figure shows a 3rd year or earlier (” ≤ −3”) estimate. The red error bars indicate the 95%
confidence intervals around the point estimates, calculated using clustered standard errors at the state level. All regressions are
weighted by sample average state population.




                                                                              110
Figure F.5: Time Paths of the Statutory Minimum Wage and Employment Rate in High and
Low Minimum Wage States




                         1 1.25 1.5 1.75 2 2.25
                          log of Minimum Wage




                                                   1980      1984    1988   1992    1996    2000   2004   2008    2012    2016
                         0.500 0.550 0.600 0.650
                              Employment rate




                                                   1980      1984    1988   1992    1996    2000   2004   2008    2012    2016
                                                                                       Year


                                                          States with only federal MW in 1996-2016
                                                          States with MW higher than the federal at least once in 1996-2016


Notes: The figure shows the time paths of the average statutory log minimum wage (Panel (a)) and employment rate (Panel (b))
in 15 states where the federal minimum wage law applies in 1996 (low minimum wage states) and onward, and in 36 remaining
states that had state-level minimum wages higher than the federal level at least once in 1996-2016 (high minimum wage states).
In both graphs, the straight red lines correspond to the low minimum wage states, and the dash blue lines to the high minimum
wage states.




                                                                                   111
Table F.1: Employment Elasticities with Respect to the Minimum Wage, Event-based and
Continuous Variation
                                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
     Bunching                                 0.024                 0.024
                                             (0.025)               (0.020)

     Overall                                             0.016                 0.008     –0.089***
                                                        (0.029)               (0.025)    (0.025)

     By wage bin
     Below $15                                           0.027                 0.020      0.020
                                                        (0.022)               (0.016)    (0.028)

     Over $15                                           –0.010                –0.012     –0.109***
                                                        (0.042)               (0.033)    (0.030)

     By demographically predicted wage
     Predicted low-wage workers                          0.019**               0.022*    –0.014
                                                        (0.009)               (0.013)    (0.009)

     Predicted middle-wage workers                       0.026                 0.001      0.027
                                                        (0.020)               (0.014)    (0.035)

     Predicted high-wage workers                        –0.029                –0.015     –0.103***
                                                        (0.023)               (0.022)    (0.038)

     Event-based                                Y          Y          Y          Y

     Bin-state-specific treatment               Y                     Y
     State-specific treatment                              Y                     Y          Y
     Discrete treatment                         Y          Y
     Continuous treatment                                             Y          Y          Y

     Standard TWFE                                                                          Y

      Notes. The table reports estimated employment elasticities of minimum wage from alternative
      approaches. Column 1 reports our baseline estimates (Column 1 in Table 1) that is derived by
      using local employment changes within a $9 window around the new minimum wage. Column
      2 use the same event study design as in Column 1 (see equation 2), but estimate the effect
      on below $15 employment counts, on above $15 employment counts, on overall employment
      counts, and on the three Card and Krueger probability groups. In Column 3 we use the 8-year
      event window around the minimum wage like in Column 1, but use a continuous treatment
      measure, where we multiply the wage-bin-state-specific treatment indicators by the change in
      log minimum wage. Column 4 reports the results using continuous treatment measure for the
      below $15 employment counts, above $15 employment counts, and overall employment counts
      (see equation F.1). For comparison, Column (5) report the results using two way fixed effects
      estimator with log minimum wage (equation F.2) shown in Figure 9. Robust standard errors in
      parentheses are clustered by state; significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.


                                                 112
Table F.2: Robustness of the Two-way Fixed Effects-log(MW) Estimates to Alternative
Controls
                                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
 All workers                             0.008      0.031     –0.089*** 0.010        –0.025     –0.027
                                        (0.025)    (0.031)    (0.025) (0.036)        (0.029)    (0.022)

 Event-based                               Y
 First-differenced                                    Y
 Standard TWFE                                                    Y          Y          Y           Y

 State fixed effects                       Y                      Y          Y          Y           Y
 State-specific linear trends                                                Y
 Base industry/occupation shares                                                        Y
 Partisan voting index                                                                              Y

  Notes. The table reports estimated employment elasticities of minimum wage from alternative approaches
  and outcome groups. Each column and row is a separately estimated model specification and outcome
  group, respectively. Columns 1 shows the results using EB-logMW specification (see equation F.1),
  Column 2 the first differenced specification (equation F.3), while Columns 3 shows that two-way fixed
  effects specifications with log minimum wage (equation F.2). Column 4, 5, and 6 explores robustness of
  the two-way fixed effects specifications to various controls. Columns 4 add state-specific linear trends,
  Column 5 control for 1979-1980 major industry and occupation shares interacted with time fixed effects,
  and Column 6 control for the partisan voting index variable. Robust standard errors in parentheses are
  clustered by state; significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.




                                                   113
      Table F.3: Estimated Impacts of Minimum Wages on Actual, and Simulated Employment Using Alternative Specifications
                                                                                                                                           Excl. states with
                                              Actual       Post 1992 sample                 Excl. states with pre-1993 events
                                                                                                                                            pre-1996 events
                                                (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                  (5)                  (6)
              Panel A: TWFE-logMW


              Emp. elas. wrt MW              -0.089***            -0.012           -0.106***          -0.091**               -0.015             -0.090*
                                              (0.025)            (0.027)            (0.037)            (0.041)              (0.043)             (0.047)

              Panel B: FD


              Emp. elas. wrt MW                0.031              0.021              -0.034             0.006                -0.040               0.019
                                              (0.031)            (0.030)            (0.021)            (0.018)              (0.024)              (0.015)

              Panel C: EB




114
              Emp. elas. wrt MW                0.016              -0.009             -0.027             -0.001               -0.026               0.001
                                              (0.029)            (0.018)            (0.039)            (0.023)              (0.032)              (0.023)

              Observations                     1479               1020               1160              1160                 1160                 1131
              Number of states                  51                 51                 40                40                   40                   39
              Period estimated               1979-2016          1993-2016          1979-2016         1979-2016            1979-2016            1979-2016

                                                                                                   Simulated epop      Simulated epop       Simulated epop
              Outcome variable             Actual epop        Actual epop        Actual epop
                                                                                                  (1993 onwards 0)      (0 until 1992)     (1993 onwards 0)

               Notes. The table reports the effect of a minimum wage increase on the actual and simulated employment using the fixed effects (Panel A),
               first-differences (Panel B), and the event-based specifications (EB). The first column reports the estimates using the actual employment data
               using the full sample from 1979 to 2016. The second column excludes all the pre-1993 years. The third column employs the entire time span of
               the data, yet leaves out the states that have a minimum wage event before 1993. The fourth column replaces the actual outcome variable in the
               previous column with the simulated employment data, where we use the actual data until 1992, and replace it with 0 from 1993 onwards. The
               fifth column uses an alternative simulated data, we use the actual data from 1992, but replace it with 0 before 1993. The sixth column replicates
               the analysis based on the same simulated data as in Column 4, but it excludes all the states that experience a minimum wage increase before
               1996 to account for potential anticipation effects. Regressions are weighted by state-quarter aggregated population. Robust standard errors in
               parentheses are clustered by state; significance levels are * 0.10, ** 0.05, *** 0.01.
