                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO INNOVATION SUBSIDIES MAKE CHINESE FIRMS MORE INNOVATIVE?
           EVIDENCE FROM THE CHINA EMPLOYER EMPLOYEE SURVEY

                                           Hong Cheng
                                           Hanbing Fan
                                           Takeo Hoshi
                                           Dezhuang Hu

                                       Working Paper 25432
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25432


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2019




We thank Chuck Eesley, Tom Fingar, Hongbin Li, Lianfa Luo, Gérard Roland, participants at 2018
AIEA-NBER Conference and seminar participants at CIDEG (Center for Industrial Development and
Environmental Governance) (Tsinghua University) for helpful comments. We also thank the participating
firms and employees who welcomed CEES enumerators to their firms and completed the survey in
2015 and 2016.We have received financial supports from the Key Project of Philosophy and Social
Sciences Research from the Ministry of Education of China (Approval No. 15JZD023), the National
Key Technology Research and Development Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology
of China (Approval No. 2015BAH27F01), the National Key Research and Development Program
of China (Approval No. 2016YFC0801906) and the Key Project of National Social Science Fund (Approval
No. 16ZDA045). All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Hong Cheng, Hanbing Fan, Takeo Hoshi, and Dezhuang Hu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Innovation Subsidies Make Chinese Firms More Innovative? Evidence from the China
Employer Employee Survey
Hong Cheng, Hanbing Fan, Takeo Hoshi, and Dezhuang Hu
NBER Working Paper No. 25432
January 2019, Revised February 2019
JEL No. O25,O38,P48

                                               ABSTRACT

The Chinese government has been using various subsidies to encourage innovations by Chinese firms.
This paper examines the allocation and impacts of innovation subsidies, using the data from the China
Employer Employee Survey (CEES). We find that the innovation subsidies are preferentially allocated
to state owned firms and politically connected firms. Of these two (state ownership and political connection),
political connection is more important in determining the allocation. We also find that the firms that
receive innovation subsidies file and receive more patents, are more likely to introduce new products,
but do not necessarily file and receive more patents abroad. Finally, the firms that receive innovation
subsidies do not have higher productivity, more profits, or larger market shares. Overall, the results
point to inefficiency of allocation of innovation subsidies and show that the subsidies encourage only
incremental innovations and not radical ones.


Hong Cheng                                            Takeo Hoshi
Institute of Quality Development Strategy             Walter H. Shorenstein Asia-Pacific Research Center
Wuhan University                                      Stanford University
Wuhan                                                 Encina Hall - E301
China                                                 Stanford, CA 94305-6055
00006933@whu.edu.cn                                   and NBER
                                                      tkohoshi@stanford.edu
Hanbing Fan
Institute of Quality Development Strategy             Dezhuang Hu
Wuhan University                                      Institute of Quality Development Strategy
Wuhan 430072                                          Wuhan University
China                                                 Wuhan 430072
lith@foxmail.com                                      China
                                                      dezhuanghu@whu.edu.cn
1. Introduction
Motivated by the realization that China’s economic growth model that relied on cheap labor,
capital deepening supported by high savings (depressed consumption), and technology mostly
coming from advanced foreign countries is about to end, the Chinese government has been trying
to encourage innovations by Chinese firms through various subsidy programs.         This paper
studies allocation and impacts of the innovation subsidies in China. We examine what type of
firms are more likely to receive the innovation subsidies and if the subsidized firms are more
likely to be innovative (measured by the number of patents and the likelihood of introducing new
products), productive, and profitable.
       In addition to improve our understanding on China’s innovation policy, our paper
contributes to three areas of economic inquiry. First, the paper builds on the literature on the
rationales of the public support of research and development (R&D) investment. It is recognized
that innovation is an important driving force of the long-run economy growth (Abramovitz,
1956; Solow, 1957; Romer, 1990; Aghion and Howitt, 1992). Most of innovation activities are
conducted by private-sector firms, but market failures are likely to hamper firms from reaching
the socially optimal level of R&D investment (Nelson, 1959; Arrow,1962).
       One type of such market failure has to do with incomplete appropriability of R&D
returns. Since the knowledge created by R&D activities is non-rival and can spill over to other
entities, private returns from R&D investment become smaller than the social benefits. Another
type of market failure is the problem of asymmetric information in the capital market. It is well
known that the presence of asymmetric information raises the cost of funds coming from
uninformed outside financiers. This is a general problem in finance, but the informational
asymmetry is especially high for R&D activities because firms are reluctant to reveal their
innovative ideas (Hall and Lerner, 2010).
       To encourage R&D investment by private firms and move the level closer to the socially
optimal level, many countries have improved their protection of intellectual property right and
provided financial incentives for private R&D. The most common financial incentive policies are


                                                                                                    1
tax credit and direct subsidies. This paper contributes to the literature by examining large scale
innovation subsidies policies implemented by the Chinese government to promote upgrading and
transformation of the economy.
          Second, this paper is related to the literature on the effects of public innovation incentives
on private innovation activities. Many papers investigate whether public innovation subsidies
increase the total R&D in the economy (crowding-in) or just substitutes private sector R&D
(crowding-out) (David et al. 2000; Lerner, 2009), and they reach different conclusions (David et
al., 2000; García-Quevedo, 2004). The impact of innovation subsidies seems to depend on many
factors including time span considered, financial conditions of firms, history of obtaining
subsidies, and size and sources of subsidies (Zúñiga-Vicente et al., 2014; Becker, 2015).
          Some recent papers use the regression discontinuity approach to measure the impact of
innovation subsidies more precisely. For example, by exploiting the mechanism used to grant the
R&D subsidy programs, Bronzini and Piselli (2016) find a positive significant effect of subsides
on the number of patents and the probability of applying for a patent. Howell (2017) finds that
the early-stage R&D grants have statistically significant positive impacts on firms’ patenting and
revenue. She finds that these effects are particularly stronger for financially constrained firms.
          Most relevant to this paper, a few papers examine the innovation subsidies by the Chinese
government.      Fang et al. (2018) finds that government innovation subsidies are positively
associated with future innovation, especially after the anti-corruption campaign and departures of
local government innovation officials. Dang and Motohashi (2015) estimate the effects of
China’s innovation subsidies on both patent quantity and quality.       They find that these policy
incentives increase the number of patents but deteriorate the quality measured by the scope of
claims.
          Finally, this paper contributes to the literature on the misallocations of economic
resources and its effects on aggregate productivity. Misallocation of resources across firms can
have important effects on aggregate total factor productivity (Restuccia and Rogerson, 2008;
Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). One potential source of misallocation is in granting of government


                                                                                                       2
innovation subsidies. If subsidies are granted preferentially to state-owned firms or politically
connected firms, then the subsidies are misallocated and the aggregate productivity is depressed
to the extent that the politically favored firms are not necessarily more innovative. Or if subsidies
are granted to larger firms that would conduct innovative activities anyway, that may also be
misallocation in the sense that smaller and younger firms that would benefit more cannot get the
subsidies (González et al., 2005; Czarnitzki and Ebersberger, 2010; Cantner and Kösters, 2012;
Becker, 2015). This type of misallocation may result in the persistence of market power of large
firms and higher barriers to entry, and thus impeding the aggregate productivity growth
(Acemoglu et al., 2017).
       This paper’s main finding that firms with political connections are more likely to obtain
access to innovation subsidies but they do not exhibit higher quality innovations is consistent
with other papers in the literature (Shleifer and Vishny, 1993, 1994; Faccio, 2006; Li et al.,
2008). Perhaps more importantly, this paper further finds that, compared with state ownership,
political connections are more influential in obtaining subsidies. Thus, the declined proportion of
state ownership does not imply higher allocation efficiency if many firms continue to maintain
political connections.
       The paper is organized in the following way.     The next section briefly discusses the
background for China’s innovation policy. We point out that the subsidies to encourage
technological innovations have been and will continue to be a key tool for the policy.    Section 3
introduces the Chinese Employer Employee Survey (CEES), which is the database that we use to
examine the allocation and impacts of innovation subsidies.     Section 4 examines the allocation
of innovation subsidies among sample firms during the years from 2012 to 2015.        Did firms that
seem more likely to innovate receive the innovation subsidies?     Or were the subsidies allocated
mainly to State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) and other politically connected firms?        Section 5
asks what type of activities that subsidized firms undertook.   Did subsidies really encourage
innovations?   Section 6 concludes.




                                                                                                     3
2. China’s Policies to Encourage Innovations
        The Chinese economy has achieved a phenomenal growth over the last 40 years and now
China accounts for 26.7% of the world’s manufacturing value added in 2015 according to the
World Bank data and ranked first in Deloitte Global Manufacturing Competitiveness Index in
2016.   The Chinese government, however, realizes that the conditions that allowed the Chinese
economy to grow rapidly are disappearing.
        For example, China’s low labor costs that supported the rapid growth are almost gone.
According to CEES Research Team (2017), China’s wage level is nearly the same as in Brazil
and significantly greater than in other emerging markets (Malaysia, Thailand, Mexico, Vietnam
and India). The projection on the future population growth does not look promising, either.
According to National Bureau of Statistics of China, the birth rate is 12.43‰ in 2017 and the
growth rate of working population (15-64 years old) has been negative since 2015. China’s
population is also aging quickly.   According to the OECD statistics, the share of population
older than 65 years old was 8.5% as late as 2011.   This was much lower than the OECD average
(14.9%) in that year, but the share is predicted to exceed 20% by 2036 and to be within 3% of the
OECD average.
        Favorable conditions for technological progress for China are also disappearing.      As
Chinese industries were technologically behind those in more advanced countries, China was
able to rely on foreign technologies to upgrade the industries.   Weak protection of intellectual
property rights in China also helped by increasing the speed of dissemination of new
technologies.   The cost of weak intellectual property rights would have been diminished
incentives for innovators to advance the technological frontier, but Chinese firms did not have
capacity to innovate at least when the economy started to grow four decades ago.     As the
economy has grown and the industries has come closer to technological frontier, China has
encountered the challenge of generating its own innovations.      President Xi Jingping
summarizes this challenge in his speech to the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the Chinese




                                                                                                    4
Academy of Engineering as follows: 1
        China’s foundation for science and Technology innovation is still not firm. China’s
        capacity for indigenous innovation, and especially original innovation, is still weak.
        Fundamentally, the fact that we are controlled by other in critical fields and key
        technology has not changed.
To keep competitiveness of manufacturing in the world, which is considered essential for
China’s growth, China needs to upgrade and transform its manufacturing to be more innovative
and more efficient. Based on this idea, the Chinese government has been trying to encourage
innovations by Chinese firms.
        China’s innovation policy has been mostly industrial targeting policy, which identifies
several targeted industries and supports those industries through subsidies, tax breaks, and
preferential (and subsidized) financing. For example, China’s government targeted the new
energy vehicle industry in early 2009 and started to promote the industry. 2 In June 2012, the
State Council of China published the Development Plan of Energy Saving and New Energy
vehicle industry (2012-2020) to further boost the technology innovation and the manufacturing
of new energy vehicles. 3 According to the Ministry of Finance of China, from 2009 to 2015, the
total amount of subsidies to new energy vehicle industry given by the central government
amounted to about 33.4 billion RMB. 4 In addition to the central government, local governments
also provide matching subsidies that amount to 30% to 100% of the central government
subsidies.

1
  Xi Jinping: Speech at the 17th Conference of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and 12th Conference of the
Chinese Academy of Engineering (习近平：在中国科学院第十七次院士大会、中国工程院第十二次院士大会
上的讲话), Chinese Communist Party News, June 9, 2014, http://cpc.people.com.cn/n/2014/0610/c64094-
25125594.html (Accessed October 23, 2018), translated and cited by European Union Chamber of Commerce in
China (2017).
2
  “New Energy” vehicles include electric vehicles and plug-in hybrid engine vehicles.
3
  The Development Plan of Energy Saving and New Energy vehicle industry (2012-2020) (国务院印发节能与新能
源汽车产业发展规划:2012-2020 年), The State Council of China, July 10, 2012, http://www.nea.gov.cn/2012-
07/10/c_131705726.htm (Accessed October 23, 2018).
4
  The Notification on the Disclosure of the Budget and Final Accounts of Local Governments and the Investigation
of the Subsidies on the Promotion of New Energy Vehicles (财政部关于地方预决算公开和新能源汽车推广应用补
助资金专项检查的通报), The Ministry of Finance of China, September 8, 2016, http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2016-
09/08/content_5106603.htm (Accessed October 23, 2018).

                                                                                                               5
        Helped by the promotion policy, the new energy vehicle industry grew very rapidly.
The production of new energy vehicles increased more than 100 times from 7,200 units in 2010
to 794,000 units in 2017. By the end of 2017, China has become the country with the largest
stock of new energy vehicles. 5
        The policy has turned out to be too successful. The Development Plan of Energy Saving
and New Energy vehicle industry (2012-2020) set the goal of 2 million units per year by 2020 as
the production capacity of new energy vehicles. According to China Automobile Dealers
Association, however, the total capacity of 200 completed new energy vehicle projects already
reached 20 million units per year by June of 2017, which is 10 times larger than the goal. The
industry’s capacity clearly exceeds the demand.         Many manufacturers make profits only
because they are subsidized: they would suffer losses if the amounts of subsidies are reduced
substantially.
        The policy to subsidize the new energy vehicle industry also created more horrendous
cases of subsidy deception. Some manufacturers that are supposed to be making new energy
vehicles received subsidies based on fake technical specifications.          According to the
investigation of the Ministry of Finance of China, 93 new energy vehicle companies received
9.27 billion RMB of subsidies that they should not have received. 6
        The latest of China’s industry policy to promote innovations is Made in China 2025 (MIC
2025). Early in 2013, the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology and the Chinese
Academy of Engineering (a think tank with ministerial-level rank) started a series of studies for a
new 10-year national program titled “China’s Manufacturing Power Strategy.” In 2014, Vice
Premier Ma Kai expressed his full support and urged a swift formulation of the program. On
May 8 in 2015, Made in China 2025 was officially released by China’s State Council and



5
  Global EV outlook 2018, OECD/IEA,
https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/GlobalEVOutlook2017.pdf (Accessed October 23,
2018).
6
  9.27 Billion RMB Subsidies on 76 Thousand New Energy Vehicles are Cheated (7.6 万辆新能源车骗补 92.7 亿
元), Securities Daily, September 9, 2016, http://epaper.zqrb.cn/html/2016-09/09/content_210081.htm (Accessed
October 23, 2018).

                                                                                                              6
authorized by the Premier Li Keqiang. 7          MIC 2025 program is aimed at transforming China
from a low value-added manufacturing giant into a world high value-added manufacturing
power.
         Responding to the nationwide program of MIC 2025, provincial and city governments
announced their programs that contribute to MIC 2025. By 2017, the central government
selected about 30 cities as demonstration pilot cities that have outstanding programs.                The
demonstration pilot cities include six cities in Guangdong province and one city in Hubei
province (Wuhan), the two provinces covered by the database we use for statistical analysis
below.    To facilitate the actual implementation of MIC 2025, eleven detailed industrial policies
(at the state level) were also announced in 2017. 8
         MIC 2025 targets ten industries including (1) next generation information technology, (2)
high-end numerical control machinery and robotics, (3) aerospace and aviation equipment, (4)
maritime engineering equipment and high-tech maritime vessel manufacturing, (5) advanced rail
equipment, (6) energy-saving and new energy vehicles, (7) electrical equipment, (8) new
material, (9) biomedicine and high-performance medical devices, and (10) agricultural
machinery and equipment. The new energy vehicle industry made the list despite some problems
that we pointed out above and received 38.1 billion RMB of subsidies in 2016 alone. These
industries collectively cover nearly 40 percent of China’s entire manufacturing value-added
according to Rhodium Group analysis (U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 2017, p.10). The
announcement of MIC 2025 was followed by the release of Made in China 2025 Major
Technical Roadmap (2015), also known as Green Book.                 Formulated by the National Advisory
Committee on Building a Manufacturing Power Strategy, Green Book specifies explicit targets



7
  Notification on the Printing and Distribution of Made in China 2025 (国务院关于印发《中国制造 2025》的通
知), The State Council of China, May 8, 2015, http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-05/19/content_9784.htm
(Accessed, October 23, 2018). Also, Made in China 2025 is the executive summary document of China’s
Manufacturing Power Strategy, but it has been used to refer to the entire set of policies especially outside China.
8
  A Planning System with 1+X Policies for Made in China is Released (《中国制造 2025》“1+X”规划体系全部发
布), Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of China, February 10, 2017,
http://www.miit.gov.cn/newweb/n1146295/n1146562/n1146650/c5483427/content.html (Accessed October 23,
2018).

                                                                                                                 7
on growth rate and market share, and details various policy assistances for each targeted industry
and its subsectors.
        Numerous policy tools will be used to achieve the goals of MIC 2025.               Subsidies
including preferential access to cheap capital will be provided to the firms in the targeted
industries.   Many expect the Chinese government will require foreign firms in the targeted
industries to transfer technology to Chinese firms before they enter the Chinese market.
Since China is not a party to the WTO Agreement on Government Procurement, favoring
domestic firms in government procurement in the targeted industries is another policy tool
available for China.
        Of these, the most important policy tools that China will certainly use are subsidies to
innovative firms in the targeted industries.       For example, Several Opinions on Finance to
Support Industry Stable Growth, Restricting, And Improving Profit, issued by seven ministries
and the People’s Bank of China on February 16, 2016, encourages banks to provide financial
support to industries including those targeted in MIC 2025. 9 Similarly, the Action Plan to
Improve Information Sharing and Promoting Industry and Finance Cooperation, jointly issued
by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), the People's Bank of China
(PBOC) and the China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC) in March 2016, calls for the
banking industry to support key enterprises and projects that are important for the MIC 2025. 10
Made in China 2025 Strategic Cooperation Agreement by MIIT and ICBC is signed on February
9, 2018. ICBC promised to provide at least 500 billion RMB of financial support to the
transformation and upgrading of MIC 2025 targeted manufacturing in the next 5 years. 11 Thus,

9
   Several Opinions Regarding Finance to Support Stable Growth of Industry, Restructuring and Improving Profit
(关于金融支持工业稳增长调结构增效益的若干意见), The State Council Information Office, www.scio.gove.cn,
February 24, 2014, http://www.scio.gov.cn/xwfbh/xwbfbh/yg/2/Document/1469592/1469592.htm (Accessed
October 23, 2018).
10
    Action Plan to Improve Information Sharing and Promoting Industry and Finance Cooperation (三部委关于印
发《加强信息共享 促进产融合作行动方案》的通知), Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of
China, March 3, 2016, http://www.miit.gov.cn/n1146290/n4388791/c4655349/content.html (Accessed October 23,
2018).
11
    Made in China 2025 Strategic Cooperation Agreement (工业和信息化部与工商银行签订实施《中国制造
2025》战略合作协议), Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of China, February 9, 2018,
http://www.miit.gov.cn/n973401/n1234620/n1234621/c6058413/content.html (Accessed October 23, 2018).

                                                                                                                 8
our examination of allocation and impacts of innovation subsidies using the data right before the
formal start of MIC 2025 can produce important information to gauge the success of MIC 2025.


3. Data
The data used in this study come from the China Employer Employee Survey (CEES), which is a
collaborative project between Wuhan University, Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, Stanford University, and the Chinese Academy of Social Science. The survey was
conducted in two waves in 2015 and 2016. As is shown in Table A1, the 2015 wave covered 573
firms and 4,838 employees matched with the firms in 13 cities and 19 counties in Guangdong
province. The 2016 wave expanded the survey to Hubei province and covered 1,122 firms and
9,103 employees in 26 cities and 39 counties. The sample firms come from the Third Economic
Census, which was conducted in early 2014. Sampling was conducted in two stages, each using
probability proportionate-to-size (PPS) sampling, with size defined as the number of employees
involved in manufacturing. Thus, the firm sample is representative of the employment size of
firms in China. 12
         CEES contains the information on the technology and innovation subsidies, which are the
central subsidies in the MIC 2025 and what we will examine in this paper. CEES asks each firm
if the firm received various subsidies.         Four of the subsidies (environmental protection
technology subsidies, new energy technology subsidies, high-tech subsidies, and technological
upgrading subsidies) are considered to be the innovation subsidies. Information on innovation
subsidies is captured in both waves 2015 and 2016. In wave 2015, CEES asked whether a firm
gained these subsidies during 2012~2014. In wave 2016, CEES had two different types of
questionnaires, one is for firms that participated in the 2015 wave and asked whether they
received the innovation subsidies in the previous year (2015), the other is for the new firms that

12
   For more details on the CEES, see CEES Research Team (2017). In the first stage, 20 county-level districts were
randomly sampled in each province, with probabilities proportionate to manufacturing employment size in each
district. In the second stage, 50 firms were sampled in each district as a target sample, again with probabilities
proportional to employment in each firm. Enumerators then started to visit the 50 firms in sequence and stopped
when they received responses from 36 eligible firms (that had production activities in the sampled district) or when
they finished visiting all the 50 firms.

                                                                                                                       9
joined the 2016 wave and asked whether they received the innovation subsidies during
2012~2015. We combine these three kinds of questionnaires on innovation subsidies in two
waves and construct a dummy variable indicating whether a firm received innovation subsidies
in any year between 2012 and 2015. We use this as a main variable in our statistical analysis
below.
         In examining the allocation of technology and innovation subsidies, a key question that
we ask is whether the subsidies are allocated primarily to the firms that show greater promise to
be innovative or to those firms that are politically favored.   One obvious way to define
politically favored firms to use the ownership by the state.    CEES has information of state
ownership of each firm, and we define a state owned enterprise (SOE) to be a firm that is
majority owned by the state.
         State ownership is one obvious way that a firm is politically favored, but there are some
other channels that the firms can use to establish close relation with the government.      As Li et
al. (2006) points out, the Chinese political system consists of four branches.       People’s Congress
(PC) is the legislative branch, (central and local) governments are the administrative branch,
Supreme Court and People’s Courts at local levels form the judicial branch, and Chinese
People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) is the democratic supervision branch.
Chinese firms can obtain political connection to the government by acquiring seats for their
CEOs in PC or (more often) CPPCC.
         Thus, we use political connection through PC or CPPCC membership as another proxy
for political favoritism in our analysis of allocation of technological subsidies.     We consider a
firm politically connected if the CEO or the owner of the firm is a member of PC or CPPCC
(national or local level).
         To investigate the impacts of the innovation subsidies on the innovative activities of
corporations, we examine five potential measures of corporate innovation in CEES.          First is the
0-1 dummy variable that takes 1 if the firm were successfully granted patents (either in China or
abroad) between 2012 and 2015.       Second is the total number of patents granted between 2012


                                                                                                       10
and 2015.    Since the patents include those for designs of product rather than technology related
in a narrow sense, we consider the number of invention patents as the third dependent variable.
The fourth variable is number of patents granted in foreign countries (mainly the U.S.).
Because the Chinese patent system allows some marginal innovations and design tweaks, the
patents granted abroad are considered much higher quality ones than those granted in China.
Finally, we consider the 0-1 dummy that takes 1 if the firm introduced any new products between
2012 and 2015.
        We also examine whether some corporate performance measures that can be indirectly
linked to innovations are influenced by the innovation subsidies.      The performance measures
that we consider are grouped into three types: (1) productivity, (2) market share, and (3)
profitability.
        First, we measure productivity in two ways.      One is a proxy of labor productivity, which
is calculated by dividing total sales by the number of employees. The other is total factor
productivity (TFP).     We calculate TFP for each firm by estimating value-added production
function separately for each industry to control for the industry heterogeneity.     We follow the
approach developed by Levinsohn and Petri (2003) to correct for potential bias in estimation of
production function caused by correlation between productivity shocks and changes in input use.
        The market share is measured using sales.      The market share in our database is a
categorical variable.   It takes 1 if the market share is less than or equal to 1%, 2 if it is between
1% and 10%, 3 if it is between 11% and 50%, and 4 if it is above 50%.
        We use two proxy variables for profitability. One is profit rate calculated by dividing
corporate profits by total sales.   The other is the loss dummy which takes 1 if the firm reports
annual losses for any year between 2013 and 2015.
        Finally, we include several control variables that may influence firm’s likelihood of
receiving innovation subsidies, innovation outcomes, and economic performance in our
regression analyses. The control variables are: number of employees (in log), firm age, firm’s
export (0-1 variable that takes 1 for an exporting firm), R&D intensity (calculated as the ratio of


                                                                                                     11
the R&D expenses to total sales), CEO’s education level (number of years in school), CEO’s
work experience (number of years in work), and whether CEO has MBA or has participated in
executive MBA programs. All the regression models that we estimate also include one
province dummy that takes 1 for firms in Hubei Province and 0 for those in Guangdong Province
and 26 industry dummies.
       Table 1 presents the summary statistics of the variables that we use.     The table shows
that just 7% of the firms in our sample are majority state-owned.    There are more firms that are
politically connected.    In total, 23% of the firms are politically connected. The 14% of the firms
have their CEOs or owners in PC and 13% have CEOs or owners in CCPPC.
       Table 2 shows a cross tabulation of the political connection variable and the state
ownership.   The majority of the firms in our sample (771 firms or 72.0% of the sample) are not
state-owned and have no political connections. Small number of firms (27 firms or 2.5% of the
sample) are state-owned and have political connections.     There are some SOEs (50 or 4.7% of
the sample) that are not politically connected according to our definition.    Finally, there are
substantial number of non-SOEs (223 or 20.8% of the sample) that are politically connected.


4. Allocation of innovation subsidies
       This section examines whether state ownership and political connection matter for the
likelihood of receiving innovation subsidies.    Table 3 shows that 51.9% of politically connected
SOEs receive innovation subsidies, while the proportion of politically connected non-SOEs that
receive the subsidies is 29.6%. Similarly, the proportion of non-politically connected SOEs that
receive the innovation subsidies (36%) is higher than the proportion of non-politically connected
non-SOEs (19.6%).        Thus, this simple comparison suggests that innovation subsidies are
allocated more to SOEs. The table also shows, given the state-ownership, politically connected
firms are more likely to receive innovation subsidies than non-politically connected firms.
       Thus, SOEs and politically connected firms appear more likely to receive innovation
subsidies, but the simple comparison of means does not prove that these firms receive favorable


                                                                                                    12
treatments by the government because of their relation to the government.      This may just reflect
other differences between SOEs or politically connected firms and the others.      For example,
SOEs and politically connected firms may be concentrated in the industries with high R&D
intensity for some reason and those industries may be more likely to receive innovation
subsidies. To control for the other factors that may influence the likelihood of obtaining
innovation subsidies, we estimate simple Probit regression models.
        The dependent variable in the regressions is the 0-1 variable that takes one when the firm
receives any innovation subsidy between 2012 and 2015.        The main explanatory variable is the
political connection dummy that takes one when the firm is politically connected and the SOE
dummy that takes one when the firm is state-owned. We also include all the control variables as
well as the province dummy and the industry dummies discussed above.
        Of the firms in the CEES database, 1,053 firms have information on all the major
variables of our interest: innovation subsidies, political connection, state ownership, province,
and industry.   For 924 of those, the database has information on all the control variables.       We
use this set of 924 firms as the full sample for the regression analyses below.
        Table 4 presents the estimation result of Probit models for determinants of innovation
subsidies. Each cell reports the average marginal effect of the explanatory variable (row) in the
model (column) and its standard error in the parentheses.     Model 1 includes just industry
dummies, province dummy, and the state ownership dummy without any other controls. The
estimation result shows that SOEs are more likely to receive the innovation subsidies.       This
result is consistent with what other researchers found (König et al., 2018; Tan et al., 2016;
Herrala and Jia, 2015; Ferri and Liu, 2010).     When the controls are added (Models 2 and 3),
however, the coefficient estimate on the SOE dummy becomes substantially smaller and loses
statistical significance.   Thus, controlling for various attributes of firms and managers, the
majority state ownership is not correlated with the likelihood of getting the innovation subsidies.
        Model 4 includes the political connection dummy instead of the SOE dummy.            The
political connection clearly increases the probability of receiving the innovation subsidies.


                                                                                                        13
When the set of control variables are added (Models 5 and 6), the coefficient estimate on the
political connection dummy becomes smaller but it is still statistically significant.              The point
estimate in Model 6 suggests that having political connection increases the probability of
receiving innovation subsidies by 8.8%.           Since about 23% of the sample receive innovation
subsidy, the estimated impact of political connection is also economically significant.
        Models 7, 8, and 9 include both political connection and SOE dummies as major
explanatory variables.       When the control variables are not included (Model 7), both political
connection and SOE dummies enter the regression model significantly with positive signs. When
the control variables are added (Models 8 and 9), the coefficient on the SOE dummy is not
statistically significant anymore while the political connection continues to be positive and
statistically significant.
        Model 10 adds the interaction term of political connection and SOE, although the
marginal effect of the interaction term is not reported in the table. The point estimate of the
marginal effect of the interaction term is negative but not significant (-0.220 with standard error
of 0.406), which indicates political connection is positively related to innovation subsidies no
matter ownership is SOE or not.
        Examining the estimated coefficients on the industry dummies (not reported in table), we
find that the coefficients on the dummies for industries targeted in MIC 2025 have large positive
values in all the specifications in the table.       When we replace the industry dummies with a
single dummy variable that takes 1 if a firm is in one of the MIC targeted industries and 0
otherwise, the coefficient is positive and statistically significant in all the specifications without
changing other results substantially. 13
        Taken together, the results in Table 4 suggest that the innovation subsidies are more likely
to be allocated to SOEs and political connected firms.            Unless state ownership or political
connection is perfectly correlated with capacity to innovate, the result means that there are some
firms that do not receive the innovation subsidies but have higher capacity to innovate than some

13
   MIC 2015 targeted industries are defined according to the Green Book, and include the following 2-digit
industries, 13, 14, 25, 26, 27, 28, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39 and 40.

                                                                                                               14
firms that receive the subsidies because of their relationship to the government.     In this sense,
the innovation subsidies are allocated inefficiently.
       Table 4 also shows that the political connection is more important than state ownership in
determining the likelihood for a firm to receive the innovation subsidies.     Even when all the
control variables and the SOE dummy are included at the same time (Model 9), the political
connection increases the probability of receiving the innovation subsidy significantly.     The SOE
dummy on the other hand loses the explanatory power completely when the control variables are
introduced.
       We also find that the innovation subsidies are allocated preferentially to the industries
targeted by MIC 2025 at least by 2015.     These subsidies will most likely continue to be the
most important tools in implementing MIC 2025.


5. Impacts of innovation subsidies
       This section examines the impacts of the innovation subsidies.     We first estimate
regression models that relate innovation performance of a firm to whether the firm received
innovation subsidies with the set of control variables.   Since there may be time lags between
receiving innovation subsidy and the subsidy resulting in innovation (or influencing profitability)
of the firm.   Unfortunately, our data do not allow us to address the timing issue.    All we can
tell is the cross-sectional correlation between subsidies and innovation (or
profitability/productivity). We consider five potential measures of corporate innovation as we
discussed above.
       We estimate the regression models in this section by OLS (Ordinary Least Squares).
Since some of the dependent variables are 0-1 variables, the OLS specification is not literally
correct as some predicted values will be below 0 or above 1.    As Wooldridge (2010, p563)
notes, we should consider the OLS estimation in such case as a linear projection of the
probability that the dependent variable takes 1 onto the space spanned by the explanatory
variables.


                                                                                                       15
       Table 5 shows the results.    Model 1 examines whether the firms that got innovation
subsidies are more likely to have patents.   The estimated coefficient on the innovation subsidies
dummy is positive and statistically significant.    The point estimate suggests that subsidies
increase the probability that the firm receives patents by about 29%. There are some notable
results on the coefficients on control variables.   The positive coefficient on employment
suggests that large firms are more likely to have patents.   As many would expect, R&D
intensive firms are more likely to have patents.    Firms with CEO with high educational
achievement and MBA are more likely to receive patents, but CEO’s work experience does not
seem to matter.
       Model 2 adds the political connection dummy and the SOE dummy.            The coefficient on
the political connection dummy is positive and statistically significant.   The coefficient on the
SOE dummy is not significantly different from zero.      Thus, even given the presence or absence
of innovation subsidies, the political connection provides an additional advantage on the
likelihood of getting patents, but the state ownership does not.   Political connection again seems
more important than state ownership.
       Models 3 and 4 consider the total number of patents that a firm receives as the measure of
innovation performance.     The results are similar to those for Models 1 and 2.   The innovation
subsidies tend to increase the number of patents.    The only difference is in Model 4 the political
connection and the SOE have additional effects of increasing the total number of patents, as
suggested by the positive and significant coefficients on political connection and SOE dummies.
       Models 5 and 6 focuses on invention patents.       China’s patent system grants three types
of patents: invention, utility model and design.    Only applications for invention go through
substantive examination for utility, novelty, and non-obviousness. Thus, it is widely recognized
that innovation patent is of the highest quality among Chinese patents. According to the Patent
Annual Report by State Intellectual Property Office of China, in 2016, among total patents in
force (3,464,824, stock number), invention patents account for only 28.2%.
       The regression results for invention patents are quite similar to those in Models 3 and 4.


                                                                                                     16
Even when we limit our attention to the invention patents, innovation subsidies tend to increase
the number of patents.    In addition to this, both political connection and state ownership further
increase the number of invention patents.
       Even the invention patents in China are considered to be of lower quality compared to the
patents in other jurisdictions such as the U.S., Japan and EU. Recently there have been
increasing number of patent filing abroad by Chinese inventors. World Intellectual Property
Organization (2017, p.34) points out “Filing abroad reflects the globalization of intellectual
property (IP) protection and a desire to commercialize technology in foreign markets. The costs
of filing abroad can be substantial, so the patents for which applicants seek international
protection are likely to confer higher values.”
       The foreign patents originated in China are much higher quality than patents filed in
China, but they are still of lower quality than the patents originated in other countries. For
example, Boeing and Muller (2016) find that among PCT (Patent Cooperation Treaty) patents,
those originated in China score lower than those originated in the U.S., Korea, Germany and
Japan on the quality measure based on forward citations in International Search Reports.
Squicciarini et al. (2013) find that among patents filed at European Patent Office (EPO), patents
originated in China have lower score than the world average in terms of patent scope, family
size, claims, and radicalness.
       We examine the number of patents filed and granted in foreign countries, which are
considered to be at least higher quality than domestic patents in China, in Models 7 and 8.       Here
we get a very different result. The coefficient on the innovation subsidy dummy is still positive
but small and only marginally significant.     There are no additional effects of political
connection or state ownership.    The results suggest that although innovation subsidies increase
patenting in China they often fail to lead to patents in foreign countries.
       The distribution for the number of patents is often considered to have a fat tail.     If this is
the case, OLS estimator is inconsistent.     To examine how serious this problem can be, we
estimated Models 3 through 8 by using Poisson regression models.         The results, which are


                                                                                                      17
reported in Table B1, are nearly identical to the OLS results in Table 5.
        Finally, Models 9 and 10 consider whether firms with innovation subsidies are more
likely to introduce new products.      The coefficient on innovation subsidy dummy is positive,
suggesting the subsidies indeed increase the probability of introducing new products.       There are
no additional effects of political connection or state ownership.
        The analysis in Table 5 assumes that the impact of innovation subsidy does not depend on
firm characteristics such as size.    We have repeated the same analysis relaxing this assumption
and considering the possibility that the impacts are different between large and small firms.
Table B2 contains the results of regressions that include the interaction term between innovation
subsidy dummy and firm size.         For some specifications (Columns 2 through 4), we find the
interaction term is statistically significant.   To see how the impact differs between small firms
and large firms, Figure B1 shows the predicted values of the dependent variable as a function of
firm size for subsidized firms and non-subsidized firms separately.      We calculate the predicted
value assuming all the explanatory variables other than innovation subsidy dummy and firm size
take the average values for the entire sample.      The range of firm size is limited to the middle
90% of the observations, so that we can compare the typical firms in the sample.        The graph
also includes 95% confidence intervals for selected value of firm size.      Panels A and B of
Figure B1 show that the result that the firms that receive innovation subsidies tend to have more
patents in total and more invention patents come mostly from medium to large firms.         Small
firms do not have many patents and innovation subsidy does not seem to matter for them.           For
the number of foreign patents (Panel C), the difference between subsidized and non-subsidized
firms is less clear even for large firms, which is consistent with the result in Table 5.
        One potential concern of our analysis is that subsidized firms and non-subsidized firms
differ so widely in many aspects beyond the innovation subsidy that the comparison is difficult.
Although include many control variables that control for the impacts of those variables (linearly),
we cannot control all the factors that are systematically different between two groups.      To
address this concern, we tried comparison based on propensity score matching.         The results are


                                                                                                        18
summarized in Appendix C, but we get qualitatively similar results as those in Table 5. The only
substantial difference is the estimated effect of innovation subsidy on the probability to introduce
new products.    Although it is significantly positive in Table 5, the propensity score matching
analysis fails to detect the impact of innovation subsidy on the new product dummy.
       Table 6 reports the regression analyses of the impacts of innovation subsidies on other
performance variables such as productivity, market share, and profitability.    We again include
the same set of control variables as in the analyses above as well as the province dummy and the
industry dummies.
       Looking at Table 6, we find that the innovation subsidy does not influence these
performance variables except for the productivity measured as sales divided by employment,
where the impact of subsidy is positive but the statistical significance is only marginal.   This
suggests that the innovation subsidies do not make the recipient firms more productive,
profitable, or increase the market share.   Although the subsidies tend to increase the patenting at
least in Chinese patent office and increases the likelihood of new products, they do not seem to
help the firms improving other performances (with a potential exception of sales/employment).
       The SOE and political connection dummy seem to influence some of these performance
measures.   SOEs tend to have higher productivity measured in sales per employment (Model 1),
but does not have significant influence on the other four performance measures.      Political
connection, on the other hand, tends to increase productivity measured in sales per employment,
market share, and reduces the probability of experiencing loss.    The findings here are again
consistent with the view that political connection is more important discriminant of Chinese
firms than state ownership.
       We again considered the possibility that the impact of innovation subsidy depends on the
size of firms by adding the interaction term to regression models.    The result is reported in
Table B3.   The interaction term comes in significantly only when we consider market share as
the dependent variable.   The overall impact of innovation subsidy on the market share,
however, is insignificant regardless of the size, as Figure B2 shows.


                                                                                                    19
        We also conducted the propensity score matching analysis for the impacts of innovation
subsidy on productivity, profitability, and market share.   As the result reported in Appendix C
shows, the results are very much the same.
        In summary, we find that the innovation subsidies indeed increase the total number of
patents granted and the likelihood of introducing new products.     The number of patents granted
abroad, however, does not increase significantly with the innovation subsidies.     These results
suggest that the innovation subsidies may be encouraging only incremental technological
improvement and new products that are not drastically different from old products.      The
innovation subsidies do not seem to generate truly innovative patents that are granted in foreign
countries with stronger patent systems. Our result is consistent with the findings by Dang and
Motohashi (2015), which examined the patent data in China.       They find that the subsidy
programs that they examine actually encourage firms to narrow the scopes of patents to make it
easier to obtain patents.
        The innovation subsidies also fail to improve the bottom line performance of the recipient
companies (with an exception for sales per employment).       This suggests that the patents and
new products that are encouraged by the subsidies do not add much to productivity or
profitability.


6. Discussion
As the catch-up phase of China’s economic growth is coming to an end, the Chinese government
has been trying to transform the Chinese economy from a developing economy that depends on
foreign technologies to an advanced economy that is supported by indigenous innovations.        The
main tools of China’s industry policy to promote innovations have been various subsidies.       This
paper assesses the success of China’s innovation policy by studying the impacts of innovation
subsidies using data from the CEES.     We make three important findings.      First, the innovation
subsidies are allocated preferentially to politically connected firms.   Politically connected firms
are not necessarily state owned and not all SOEs are politically connected.     For the allocation of


                                                                                                    20
subsidies, we find political connection is a more important determinant than state ownership.
Because politically connected firms are not necessarily more innovative firms, the result suggests
inefficiency of the allocation of the innovation subsidies.
        Second, firms that receive subsidies file more patents and are more likely to introduce
new products, but do not necessarily file more patents outside China.      Since the quality of
patents granted in China are lower than those in foreign jurisdictions, the result suggests the
innovation subsidies often encourage the firms to come up with incremental changes and not
truly innovative technologies.
        Third, the firms that receive innovation subsidies do not show higher productivity, more
profitability, or larger market shares.   Thus, the innovation subsidies do not seem to help the
bottom lines of the recipient firms.
        Overall, our findings suggest that the allocation of innovation subsidies is inefficient, that
the subsidies encourage only incremental innovations and not radical ones, and that the subsidies
do not help the bottom lines. These make one doubt the effectiveness of China’s innovation
policy so far.
        In a recent paper, Fang, Lerner, Wu, and Zhang (2018) examined similar questions about
the relation between politics, government subsidies, and innovation in China. Using the data
for Chinese firms listed in Shanghai and Shenzhen A-share markets, they find that the allocation
of government subsidies became more efficient in the sense that subsidies are correlated with
firm’s innovative capacity rather than political consideration, following the anticorruption
campaign under Chairman Xi and in the regions where local government officials changed.
They find that the subsidies also became more positively correlated with future innovation.
        Thus, their findings paint a more promising picture for the future of China’s innovation
policy than what our results suggest. Both allocation and effectiveness of government subsidies
seem to have improved recently. There are some differences between their sample firms and our
sample firms, which at least partially may explain the difference. Their sample includes only
firms publicly listed in Shanghai and Shenzhen, while our sample includes both listed and


                                                                                                    21
unlisted firms but in two provinces. They identify the firms that are likely to be receiving
political favors by looking at the entertainment expenses reported by the firms, while we check
the CEO’s membership in PC and CPPCC. They study panel data while our examination is
limited to cross-sectional variation, which prevents us from investigating the change overtime.
As far as we examine the data on a wide range of firms in Guangdong and Hubei, however, we
still find the political connection (measured in political membership of CEOs) still mattered for
the allocation of innovation subsidies even after the anticorruption campaign started.
        Our findings have important implications for the attempts by the Chinese government to
stimulate innovations. Chinese government seems to believe that the industrial policies such as
innovation subsidies will transform China into a world leader in innovations and allow China to
continue economic growth.      Many critics outside China view these attempts as manifestation of
China’s traditional state-led economic development that not only survived to today but rather got
intensified.   Our results suggest that these industrial policies are not effective in promoting
innovation and can distort the allocation of economic resources.     If the Chinese government
wishes to promote innovation in the long run, phasing out these preferential policies to create fair
and competitive business environment for all economic players is likely to be more effective.


References
Abramovitz, Moses (1956). “Resource and output trends in the United States since 1870.” The
     American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 46 (2), 5-23.
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Harun Alp, Nicholas Bloom, and William R. Kerr (2017).
     “Innovation, Reallocation and Growth.” NBER Working Paper 18993.
Aghion, Phillipe, and Peter Howitt (1992). “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction.”
     Econometrica, 60 (2), 323-351.
Arrow, Kenneth J. (1962). “Economic Welfare and The Allocation of Resources for Invention.”
     In Nelson, Richard R. (Eds.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity, New Jersey:
     Princeton University Press, 609-626.


                                                                                                    22
Becker, Bettina (2015). “Public R&D Policies and Private R&D Investment: A Survey of The
    Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Economic Surveys, 29 (5), 917-942.
Boeing, Philipp, and Elisabeth Mueller (2016). “Measuring Patent Quality in Cross-Country
    Comparison.” Economics Letters, 149, 145-47.
Bronzini, Raffaello, and Paolo Piselli (2016). “The Impact of R&D Subsidies on Firm
    Innovation.” Research Policy, 45 (2), 442-457.
Cantner, Uwe, and Sarah Kösters (2012). “Picking the Winner? Empirical Evidence on The
    Targeting Of R&D Subsidies to Start-Ups.” Small Business Economics, 39 (4), 921-936.
CEES Research Team (2017). “How are Chinese Manufacturing Firms Coping with Rising
    Labor Costs: A Report of China Employer-Employee Survey (2015-2016).” Journal of
    Macro-Quality Research, 5 (2), 1-21.
Czarnitzki, Dirk, and Bernd Ebersberger (2010). “Do Direct R&D Subsidies Lead to the
    Monopolization of R&D in the Economy?” ZEW Discussion Paper 10-078.
Dang, Jianwei, and Kazuyuki Motohashi (2015). “Patent Statistics: A Good Indicator for
    Innovation in China? Patent Subsidy Program Impacts on Patent Quality.” China Economic
    Review, 35, 137-155.
David, Paul A., Bronwyn H. Hall, and Andrew A. Toole (2000). “Is Public R&D A Complement
    or Substitute for Private R&D? A Review of The Econometric Evidence.” Research policy,
    29 (4-5), 497-529.
European Union Chamber of Commerce in China (2017). “China Manufacturing 2025: Putting
    Industrial Policy Ahead of Market Forces.”
    http://www.europeanchamber.com.cn/documents/confirm/5bcf07228336e/en/pdf/473,
    (Accessed, October 23, 2018).
Faccio, Mara (2006). “Politically Connected Firms.” American Economic Review, 96 (1), 369-
    386.
Fang, Lily, Josh Lerner, Chaopeng Wu, and Qi Zhang (2018). “Corruption, Government
    Subsidies, and Innovation: Evidence from China.” NBER Working Paper 25098.


                                                                                             23
Ferri, Giovanni, and Li-Gang Liu (2010). “Honor Thy Creditors Beforan Thy Shareholders: Are
    the Profits of Chinese State-Owned Enterprises Real?” Asian Economic Papers, 9(3), 50-71.
García‐Quevedo, José (2004). “Do Public Subsidies Complement Business R&D? A Meta-
    Analysis of the Econometric Evidence.” Kyklos, 57 (1), 87-102.
González, Xulia, Jordi Jaumandreu, and Consuelo Pazó (2005). “Barriers to Innovation and
    Subsidy Effectiveness.” RAND Journal of Economics, 36 (4), 930-950.
Hall, Bronwyn H., and Josh Lerner (2010). “The Financing of R&D and Innovation.” In Hall,
    Bronwyn H., and Nathan Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation,
    Oxford: Elsevier, Vol. 1, Chapter 14, 609-639.
Herrala, Risto, and Yandong Jia (2015). “Toward State Capitalism in China?” Asian Economic
    Papers, 14(2), 163-75.
Howell, Sabrina T. (2017). “Financing Innovation: Evidence From R&D Grants.” American
    Economic Review, 107 (4), 1136-64.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow (2009). “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
    and India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (4), 1403-1448.
König, Michael, Kjetil Storesletten, Zheng Song, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2018). “From Imitation
    to Innovation: Where Is All That Chinese R&D Going?” Unpublished Working Paper.
Lerner, J. (2009). “The Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Efforts to Boost
    Entrepreneurship and Venture Capital Have Failed and What to Do About It.” Princeton:
    Princeton University Press.
Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin (2003). “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to
    Control for Unobservables.” The Review of Economic Studies, 70 (2), 317-41.
Li, Hongbin, Lingsheng Meng, and Junsen Zhang (2006). “Why Do Entrepreneurs Enter
    Politics? Evidence from China.” Economic Inquiry, 44 (3), 559-578.
Li, Hongbin, Lingsheng Meng, Qian Wang, and Li-An Zhou (2008). “Political Connections,
    Financing and Firm Performance: Evidence From Chinese Private Firms.” Journal of
    Development Economics, 87 (2), 283-299.


                                                                                              24
National Advisory Committee on Building a Manufacturing Power Strategy (2015). “Made in
    China 2025 Major Technical Roadmap.” http://www.cae.cn/cae/html/files/2015-
    10/29/20151029105822561730637.pdf, (Accessed, October 23, 2018).
Nelson, Richard R. (1959) “The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research.” Journal of
    Political Economy, 67 (3), 297-306.
Restuccia, Diego, and Richard Rogerson (2008). “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity
    with Heterogeneous Plants.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11 (4), 707-720.
Romer, Paul M. (1990). “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political Economy, 98
    (5), S71-S102.
Rosenbaum, Paul R., and Donald B. Rubin (1983). “The Central Role of The Propensity Score in
    Observational Studies for Causal Effects.” Biometrika,70 (1), 41-55.
Rosenbaum, Paul R., and Donald B. Rubin (1985). “Constructing a Control Group Using
    Multivariate Matched Sampling Methods that Incorporate the Propensity Score.” The
    American Statistician, 39 (1), 33-38.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny (1993). “Corruption.” The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 108 (3), 599-617.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny (1994). “Politicians and Firms.” The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 109 (4), 995-1025.
Solow, Robert M. (1957). “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” The
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 39 (3), 312-320.
Squicciarini, Mariagrazia, Hélène Dernis, and Chiara Criscuolo (2013). “Measuring Patent
    Quality: Indicators of Technological and Economic Value.” OECD DSTI/DOC.
Zúñiga‐Vicente, José Ángel, César Alonso‐Borrego, Francisco J. Forcadell, and José I. Galán
    (2014). “Assessing the Effect of Public Subsidies on Firm R&D Investment: A Survey.”
    Journal of Economic Surveys, 28 (1), 36-67.
Tan, Yuyan, Yiping Huang, and Wing Thye Woo (2016). “Zombie Firms and The Crowding-Out
    of Private Investment in China.” Asian Economic Papers, 15 (3), 32-55.


                                                                                              25
U.S. Chamber of Commerce (2017). “Made in China 2025: Global Ambitions Built on Local
    Protections.”
    https://www.uschamber.com/sites/default/files/final_made_in_china_2025_report_full.pdf,
    (Accessed, October 23, 2018).
World Intellectual Property Organization (2017). “World Intellectual Property Indicators.”
    http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_941_2017.pdf, (Accessed, October 23,
    2018).
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (2010). “Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, 2nd
    Edition.” Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.




                                                                                             26
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics of Variables
Variable                                                               N      Mean      SD
Technological innovation subsidy dummy                                1,189   0.23     0.42
Political connection
  People's Congress (PC) member                                       1,086   0.14     0.35
  Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) member   1,083   0.13     0.34
  PC or CPPCC                                                         1,087   0.23     0.42
Ownership
  SOEs                                                                1,202   0.07     0.26
  Private                                                             1,202   0.68     0.47
  HMT                                                                 1,202   0.18     0.38
  Foreign                                                             1,202   0.07     0.26
Firm's attributes
  Firm age                                                            1,202   12.31    7.59
  Firm size (Employment)                                              1,114   827.4   2,765.6
  Exporter                                                            1,117   0.43     0.49
  R&D sales ratio                                                     1,030   0.02     0.06
Entrepreneur's attributes
  Years of schooling                                                  1,090   14.45    3.08
  Industry working experience                                         1,057   20.74   10.25
  CEO has MBA                                                         1,074    0.3     0.46
Province
  Hubei                                                               1,208   0.48     0.50
MIC targeted industries                                               1,188   0.46     0.50
Innovation
  Patent dummy                                                        1,108    0.4      0.5
  Total No. of patents                                                1,108   33.4    319.1
  Total No. of invention patents                                      1,097   13.9    167.4
  Total No. of foreign patents                                        1,081    4.3     76.5
  New product dummy                                                   1,109   0.421   0.494
Corporate performance
  Labor productivity (sales/employment)                               1,098    76      182
  TFP in log                                                          848     3.109   2.343
  Market share
     ≤1%                                                              1,143   0.207   0.406
     1% ~ 10%                                                         1,143   0.317   0.465
     11% ~ 50%                                                        1,143   0.270   0.444
     ≥ 50%                                                            1,143   0.206   0.404
  Profit rate (profit/sales)                                          1,066   0.041   0.120
  Loss dummy                                                          1,066   0.174   0.380




                                                                                                27
Table 2. Tabulation of Political Connections and Ownership
                        Without Political               With Political
                                                                                               Total
                          Connections                   Connections
                       No.            Row %           No.            Row %             No.             Row %
   Non-SOEs            771             77.6           223              22.4            994              100


      SOEs              50             64.9           27               35.1            77               100




  Table 3. Innovation Subsidies by State Ownership and Political Connections

                                    SOEs                           Non-SOEs                 Mean difference

                        # of Obs.            Mean       # of Obs.              Mean              (SE)

    With political           27              0.519           223               0.296           -0.223**
     connections                                                                                (0.094)
   Without political         50              0.360           771               0.196          -0.164***
     connections                                                                                (0.059)
   Mean difference                  -0.159                         -0.100***
         (SE)                     (0.118)                           (0.031)




                                                                                                               28
Table 4. Probit Regressions of Innovation Subsidies on Political Connections and Ownership
                                                                               Dependent variable: Technological innovation subsidy dummy
                                      (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)         (9)           (10)       Original
SOE                               0.189***           0.0511          0.0431                                                         0.163***          0.0469      0.0404        0.0457        0.254
                                   (0.0623)         (0.0542)        (0.0529)                                                         (0.0624)        (0.0549)    (0.0534)       (0.0549)     (0.265)
Political Connection                                                                0.187***        0.101***       0.0884***        0.179***        0.100***    0.0879***      0.0895***     0.393***
                                                                                    (0.0342)        (0.0316)        (0.0320)        (0.0343)         (0.0316)    (0.0321)       (0.0321)     (0.133)
SOE*Political Connection                                                                                                                                                                      -0.220
                                                                                                                                                                                             (0.406)
Firm's attributes
    Employment in log                              0.0563***       0.0435***                       0.0542***       0.0429***                        0.0523***   0.0414***      0.0414***     0.185***
                                                   (0.00888)       (0.00952)                        (0.00876)       (0.00942)                       (0.00899)    (0.00961)     (0.00961)     (0.044)
    Firm age in log                                0.0607***       0.0611***                       0.0551***       0.0581***                        0.0526***   0.0560***      0.0560***     0.250***
                                                    (0.0202)        (0.0207)                        (0.0202)        (0.0207)                         (0.0203)    (0.0208)       (0.0207)     (0.093)
    Export                                           0.0329          0.0308                          0.0319          0.0318                           0.0334      0.0332        0.0336        0.150
                                                    (0.0287)        (0.0289)                        (0.0280)        (0.0282)                         (0.0280)    (0.0282)       (0.0281)     (0.125)
    R&D sales ratio                                1.766***         1.595***                        1.688***        1.537***                        1.682***     1.535***      1.535***      6.843***
                                                    (0.351)          (0.323)                         (0.339)         (0.314)                         (0.335)      (0.311)       (0.310)      (1.446)
Entrepreneur's attributes
    Years of schooling                                             0.00950**                                        0.0102**                                    0.00998**      0.00988**     0.044**
                                                                   (0.00450)                                        (0.00453)                                    (0.00452)     (0.00452)     (0.020)
    Working experience                                              0.000406                                       -0.0000711                                    -0.000118     -0.000116      -0.001
                                                                   (0.00126)                                        (0.00128)                                    (0.00128)     (0.00128)     (0.006)
    CEO has MBA                                                     0.0660**                                         0.0501*                                      0.0504*       0.0511*       0.228*
                                                                    (0.0270)                                        (0.0270)                                     (0.0270)       (0.0270)     (0.121)
2-digit industry                     Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Province                             Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Pseudo R2                           0.100            0.230           0.244            0.121           0.240           0.251           0.130           0.241        0.252         0.252        0.252
N                                    924              924             924             924              924             924             924             924          924           924          924
Note: Interaction term of political connection dummy and state ownership is only included in the last column. Average marginal effects in cells and robust standard errors in parentheses.
Marginal effect for dummy variable is the discrete change from 0 to 1. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level.



                                                                                                                                                                                                        29
Table 5. OLS Regressions of Innovation Performance on Innovation Subsidy
                                                                                                   Dependent variables: Innovation performance
                                              Patent                      Total No. of patents                  Total No. of invention           Total No. of foreign patents       New product
                                              dummy                               in log                            patents in log                           in log                       dummy
                                      (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)                  (5)            (6)                 (7)                (8)       (9)             (10)
Innovation subsidy                0.293***             0.283***        1.055***            1.006***            0.498***       0.461***             0.139*             0.130*    0.183***      0.178***
                                   (0.040)             (0.040)          (0.129)            (0.128)              (0.100)        (0.099)             (0.073)            (0.073)   (0.044)       (0.045)
SOE                                                     0.085                              0.538***                           0.576***                                -0.024                   -0.005
                                                       (0.057)                             (0.199)                             (0.190)                                (0.127)                 (0.068)
Political Connection                                   0.069**                             0.314***                            0.174*                                  0.088                      0.044
                                                       (0.034)                             (0.111)                             (0.092)                                (0.067)                 (0.041)
Firm's attributes
    Employment in log             0.033***             0.029**         0.257***            0.234***            0.173***       0.153***             0.053*             0.051*     0.025*        0.024*
                                    (0.011)            (0.011)          (0.043)            (0.042)              (0.037)        (0.036)             (0.027)            (0.027)   (0.014)       (0.014)
    Firm age in log                 0.043*              0.036            0.081              0.044              0.086**          0.054               0.013              0.010     -0.007        -0.008
                                   (0.024)             (0.024)          (0.061)            (0.062)              (0.042)        (0.043)             (0.033)            (0.032)   (0.027)       (0.027)
    Export                          0.063*              0.067*          0.187*             0.208**              -0.007          0.012              0.093*             0.095*    0.094**       0.095**
                                   (0.035)             (0.035)          (0.100)            (0.099)              (0.078)        (0.077)             (0.054)            (0.055)   (0.041)       (0.041)
    R&D sales ratio               2.132***             2.139***        6.914***            6.971***            2.615**        2.698**              1.465*             1.448*    1.141**       1.134**
                                   (0.595)             (0.582)          (1.661)            (1.601)              (1.243)        (1.195)             (0.824)            (0.835)   (0.551)       (0.549)
Entrepreneur's attributes
    Years of schooling            0.016***             0.016***         0.033**            0.032**             0.027**        0.026**             0.018**             0.019**   0.017***      0.017***
                                     (0.005)           (0.005)          (0.016)            (0.016)              (0.013)        (0.013)             (0.008)            (0.008)   (0.006)       (0.006)
    Working experience              0.002               0.001           0.008*              0.005               0.003           0.001               0.001              0.000     0.001            0.001
                                     (0.002)           (0.002)          (0.004)            (0.004)              (0.003)        (0.003)             (0.002)            (0.002)   (0.002)       (0.002)
    CEO has MBA                   0.127***             0.116***        0.280***            0.226**             0.200**         0.169*              -0.057             -0.072    0.113***      0.106***
                                     (0.036)           (0.036)          (0.103)            (0.105)              (0.083)        (0.087)             (0.063)            (0.068)   (0.040)       (0.041)
2-digit industry                     Yes                 Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes             Yes                 Yes               Yes        Yes             Yes
Province                             Yes                 Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes             Yes                 Yes               Yes        Yes             Yes
R-Square                            0.369               0.374            0.474              0.486               0.320           0.339               0.122              0.124     0.157            0.158
N                                    859                 859              859                859                 859             859                 859               859        859             859
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level

                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
Table 6. Regression of Other Performance Variables on Innovation Subsidy
                                                  Dependent variables: Corporate performance
                                Sales/employ
                                                  TFP in log      Market share      Profit/sales     Loss dummy
                                 ment in log
                                     (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)
Innovation subsidy                 0.147*            0.009            0.069            0.000             0.020
                                   (0.090)          (0.153)          (0.092)          (0.011)           (0.039)
SOE                               0.386***           0.269            0.033            -0.018            0.065
                                   (0.136)          (0.211)          (0.129)          (0.020)           (0.066)
Political connection              0.228**            0.088           0.175**           0.011          -0.094***
                                   (0.089)          (0.142)          (0.083)          (0.009)           (0.035)
Firm's attributes
    Employment in log            -0.095***         0.322***         0.095***           0.006           -0.027**
                                   (0.030)          (0.049)          (0.030)          (0.004)           (0.012)
    Firm age in log               0.138**           -0.127            -0.038           0.007           0.063***
                                   (0.064)          (0.100)          (0.060)          (0.008)           (0.023)
    Export                        0.176**            0.047            0.060            -0.009           -0.048
                                   (0.082)          (0.140)          (0.087)          (0.011)           (0.036)
    R&D sales ratio              -2.488***          -1.422           1.434*            -0.065          0.963***
                                   (0.624)          (1.171)          (0.844)          (0.153)           (0.295)
Entrepreneur's attributes
    Years of schooling            0.084***         0.064***          0.022*            -0.000          0.016***
                                   (0.014)          (0.022)          (0.013)          (0.002)           (0.006)
    Working experience              0.004            0.001            0.000            -0.000            0.003
                                   (0.004)          (0.006)          (0.004)          (0.000)           (0.002)
    CEO has MBA                    0.142*            0.011            -0.130           -0.007           -0.043
                                   (0.085)          (0.139)          (0.083)          (0.009)           (0.035)


2-digit industry                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
Province                             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
R-Square                            0.252            0.578            0.091            0.059             0.085
N                                    859              736              859              859              859
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant
at 10% level.




                                                                                                                      31
Appendix A: China Employer Employee Survey (CEES)

Table A1. Sample Size and Response Rates of CEES Survey in Hubei and Guangdong Provinces of China
                                                              Number of                Response Rate
                                                             observations                   (%)
Firms survey 2015 (Guangdong only)                               573                        82
Firms survey 2016                                               1,122                       85
    New sample (Hubei)                                           585                        83
    Follow up sample (Guangdong)                                 487                        85
    New sample (Guangdong)                                        50                         --

Workers survey 2015 (Guangdong only)                            4,838                       88
Workers survey 2016                                             9,103                       80
    New sample (Hubei)                                          4,114                       89
    Follow up sample (Guangdong)                                2,575                       53
    New sample (Guangdong)                                      2,414                       94




                                                                                                       32
Table A2. Two-Digit Industry of Manufacturing
Code      Industry (Chinese)                              Industry (English)                                            # of obs.   %
13        农副食品加工业                                         Agricultural and By-Product Processing                        61          5.13
14        食品制造业                                           Food Manufacturing                                            19          1.6
15        酒、饮料和精制茶制造业                                     Beverage Manufacturing                                        27          2.27
16        烟草制造业                                           Tobacco Product Manufacturing                                 3           0.25
17        纺织业                                             Textile                                                       73          6.14
18        纺织服装、服饰业                                        Textile Product Manufacturing                                 82          6.9
19        皮革、毛皮、羽毛及其制品和制鞋业                                Leather, Fur, Feather Product and Shoes Manufacturing         44          3.7
20        木材加工和木、竹、藤、棕、草制品业                               Wood Processing, and Other Wood Product                       12          1.01
21        家具制造业                                           Furniture Manufacturing                                       23          1.94
22        造纸和纸制品业                                         Paper Making and Paper Product Manufacturing                  16          1.35
23        印刷和记录媒介复制业                                      Printing and Recording Media Reproducing                      36          3.03
24        文教、工美、体育和娱乐用品制造业                                Stationery, Athletic, Sporting, and Entertaining Goods        32          2.69
                                                          Petroleum processing, coking and nuclear fuel processing
25        石油加工、炼焦和核燃料加工业                                                                                                2           0.17
                                                          industry
26        化学原料和化学制品制造业                                    Chemical Materials and Product Manufacturing                  31          2.61
27        医药制造业                                           Pharmaceutical                                                26          2.19
28        化学纤维制造业                                         Chemical Fiber Industry                                       2           0.17
29        橡胶和塑料制品业                                        Balata and Plastic Product Industry                           45          3.79
30        非金属矿物制品业                                        Nonmetallic Minerals Product                                  114         9.6
31        黑色金属冶炼和压延加工业                                    Ferrous Metal Smelting and Rolling Processing                 13          1.09
32        有色金属冶炼和压延加工业                                    Non-Ferrous Metal and Rolling Processing                      21          1.77
33        金属制品业                                           Metal Product                                                 80          6.73
34        通用设备制造业                                         General Machinery Manufacturing                               35          2.95
35        专用设备制造业                                         Special Machinery Manufacturing                               48          4.04
36        汽车制造业                                           Automobile Manufacturing                                      64          5.39
          铁路、船舶、航空航天和其他运输设备制                              Railway,    Boat,    Aviation,   Aerospace     and   Other
37                                                                                                                      8           0.67
          造业                                              Transportation Equipment Manufacturing
38        电气机械和器材制造业                                      Electronic Machinery and Equipment                            107         9.01
                                                          Computer,    communications      and   other    electronic
39        计算机、通信和其他电子设备制造业                                                                                              131         11.03
                                                          equipment manufacturing
40        仪器仪表制造业                                         Instruments Manufacturing                                     17          1.43
41        其他制造业                                           Other manufacturing                                           7           0.59
42        废弃资源综合利用业                                       Comprehensive utilization of waste resources                  5           0.42
43        金属制品、机械和设备修理业                                   Metal products, machinery and equipment repair industry       4           0.34
          Total                                                                                                         1,188       100
Note: In regressions, 16 is merged into 15, 25 is merged into 26, 28 is merged into 29, 42 and 43 are merged into 41.




                                                                                                                                    33
        Appendix B: Some Additional Results


Table B1. Poisson Regression Models of Innovation Performance
                                                                          Dependent variables: Innovation performance
                                              Total No. of patents                   Total No. of invention        Total No. of foreign patents
                                                      in log                             patents in log                            in log
                                              (1)                 (2)                 (3)             (4)                 (5)                  (6)
Innovation subsidy                         0.807***            0.751***            0.348***        0.317***             0.108**             0.0954*
                                            (0.101)            (0.0994)            (0.0664)        (0.0662)             (0.0485)            (0.0509)
SOE                                                             0.208                               0.197**                                 -0.0233
                                                                (0.139)                            (0.0993)                                 (0.0659)
Political connection                                           0.305***                             0.163**                                  0.0850
                                                               (0.0979)                            (0.0699)                                 (0.0575)
Firm's attributes
    Employment in log                      0.216***            0.204***            0.146***        0.135***             0.0292*             0.0283**
                                           (0.0338)            (0.0326)            (0.0268)        (0.0263)             (0.0152)            (0.0142)
    Firm age in log                         0.0734              0.0508              0.0833*         0.0640              0.0165               0.0149
                                           (0.0754)            (0.0762)            (0.0483)        (0.0489)             (0.0477)            (0.0506)
    Export                                  0.188*             0.209**              -0.0125         0.0144              0.128*               0.130*
                                            (0.101)            (0.1000)            (0.0714)        (0.0720)             (0.0675)            (0.0701)
    R&D sales ratio                        2.758***            2.881***             1.150**        1.262***             0.336**             0.366**
                                            (0.735)             (0.726)             (0.453)         (0.458)             (0.156)              (0.150)
Entrepreneur's attributes
    Years of schooling                    0.0482***        0.0476***              0.0395***       0.0395***         0.0223**                0.0217**
                                           (0.0155)            (0.0156)            (0.0123)        (0.0123)         (0.00907)               (0.00848)
    Working experience                    0.00954**            0.00626              0.00435         0.00206             0.00132             0.000560
                                          (0.00450)            (0.00450)           (0.00308)       (0.00322)        (0.00209)               (0.00223)
    CEO has MBA                            0.304***            0.255***            0.200***        0.169***             -0.0139             -0.0192
                                           (0.0825)            (0.0827)            (0.0619)        (0.0652)             (0.0424)            (0.0465)
2-digit industry                              Yes                Yes                  Yes             Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Province                                      Yes                Yes                  Yes             Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Pseudo R2                                    0.288              0.293                0.293           0.300               0.353               0.360
N                                            859                 859                  859             859                 859                 859
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level.




                                                                                                                                             34
Table B2. OLS Regression Models with the Size X Subsidy Interaction Terms: Innovation Performance
                                                             Dependent variables: Innovation performance
                                                                              Total NO. of       Total NO. of
                                             Patent         Total NO. of                                           New product
                                                                                invention       foreign patents
                                            dummy           patents in log                                            dummy
                                                                              patents in log        in log
                                               (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)
Innovation subsidy                          0.331**          -1.305***          -1.853***          -1.142**          0.406***
                                            (0.136)            (0.500)           (0.502)            (0.453)           (0.156)
Firm size in log                            0.031**           0.124***           0.043*             -0.009            0.035**
                                            (0.013)            (0.035)           (0.025)            (0.015)           (0.016)
Subsidy dummy × firm size in log             -0.008           0.408***          0.409***           0.224***           -0.040
                                            (0.022)            (0.092)           (0.092)            (0.083)           (0.027)
SOE                                          0.087            0.468**           0.505***            -0.063             0.002
                                            (0.057)            (0.190)           (0.175)            (0.124)           (0.067)
political connection                        0.069**           0.326***           0.186**            0.095              0.043
                                            (0.034)            (0.106)           (0.086)            (0.065)           (0.041)
Firm's attributes
    Firm age in log                          0.036              0.036             0.047             0.005             -0.008
                                            (0.024)            (0.063)           (0.043)            (0.032)           (0.027)
    exporter                                 0.067*           0.201**             0.005             0.091*            0.096**
                                            (0.035)            (0.098)           (0.075)            (0.054)           (0.041)
    R&D ratio                              2.130***           7.376***          3.104***           1.671**            1.094**
                                            (0.583)            (1.595)           (1.164)            (0.728)           (0.552)
Entrepreneur's attributes
    Years of schooling                     0.016***           0.041***          0.034***           0.024***          0.016***
                                            (0.005)            (0.014)           (0.012)            (0.009)           (0.006)
    Working experience                       0.001              0.006             0.002             0.000              0.001
                                            (0.002)            (0.004)           (0.003)            (0.002)           (0.002)
    CEO has MBA                            0.116***           0.214**            0.157*             -0.078           0.107***
                                            (0.036)            (0.103)           (0.084)            (0.066)           (0.041)
2-digit industries                            Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
Province                                      Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
R-Square                                     0.374              0.512             0.396             0.168              0.161
N                                             859                859               859               859                859
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level.




                                                                                                                                35
Table B3. OLS Regression Models with the Size X Subsidy Interaction Terms: Corporate Performance
                                                              Dependent variables: Corporate performance
                                         Sales/employ
                                                             TFP in log       Market share        Profit/sales     Loss dummy
                                          ment in log
                                               (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)
Innovation subsidy                           -0.236            -0.761           0.882***            0.009             -0.134
                                            (0.323)            (0.557)           (0.340)            (0.036)           (0.120)
Firm size in log                           -0.114***          0.284***          0.134***            0.006            -0.034**
                                            (0.034)            (0.057)           (0.033)            (0.004)           (0.013)
Subsidy dummy × firm size in log             0.068              0.136           -0.144**            -0.002             0.027
                                            (0.054)            (0.096)           (0.058)            (0.006)           (0.020)
SOE                                        0.374***             0.247             0.058             -0.018             0.060
                                            (0.135)            (0.214)           (0.130)            (0.021)           (0.067)
political connection                        0.230**             0.089            0.171**             0.011           -0.094***
                                            (0.089)            (0.141)           (0.082)            (0.009)           (0.035)
Firm's attributes
    Firm age in log                         0.137**            -0.132             -0.035            0.007            0.063***
                                            (0.064)            (0.100)           (0.060)            (0.008)           (0.023)
    exporter                                0.175**             0.038             0.063             -0.009            -0.048
                                            (0.082)            (0.140)           (0.087)            (0.011)           (0.035)
    R&D ratio                              -2.420***           -1.469             1.291             -0.067           0.990***
                                            (0.604)            (1.195)           (0.865)            (0.153)           (0.288)
Entrepreneur's attributes
    Years of schooling                     0.086***           0.067***            0.019             -0.000           0.017***
                                            (0.014)            (0.022)           (0.013)            (0.002)           (0.006)
    Working experience                       0.004              0.002             -0.000            -0.000             0.003
                                            (0.004)            (0.006)           (0.004)            (0.000)           (0.002)
    CEO has MBA                              0.140*             0.008             -0.125            -0.007            -0.044
                                            (0.085)            (0.139)           (0.083)            (0.009)           (0.035)
R-Square                                     0.254              0.580             0.099             0.059              0.087
N                                             859                736               859               859                859
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level.




                                                                                                                                36
Figure B1. Innovation Outcomes as a Function of Firm Size (# of Employees)

Panel A: Total Number of Patents




Panel B: Total Number of Invention Patents




                                                                             37
Panel C: Total Number of Foreign Patents




Figure B2: Market Share as a Function of Firm Size (# of Employees)




                                                                      38
Appendix C: Propensity Score Matching Analysis
       In this paper, we basically compare the firms that receive innovation subsidies to
those that do not to assess the impacts of the government subsidies.   If the subsidies were
just assigned randomly to the firms, whether a firm actually receives the treatment (subsidy)
or not would be independent of the outcome variable (innovation or performance) either
when the subsidies are given or not.    In this case, our procedure would be fine in estimating
the average treatment effect.
       In reality, however, the subsidized firms are not randomly selected. When granting
subsidies, governments usually set some criteria that the firms that apply to subsidies must
satisfy. At the same time, firms themselves make decision on whether to apply to the
subsidies or not. Thus, the subsidized and non-subsidized companies in the sample are so
different including the likelihood of coming up with innovation that they cannot be
compared.
       The propensity score matching developed by Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) and
others is one way to estimate treatment effects when the assignment of treatment is not
random. This appendix applies the propensity score matching analysis to our estimation of
the average treatment effect of innovation subsidies. Since we are especially interested in
how the innovation subsidies affect the firms that actually receive the subsidies, we estimated
the average treatment effect on treated (i.e., subsidized).
       We start by finding the propensity score, which is the probability that a firm receive
the subsidy, as a function of some observable characteristics. Here we follow the standard
approach of estimating a logit model. The characteristics considered are political connection,
state ownership, firm’s employment in log, firm’s age in log, export dummy, R&D sales
ratio, entrepreneur’s years of schooling, working experience, and a dummy indicates whether
the CEO has MBA. We also included industry and province dummies.
       The propensity score matching matches each firm that receives the innovation subsidy
to the firms that do not receive the subsidy but have similar propensity scores.   To find firms
with “similar” propensity scores, we use K-nearest neighbor matching method. This approach
matches each subsidized firm with K non-subsidized firms that have the closest propensity
scores. For the value of K, we try 1, 2, 3, and 4.

                                                                                                39
Balancing test
       We first conduct a balancing test to examine the quality of the matching. If the
propensity score matching is successful, the distribution of the conditioning variables should
be similar across the treatment group and the control group that is matched by propensity
scores. As is shown in Table C1, for the entire sample, subsidized firms are significantly
different from non-subsidized firms in all conditioning variables, including political
connection, state ownership, firm’s attributes and entrepreneur’s attributes. When we apply 1-
nearest matching, however, the differences disappear. Figure C1 graphically shows that the
standardized percentages of the differences become smaller after matching.
       Moreover, almost all observations in our sample are on the common support after the
matching. As Table C2 reports, only 3.8% of non-subsidized firms and only 2.0% of
subsidized firms are off the common support.


Estimation with matched data
       Table C3-C7 presents the estimated mean differences in innovation performance
between subsidized firms and non-subsidized firms in the matched subsamples. Table C3
shows estimation of the average treatment effect on treated (ATT) of innovation subsidy on
the probability of having patents.   The estimated effect is positive and statistically
significant. The subsidized firms have 5%-7% higher probability of having patents.
       Similarly, Table C4-C7 reports ATT on total number of patents, total number of
invention patents, total number of foreign patents, and the new product dummy respectively.
As Tables C4 and C5 shows, subsidized firms have 16%-24% more patents in total and 14%-
21% more invention patents than non-subsidized firms on average.
       For the number of foreign patents, the difference is much smaller (Table C6).      The
subsidized firms have only 11%-13% more foreign patents than non-subsidized firms. This
difference is about 3-10 percentage point less than that when total number of invention
patents is the outcome variable, and even less than half of that when total number of patents
is the outcome variable.
       For the new product dummy, the result of propensity score matching analysis is very
                                                                                                40
different from the OLS result in the main part.   The subsidized firms and non-subsidized
firms are not significantly different in the likelihood of introducing new products when we
used the matched data.
        Table C8-C12 presents the estimated differences in productivity, market share, and
profitability. Although the estimated ATT of innovation subsidy are all positive, none of them
is statistically significant.
        Overall, the results from the propensity score matching analysis are very similar to
OLS regression results reported in the main part of the paper.   The innovation subsidies
encourage only incremental innovations rather than radical innovations, and do not seem to
help firms to increase productivity, market share, or profitability. For the introduction of new
products, the propensity score matching gives a different result than the OLS regression.
For matched sample, the subsidized firms and non-subsidized firms are not different in the
likelihood of introducing new products.




                                                                                               41
Table C1. Standardized Percentage Bias of Covariates Between Treated and Control Group
                                                    Before match                                                After match
                                Treated        Control                                           Treated   Control
                                 Mean           Mean           % bias         T-stat              Mean      Mean          % bias         T-stat
                                (N=196)        (N=663)                                           (N=192)   (N=638)
Political Connection              0.35           0.21          32.10         4.13***              0.35      0.33           4.70           0.43
SOE                               0.12           0.05          27.40         3.83***              0.13      0.13           -1.90         -0.15
Firm's attributes
  Employment in log               5.97           4.77          81.10        10.22***              5.95      6.01           -4.00         -0.37
  Firm age in log                 2.55           2.24          51.80         6.00***              2.54      2.53           1.60           0.16
  Export                          0.56           0.34          43.90         5.47***              0.56      0.54           4.30           0.41
  R&D sales ratio                 0.04           0.01          48.00         7.76***              0.03      0.04           -8.60         -0.83
Entrepreneur's attributes
  Years of schooling             15.52          13.78          59.40         7.17***              15.52     15.47          1.60           0.16
  Working experience             22.74          20.10          26.30         3.22***              22.83     22.45          3.80           0.37
  CEO has MBA                     0.45           0.24          46.10         5.94***              0.45      0.41           9.00           0.82
Note: The standardized % bias is the % difference of the sample means in the treated and control sub-samples as a percentage of the square root of
the average of the sample variances in the treated and control groups (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1985). The method of matching is the 1-nearst neighbor
matching. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level.




                                                                                                                                    42
Table C2. Treatment Assignment of Propensity Matching
                                          Off support                   On support            Total
                                     No.           Row %          No.           Row %   No.           Row %
Untreated                            25                 3.8       638            96.2   663            100
(non-subsidized)
Treated                               4                 2.0       192            98.0   196            100
(subsidized)
Note: The method of matching is the 1-nearst neighbor matching.




 Figure C1. Standardized Percentage Bias Across Covariates




                                                                                                             43
Table C3. Average Treatment Effect of Technological Innovation Subsidy
                                                            Outcome: Patent dummy
                                         Treated            Control           Mean
                                                                                                   S.E.
                                         (N=192)            (N=638)         Difference
Unmatched                                  0.79               0.27             0.52            0.04***
Matched
  ATT (k=1)                                0.79               0.51             0.28            0.07***
  ATT (k=2)                                0.79               0.52             0.27            0.07***
  ATT (k=3)                                0.79               0.51             0.27            0.07***
  ATT (k=4)                                0.79               0.51             0.28            0.05***
Note: K-nearest neighbor matching method is used when matching. Bootstrapped standard errors are
estimated for matched sample. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10%
level.




Table C4. Average Treatment Effect of Technological Innovation Subsidy
                                                      Outcome: Total No. of patents in log
                                         Treated            Control           Mean
                                                                                                   S.E.
                                         (N=192)            (N=638)         Difference
Unmatched                                  2.52               0.61             1.91            0.11***
Matched
  ATT (k=1)                                2.49               1.54             0.94            0.23***
  ATT (k=2)                                2.49               1.50             0.99            0.24***
  ATT (k=3)                                2.49               1.44             1.04            0.16***
  ATT (k=4)                                2.49               1.44             1.05            0.19***
Note: K-nearest neighbor matching method is used when matching. Bootstrapped standard errors are
estimated for matched sample. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10%
level.




Table C5. Average Treatment Effect of Technological Innovation Subsidy
                                                  Outcome: Total No. of invention patents in log
                                         Treated            Control           Mean
                                                                                                   S.E.
                                         (N=192)            (N=638)         Difference
Unmatched                                  1.27               0.27             0.99            0.08***
Matched
  ATT (k=1)                                1.25               0.85             0.40                0.21*
  ATT (k=2)                                1.25               0.87             0.38             0.19**
  ATT (k=3)                                1.25               0.82             0.43            0.14***
  ATT (k=4)                                1.25               0.80             0.45            0.15***
Note: K-nearest neighbor matching method is used when matching. Bootstrapped standard errors are
estimated for matched sample. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10%
level.


                                                                                                              44
Table C6. Average Treatment Effect of Technological Innovation Subsidy
                                                   Outcome: Total No. of foreign patents in log
                                         Treated            Control           Mean
                                                                                                   S.E.
                                         (N=192)           (N=638)          Difference
Unmatched                                  0.39               0.06             0.33               0.05***
Matched
  ATT (k=1)                                0.37               0.15             0.22               0.11**
  ATT (k=2)                                0.37               0.16             0.21                0.13*
  ATT (k=3)                                0.37               0.12             0.25               0.11**
  ATT (k=4)                                0.37               0.12             0.25               0.10**
Note: K-nearest neighbor matching method is used when matching. Bootstrapped standard errors are
estimated for matched sample. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10%
level.




Table C7. Average Treatment Effect of Technological Innovation Subsidy
                                                         Outcome: New product dummy
                                         Treated            Control           Mean
                                                                                                   S.E.
                                         (N=192)           (N=638)          Difference
Unmatched                                  0.66               0.34             0.32               0.04***
Matched
  ATT (k=1)                                0.66               0.42             0.24                0.08
  ATT (k=2)                                0.66               0.45             0.21                0.08
  ATT (k=3)                                0.66               0.47             0.19                0.06
  ATT (k=4)                                0.66               0.47             0.19                0.06
Note: K-nearest neighbor matching method is used when matching. Bootstrapped standard errors are
estimated for matched sample. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10%
level.




Table C8. Average Treatment Effect of Technological Innovation Subsidy
                                                       Outcome: Sales/employment in log
                                         Treated            Control           Mean
                                                                                                   S.E.
                                         (N=192)           (N=638)          Difference
Unmatched                                  3.83               3.48             0.36               0.09***
Matched
  ATT (k=1)                                3.85               3.61             0.23                0.16
  ATT (k=2)                                3.85               3.68             0.17                0.16
  ATT (k=3)                                3.85               3.67             0.18                0.16
  ATT (k=4)                                3.85               3.69             0.16                0.13
Note: K-nearest neighbor matching method is used when matching. Bootstrapped standard errors are
estimated for matched sample. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10%
level.


                                                                                                              45
Table C9. Average Treatment Effect of Technological Innovation Subsidy
                                                             Outcome: TFP in log
                                         Treated           Control            Mean
                                                                                                 S.E.
                                         (N=192)           (N=638)          Difference
Unmatched                                  3.54              2.74              0.80            0.20***
Matched
  ATT (k=1)                                3.48              3.58             -0.09              0.40
  ATT (k=2)                                3.48              3.52             -0.04              0.31
  ATT (k=3)                                3.48              3.46              0.02              0.32
  ATT (k=4)                                3.48              3.55             -0.06              0.30
Note: K-nearest neighbor matching method is used when matching. Bootstrapped standard errors are
estimated for matched sample. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10%
level.




Table C10. Average Treatment Effect of Technological Innovation Subsidy
                                                            Outcome: Market share
                                         Treated           Control            Mean
                                                                                                 S.E.
                                         (N=192)           (N=638)          Difference
Unmatched                                  2.68              2.39              0.28            0.08***
Matched
  ATT (k=1)                                2.68              2.80             -0.12              0.11
  ATT (k=2)                                2.68              2.76             -0.08              0.13
  ATT (k=3)                                2.68              2.72             -0.04              0.11
  ATT (k=4)                                2.68              2.70             -0.02              0.13
Note: K-nearest neighbor matching method is used when matching. Bootstrapped standard errors are
estimated for matched sample. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10%
level.




Table C11. Average Treatment Effect of Technological Innovation Subsidy
                                                             Outcome: Profit/sales
                                         Treated           Control            Mean
                                                                                                 S.E.
                                         (N=192)           (N=638)          Difference
Unmatched                                  0.05              0.04              0.01              0.01
Matched
  ATT (k=1)                                0.05              0.04              0.01              0.02
  ATT (k=2)                                0.05              0.04              0.01              0.02
  ATT (k=3)                                0.05              0.04              0.00              0.02
  ATT (k=4)                                0.05              0.05              0.00              0.02
Note: K-nearest neighbor matching method is used when matching. Bootstrapped standard errors are
estimated for matched sample. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10%
level.


                                                                                                              46
Table C12. Average Treatment Effect of Technological Innovation Subsidy
                                                            Outcome: Loss dummy
                                         Treated           Control            Mean
                                                                                                 S.E.
                                         (N=192)           (N=638)          Difference
Unmatched                                  0.16              0.18             -0.02              0.03
Matched
  ATT (k=1)                                0.16              0.15              0.02              0.05
  ATT (k=2)                                0.16              0.15              0.02              0.05
  ATT (k=3)                                0.16              0.14              0.03              0.05
  ATT (k=4)                                0.16              0.13              0.03              0.05
Note: K-nearest neighbor matching method is used when matching. Bootstrapped standard errors are
estimated for matched sample. *** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10%
level.




                                                                                                              47
