NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO FIRMS RESPOND TO GENDER PAY GAP TRANSPARENCY?
Morten Bennedsen
Elena Simintzi
Margarita Tsoutsoura
Daniel Wolfenzon
Working Paper 25435
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25435

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2019

We thank our discussants Irem Demirci, Daniel Ferreira, Camille Hebert, David Matsa, Geoff Tate,
Karin Thorburn, and Rebecca Zarutskie. We are grateful for excellent comments from seminar participants
at UC San Diego, IESE Barcelona, Columbia Business School, Cornell University, Darden, INSEAD,
UIC, UCLA, ASU, and conference participants at LBS Summer Finance Symposium, Stanford SITE
conference, CEPR Incentives, Management and Organization 2018 conference, European Commission-Gender
equality Unit, Colorado Finance Summit, Swedish House of Finance and AFFECT conference, the
Corporate Finance Beyond Public Companies conference, 2019 SOLE conference, 2019 EFA meetings,
2019 WFA meetings, and 2020 AEA meetings. We thank Brian J. Lee and Jiacheng Yan for excellent
research assistance, He Zhang for data management, and help with data understanding from Mona
Larsen (VIVE), Helle Holt (VIVE) and Maria Boysen (Statistic Office Denmark). We are grateful
for financial support from the Danish National Research Foundation (Niels Bohr Professorship).The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by Morten Bennedsen, Elena Simintzi, Margarita Tsoutsoura, and Daniel Wolfenzon. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Firms Respond to Gender Pay Gap Transparency?
Morten Bennedsen, Elena Simintzi, Margarita Tsoutsoura, and Daniel Wolfenzon
NBER Working Paper No. 25435
January 2019, Revised April 2020
JEL No. G18,G28,J16
ABSTRACT
We examine the effect of pay transparency on gender pay gap and firm outcomes. This paper exploits
a 2006 legislation change in Denmark that requires firms to provide gender disaggregated wage statistics.
Using detailed employee-employer administrative data and a difference-in-differences and difference-in-discontinuities
designs, we find the law reduces the gender pay gap, primarily by slowing the wage growth for male
employees. The gender pay gap declines by approximately two percentage points, or a 13% reduction
relative to the pre-legislation mean. Despite the reduction of the overall wage bill, the wage-transparency
mandate does not affect firm profitability, likely because of the offsetting effect of reduced firm productivity.

Morten Bennedsen
Department of Economics
INSEAD
Fontainebleau
France
Morten.BENNEDSEN@insead.edu

Margarita Tsoutsoura
SC Johnson College of Business
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
tsoutsoura@cornell.edu

Elena Simintzi
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Kenan-Flagler Business School
Chapel Hill, NC
United States
Elena_Simintzi@kenan-flagler.unc.edu

Daniel Wolfenzon
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall, Room 808
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
dw2382@columbia.edu

I

Introduction
Gender pay disparities characterize labor markets in most developed countries

(Goldin, 2014; Blau and Kahn, 2017). When a man earns $100, a woman earns $77
in the US (Goldin, 2014), $78.5 in Germany, $79 in the UK, and $83.8, on average,
across EU countries (Eurostat, 2016). Recent proposals across many countries focus on
pay transparency to promote equal pay.1 However, evidence on the effect of transparency
on gender pay disparities on employee and firm outcomes is limited. In this paper, we
draw insights from a regulation in Denmark that increased transparency by requiring
companies to inform employees of average wages by gender and occupation.
The debate about the consequences of disclosing gender wage gaps is ongoing. Governments often propose transparency as a tool to encourage firms to reduce the wage
gap between men and women. Unions and employee groups representing women also
seem to believe secrecy about pay contributes significantly to unequal pay for women.2
Opponents of pay transparency argue disclosing gender pay comes as a challenge to firms
because it lacks practical utility, increases administrative burden, and violates employee
privacy.3
The effect of transparency on the gender pay gap and firm outcomes is ultimately
an empirical question. Whether transparency will provide sufficient incentives for firms
1

In the UK, employers of firms with more than 250 employees have to publish gender-based wage
statistics from April 2018. In Germany, employees have the right to know the median salary for a group
of comparable employees in firms with more than 200 employees. An executive order signed by the US
government in 2016 required large companies to report salary data broken down by gender starting in
2017, but the succeeding administration overturned the rule.
2

AFL-CIO runs a petition campaign as a response to the halt of the equal pay initiative that
would have required large corporations to report pay data by gender to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. https://actionnetwork.org/petitions/tell-the-eeoc-we-need-the-equal-pay-datacollection?source=website. The Institute for Women’s Policy Research in a survey documents 60% of
employees are discouraged or prohibited from sharing wage information, and concludes pay secrecy is
an important determinant of the gender gap in earnings (IWPR, 2014).
3

See, for example, a letter representing employers against a bill in California that requires large
firms in the state to file reports detailing the gender pay gap for people working in the same position.
http://blob.capitoltrack.com/17blobs/e3526ab2-1360-4461-a1d3-b0580abe6172

–2–

to adjust their compensation policies is unclear. Moreover, these wage adjustments
might have unintended consequences for firm outcomes, such as firm productivity and,
eventually, profitability.
Studying this question empirically requires addressing two key challenges: finding
exogenous variation in wage transparency at the firm level and obtaining information on
wages and employment at the individual level. For the source of exogenous variation,
we exploit a 2006 legislation change in Denmark that requires firms with more than
35 employees to report salary data broken down by gender for employee groups large
enough for individual’s anonymity to be protected. Firms must inform their employees
of wage gaps between men and women and explain the design of the statistics and the
wage concept used. For data on wages and employment at the individual level, we use
administrative records from the Danish Statistics matched employee-employer dataset.
In our research design, we compare employees in firms above the 35-employee threshold with employees in firms below. Because firm size can influence wage dynamics and
firm outcomes, our sample includes only employees in firms in a narrow band around 35
employees. Specifically, we estimate a difference-in-differences model (diff-in-diff) where
treated employees are those working in firms that employ 35-50 employees prior to the
introduction of the law and the control employees are those working in firms with 20-34
workers.
In our specifications, we control for a variety of time-varying firm and individual
characteristics (age, work experience, firm size), year fixed effects, interacted individual
and firm fixed effects, and interacted firm and year fixed effects. By including individualfirm fixed effects, we control for time-invariant person characteristics, time-invariant firm
characteristics, and the match between firms and workers. In essence, these fixed effects
allow us to compare the same employee at the same firm before and after the regulation.
By including firm-year fixed effects, we absorb any time-varying shocks at the firm level
that may be correlated with wages.
In terms of the effect of transparency on firm compensation policies, we find that after

–3–

the passage of the law, wages of male employees in treated firms grow 1.7 percentage
points slower than wages of male employees in control firms. The effect is statistically
significant at the 1% level and economically important. By contrast, female wages in
treated firms increase by 0.3 percentage points more than for female employees in control
firms, although this difference is not statistically significant. Examining the dynamic
effects, we find no evidence of pre-treatment trends, whereas we observe a sharp drop in
male wages in treated firms in 2006, which increasingly persists until up to year 2008.
Moving to a firm-level analysis, we confirm the reduction of the wage gap. We find the
average ratio of male to female wages (gender pay gap) declines by 1.9 percentage points
in treated firms relative to control firms, following the law passage, a 13% reduction
relative to the pre-treatment mean. We also show the average decline is more pronounced
at the bottom and the middle of the wage distribution.
We also find similar results when we employ a difference-in-discontinuities design
(diff-in-disc) following (Grembi, Nannicini, and Troiano, 2016). This approach takes the
difference between the pre-treatment and post-treatment discontinuity at 35 employees.
As such, the diff-in-disc allows us to difference out the effect of any potential pre-existing
discontinuity at 35 employees. In addition, by focusing only on the effect at the threshold,
this method circumvents concerns with the diff-in-diff method that the control firms
might not be a good counterfactual for treated firms. Using this approach, we find that
male employee wages grow by 1.1 percentage points less for firms above the threshold,
and this difference is significant at the 1% level. Consistent with our diff-in-diff analysis,
the decline in male wages starts in 2006 and gradually increases until the end of the
sample. By contrast, we find a positive but insignificant change for female employee
wages following the policy change.
After documenting the effect of the law on employee wages, we investigate how transparency affects employee reallocation and promotions. We show treated firms hire more
female employees than do control firms. This finding is in line with an argument that
female employees might be more willing to seek employment in firms where the gender

–4–

pay gap is reduced. We also find male employees are less likely to join treated firms,
consistent with the fact that wage policies are less attractive for male employees in these
firms following the legislation. We do not find that female or male employees are more
likely to leave treated firms after the law passage. We also find the law has effects on
promotion decisions that favor female employees. We find women are more likely to be
promoted to higher-paid positions within the firm, whereas we do not find any significant
change in the promotion probability for male employees.
In additional tests, we examine the implications of gender pay transparency on wage
bill, firm productivity, and profits. Consistent with our employee-level analysis, we
find the average wage per employee is reduced in treated firms relative to control firms.
Despite the reduction in the average wages, we do not find any effect on firm profitability,
which could be potentially explained by a decline in labor productivity, because previous
research has shown that employees who learn they are earning less than their peers
become less productive (Akerlof and Yellen, 1990; Breza, Kaur, and Shamdasani, 2018).
We find a negative effect on productivity in some of our specifications.
The paper contributes to the literature on the effects of pay transparency. Breza,
Kaur, and Shamdasani (2018) use a sample of workers in an Indian manufacturing plant
to show information on peers’ salaries generates negative feelings, reduces job satisfaction, and negatively affects labor productivity.4 Cullen and Perez-Truglia (2017) and
Cullen and Perez-Truglia (2018) show employees have misperceptions about the salaries
of their peers and their superiors and change their behavior when they learn their true
salaries. In the context of mandated pay disclosure on the public sector, Card, Mas,
Moretti, and Saez (2012) use a sample of government employees in California to show
that after government employee salaries are published online, aggregate worker satisfaction drops. These studies mostly focus on job satisfaction and employee productivity
and not on wages or firm outcomes, as we do in this paper.
4

Perez-Truglia (2016) shows how online access of the general public to tax income information in
Norway increases relative well-being and life satisfaction for the rich. This finding suggests the disclosure
regulation might have a direct effect on employee well-being.

–5–

Focusing on how transparency affects wage setting in organizations, Cullen and
Pakzad-Hurson (2019) argue that higher transparency results in more equal but lower
wages, thereby resulting in higher profits for employers. They test the predictions of
their model using data from online markets for low-skill, temporary jobs and an online
field experiment. Mas (2017) shows top earners in municipal jobs experience a drop in
wages following the public disclosure of wages, which he argues is primarily due to public
aversion to visibly exorbitant salaries. These papers focus on the effect of transparency
on the distribution of wages, and their main focus is not on the gender wage gap. In
addition, these papers analyze the wages of either temporary employees or public sector
employees, and wage setting for regular employment contracts in the private sector is
likely different. For example, in the public sector, public pressure and public aversion to
high compensation or inequalities might play a larger role than in the private sector.
In a recent paper, Baker, Halberstam, Kroft, Mas, and Messacar (2019) show that
disclosing the wages of university faculty in Canada reduced the gender pay gap, driven
primarily by universities where faculty are unionized. In contrast in this paper we provide
evidence based on private firms.
A related literature examines the effect of information sharing on executive compensation. Shue (2013) finds that exchange of information through peer interactions affects
managerial pay. Mas (2016) uses data from the Great Depression to find that a mandated pay disclosure of executive compensation led to an increase in the average CEO
pay relative to other highly-paid executives in the firm. More generally, Hermalin and
Weisbach (2012) argue that an increase in disclosure requirements about the firm can
affect firm value and CEO compensation. Whereas these papers focus on executives, we
are interested in how transparency can affect wage and firm outcomes throughout the
organization.
Our paper lastly contributes to a growing literature on gender and organizations that
points to biases that women face in the professional workforce. Hospido, Laeven, and
Lamo (2019) show gender differences exist in career progression and promotions in central

–6–

banking. Egan, Matvos, and Seru (2017) show female advisers face harsher outcomes
following misconduct, but this effect is mitigated in firms with more female executives.
Adams and Ragunathan (2017) show gender barriers tend to discourage women from
working in finance. Duchin, Simutin, and Sosyura (2018) show female division managers
are allocated less capital, especially in firms where CEOs grew up in male-dominated
families. Tate and Yang (2015) show male leadership cultivates a less female-friendly
culture within firms. Our findings suggest regulatory mandates on pay transparency, as
a means to overcome biases against women in the workforce, may be effective in closing
the gender pay gap.

II

The Law
On June 9, 2006, Denmark adopted Act no. 562, which required firms to report

gender-based disaggregated statistics. The goal of the law was “to promote visibility
and information about wage differentials.”5 The law stated that an employer with a
minimum of 35 employees and at least 10 employees of each gender within an occupation
classification code (six-digit DISCO code) shall each year prepare gender-segregated wage
statistics for the purpose of consulting and informing the employees of wage gaps between
men and women in the firm.6 The statistics had to be made available to the employees
through the employee representatives; they did not need to be made available to the
general public. The law also offered an alternative choice to employers by permitting
them to replace gender-based wage statistics with an internal report on equal pay. This
report had to include a description of the conditions that are important for determining
wages, and establish an action plan for equal pay to be implemented.
During the campaign for the snap election in February 2005, the government promised
5

Indeed, in a survey conducted thee years after the law implementation, companies stated that "the
law has sharpened their attention about pay and any pay gaps" (Holt and Larsen, 2011).
6

The requirement does not extend to companies in the fields of farming, gardening, forestry, and
fishery.

–7–

to introduce a law that would require firms with more than 35 employees to produce
gender-disaggregated wage statistics.7 This campaign promise was generally viewed as
an attempt by the government to get a better standing among female voters (NordjyskeStiftstidende, 2007). The campaign promise surprised most observers because the
same administration had stalled a similar proposal years earlier.
After winning the election in February, little discussion addressed fulfilling this
promise, but eight months after the re-election, in October 2005, the government announced it would introduce a bill to amend the Equal Pay Act. The Ministry of Economics introduced the bill to Parliament in December 2005. The proposal was adopted
on June 2006, and the new provisions came into force in January 2007. In Appendix II,
we provide additional details on the timeline and implementation of the law.

III

How Might Transparency Affect the Gender Pay
Gap?

We now discuss mechanisms through which transparency may affect firms’ gender pay
gap and worker outcomes. An extensive literature provides evidence of the gender pay
gap and explores potential causes. (Goldin (2014) and Blau and Kahn (2017) provide a
detailed survey of the literature). A large portion of the gender pay gap can be explained
by several observable characteristics such as education, experience, hours worked, occupation or industry, and geographical location, among others. Blau and Kahn (2017) find
91.6% of the gender pay gap in 2010 in the US can be attributed to these observable
factors. In our empirical analysis, we do not capture changes in the gender wage gap
driven by these observable factors, because, as we explain in section V.1, we control for
observable characteristics and exploit within-firm-employee variation.
The gender pay gap might be driven by unobservable factors (the “unexplained"
component) such as differences in risk aversion or bargaining power between male and
7

The snap election was announced on January 18, one year earlier than scheduled, and took place
on February 8.

–8–

female employees. Below, we discuss some of these explanations with respect to our
results.
A number of studies propose the differences in bargaining power and the willingness
to bargain between men and women contribute to the gender pay gap. Hall and Krueger
(2012) find women are roughly half as likely as men to bargain for wages. Babcock and
Laschever (2003) find women are less informed of the market value of their work than men
and are less likely to negotiate. Transparency, by increasing the information of employees
about their peers’ wages, affects the bargaining process. In a recent paper, Cullen and
Pakzad-Hurson (2019) provide a dynamic bargaining model of wage negotiations as a
function of transparency. In their model, when transparency is high, firms are reluctant
to offer high wages to an employee, because doing so will affect negotiation with other
employees. As a result, overall wages decline and dispersion in wages is reduced.
Employees might bargain harder not only because knowledge of their peers’ salary
is useful in negotiation, but also because they dislike unequal wages. Cullen and PerezTruglia (2017) and Cullen and Perez-Truglia (2018) show employees have large misperceptions about the salary of their peers. Once transparency is increased, employees who
realize the gender pay gap is higher than they thought might be encouraged to put more
pressure on firms to reduce it.
Alternatively, managers could be averse to being associated with unequal compensation. As a result, they act to reduce the gender gap when compensation is known.
Indeed, the rationale behind the UK introducing wage-transparency regulation in 2017
was supposed to work by shaming firms into action. Although in Denmark, firms are
not required to make salaries public as in the UK, this same mechanism can be at work,
because all employees as well as some external stakeholders learn about the wages.
In addition, the closing of the gender wage gap once information about wages is
available to employees might be profit maximizing. Prior literature shows employees who
learn they are earning less than their peers become less productive (Akerlof and Yellen,
1990; Breza, Kaur, and Shamdasani, 2018). Hence, an optimal response of managers

–9–

to increased transparency is to adjust wages and reduce the discrepancies to avoid the
lower effort provision (Cullen and Pakzad-Hurson, 2019).
The above mechanisms are related to transparency leading to a change in the information environment. An alternative mechanism is that firms learn the intentions of
the government. Specifically, the enactment of the law might create expectations that
additional legislation would be related to gender pay equality in the future, causing firms
to reduce the gender pay gap in anticipation.

IV
IV.1

Data and Summary Statistics
Data and sample description

Our main dataset is the matched employer-employee dataset from the Integrated
Database for Labor Market Research (IDA database) at Statistics Denmark. In addition to the employer’s identification number (CVR), and employee identification number
(CPR), the IDA dataset contains detailed information for employees’ compensation, demographics, and occupation. For compensation, we have information on employees’
wages and bonuses. Furthermore, for each employee, we observe their age, gender, and
education, as well as their position in the firm hierarchy.
This information is combined with firm-level outcomes from the Danish Business
Register. This dataset covers all firms incorporated in Denmark and includes the information these firms are required to file with the Ministry of Economics and Business
Affairs, including the value of total assets, number of employees, and revenues. Even
though most firms in this dataset are privately held, external accountants audit firm
financial information in compliance with Danish corporate law. We link information in
the firm-level dataset to the matched employer-employee dataset using the firm identifier
(CVR number).
We start with the universe of limited-liability firms in Denmark and their employees
included in the IDA dataset. For ease of comparison, for the employee-level outcomes,

– 10 –

we focus on full-time workers, excluding CEOs and boards of directors. We drop firms
in industries unaffected by the policy (farming, gardening, forestry, and fishery). We
require firms to have financial information, which results in dropping 0.8% of firm-years
in the sample. We end up with a panel of employee-firm-years over the 2003-2008 period,
which we use to test whether transparency on wages by gender has real effects on firms’
compensation policies.
We perform a difference-in-difference-in-differences analysis where we compare the
effect of the regulation on male wages (i.e., difference between the change in male wages
in treated firms relative to control firms) to its effect on female wages. We define treated
firms to be firms that employ 35-50 employees prior to the introduction of the law, and
control firms to be those that employ 20-34 workers. We take a narrow window around
the 35-employee cutoff so that the control firms are close in size to the treated firms, and
hence likely to be a valid counterfactual.
We define treated and control groups based on the 35-employee threshold and do
not take into account the criterion that firms should have at least 10 male and 10
female employees in one six-digit DISCO code. The reason is that firms do not typically
have DISCO code information. As a result, firms in practice often do not follow the
occupational-codes recommendation to report disaggregated wage statistics, or ignore
them altogether.8 This observation is consistent with the information we obtained from
the Confederation of Danish Employers (DA), the largest employer association, covering
24,200 employers and about a third of Danish employees in the private sector. In fact,
according to the DA, 35% of firms that reported gender disaggregated wage statistics
through them did not satisfy the second criterion; yet, all of these firms had more than 35
employees. In addition, this finding is consistent with how the law was interpreted more
widely. The description of the law by the EU and the International Labor Organization
(ILO) only mentions the criterion that firms above the 35-employee threshold must
8
In Appendix II, we provide a number of examples of firms that did not follow the DISCO requirement.

– 11 –

comply.9

IV.2

Summary statistics

Table 1 presents summary statistics for the treated and control firms in our sample
over the 2003-2005 period prior to the law passage. Panel A presents employee-level
characteristics, and Panel B presents firm-level characteristics.10 The average annual
(hourly) wage for employees in the treated firms is $54,500 ($34.4), whereas for the
control group it is $53,000 ($33.5). The average employee in the sample is 40 years old
and has 17 years of work experience in both treated and control groups. On average,
25% of employees in treated and control groups hold a college degree. Consistent with
the well-documented employer size-wage effect (Brown and Medoff, 1989; Idson and Oi,
1999), the average individual wage in treated firms is higher than that in control firms.
However, the average employee is similar in terms of other observable characteristics
between treated and control firms.
Treated firms are larger than control firms by construction. For example, as shown in
Panel B, the average treated firm has 42 employees pre-treatment, assets of $7.2 million,
sales of $11.68 million, and pays total wages of $2.3 million compared to 26 employees,
$5.8 million in assets, $7.73 million in sales, and $1.4 million in wages for control firms.
However, firms are similar in terms of their pre-treatment productivity, cost structures,
and the gender composition of their employees with 70% of employees, on average, who
are male.
Panel B also shows the “unexplained” part of the pre-law gender wage gap for treated
9

The European commission directorate for internal policies issued a report on policies on Gender
Equality in Denmark describing the law: “Since 2007, companies with 35 employees or more should carry
out gender disaggregated pay statistics and elaborate status reports on the efforts to promote equal pay
in the workplace.” (European Commission, 2015). ILO describes the law as: “Employers employing 35
or more workers are required to prepare annually gender-disaggregated statistics or, alternatively, an
equal pay report and action plan.”
10

In Internet Appendix Table IA1, we present the industry composition for the overall sample, as
well as for the treated and control groups separately. Our sample spans all major industry categories,
whereas both groups are equally represented across all industries around the 35-employee cutoff.

– 12 –

and control firms.11 When we do not control for observables, we find, on average, a gender
pay gap of 18.7% prior to the regulation. When we instead control for observables, we
estimate, on average, a pre-treatment gender pay gap of 15.4%, which is not statistically
significant between treated and control firms.12
In Table 2, we show univariate tests that demonstrate the main effect of the regulation
on wages. We calculate the average log wage in years 2006-2008 minus the average log
wage in 2003-2005, the three years prior to the passage of the law. To control for
compositional changes, we keep only observations in which the employee works at the
same firm as he did in 2005.
Wages increase for all employees, irrespective of their gender in both the treated
and the control group. However, male employee wages grow by 1.65 percentage points
less in treated firms than in control firms, and this difference is statistically significant
at the 1% level. By contrast, we find no significant differences in female wage growth
between treated and control firms. These univariate comparisons suggest the reform
requiring wage transparency resulted in a 1.96-percentage-points-lower wage growth for
male employees than for female employees.
Another interesting observation is the rate at which the wage gap changes in treated
and control firms. In control firms, the wage growth rate of male and female employees
is similar. The difference is -0.0012, but it is not statistically significant. That is, no
change in the wage gap occurs in control firms. However, in treated firms, the growth
11

We calculate the gender pay gap as the estimate of the coefficient (γj ) on a male dummy in the
following log wage regression
estimated at the individual level in our baseline sample over 2003-2005:
PN
log wage ijt = αj + n=1 γn × 1(n = j) × malei + αk + αt + βXi + ijt , where i is an individual, j
is a firm, k is an occupation, N is the total number of firms, and t represents a year. αj , αk , and αt
are firm, occupation, and year fixed effects, respectively. Xi consists of individual controls that include
age, work experience, education, and number of children. Standard errors are two-way clustered on the
person and firm level.
12

To examine whether our estimates are in line with other studies for Denmark, we run an additional
analysis for the overall population in Denmark in 2005, where we find an average “unexplained” gender
pay gap of 12%. This finding is consistent with the estimates of the gender pay gap for Denmark
by (Kleven, Landais, and Søgaard, 2018; Gallen, Lesner, and Vejlin, 2019). Gallen, Lesner, and Vejlin
(2019) find an unexplained gender pay gap in 2010 of approximately 12%. Kleven, Landais, and Søgaard
(2018) report a raw (no controls) gender pay gap of about 20%.

– 13 –

rate of male employees is lower than that of female employees. The difference is -2.08
percentage points, and it is significant at the 1% level. The fact that male wages grow
more slowly than female wages in treated firms implies a reduction in the gender pay
gap of around two percentage points. This reduction is economically meaningful. The
level of the “unexplained” pay gap prior to the reform was 15.4% based on the mean
salaries of men and women. Thus, the pay gap is reduced by about 13% following the
law.
An alternative way to visualize the effect of the law on wages is to focus on the
discontinuity created by the law at 35 employees. For each employee, we construct the
change in log wage from 2005 to 2008. We averaged across all employees in firms with a
given employee size. We plot this average separately for male and females in Appendix
Figure A1. We also fit a third-order polynomial on each side of the discontinuity. We
observe a clear discontinuous drop at the 35-employee threshold for male employees, but
not for female employees. This observation is consistent with the results in Table 2.

V

Effect of Transparency on Wages

V.1

DIDID estimates

We next turn to a multivariate regression analysis and estimate the effect of disclosing
gender pay disparities on individual wages. We estimate the following OLS regression in
which the coefficient of interest is δ:13
log(wage)ijt = αij + αt + γ1 Xjt + γ2 Zit
+ β1 I(T reatedij × P ostt )
+ β2 I(P ostt × M alei )
+ δ I(T reatedij × P ostt × M alei ) + εijt ,
13

(1)

Equation 1 is our preferred specification. In the tables, we also report diff-in-diff specifications
separately for male and female employees.

– 14 –

where j, i, and t index firms, individuals, and years; P ost takes a value of 1 for 2006, 2007,
and 2008 and a value of 0 for years 2003, 2004 and 2005;14 T reated takes a value of 1 for
firms that employ 35-50 employees prior to the introduction of the law and 0 for firms
that employ 20-34 workers. The terms M alei , T reatedj , P ostt , and T reatedij × M alei
are not shown, because their coefficients are absorbed by the fixed effects. Xjt and
Zijt capture time-varying firm- and individual-level control variables, respectively. Xjt
controls for firm size proxied by sales (log-transformed). Zit controls for time-varying
individual characteristics (age, work experience), following Blau and Kahn (2017). αt is
year fixed effects to absorb aggregate macroeconomic shocks.
We also include interacted individual and firm fixed effects, αij . By including these
fixed effects, we control for time-invariant person characteristics (e.g., skill, education),
time-invariant firm characteristics, and the match between firms and workers.15 Essentially, we compare the same employee at the same firm before and after the regulation.
That is, our estimation results are free of composition effects.16 Standard errors are
double clustered at the individual and the firm level.17
Table 3 reports the results. Column 1 compares the change in wages of male employees in treated firms relative to control firms. Column 2 repeats this analysis comparing
instead wages for female employees. We find that wages of male employees in treated
firms grow 1.7 percentage points more slowly than wages of male employees in control
firms. This magnitude is similar to that in our univariate results in Table 2. The effect
14

The results are robust if we drop 2006, the year in which the law was passed.

15

Individual fixed effects largely overlap with occupation fixed effects; therefore, our estimates remain
unchanged when we additionally control for occupation fixed effects.
16
To further confirm that compositional changes are not explaining our findings, we repeat our analysis
in Internet Appendix Table IA2 by keeping only observations in which the employee works at the same
firm as he did in 2005.
17

In our empirical strategy, we measure differences between control and treatment groups. General
equilibrium effects might attenuate our measurement of the true effect of the regulation. For example,
if a large number of treated firms lower wages for male employees, wages for male employees could
decrease in control firms as well, as the outside option of the latter decreases. In Internet Appendix
Table IA3, we test for spillover effects and do not find supportive evidence.

– 15 –

is statistically significant at the 1% level. On the contrary, we find a positive, but not
significant, coefficient on treated firms’ female wages relative to control firms in column
2. In column 3, we estimate the triple-differences model of equation 1 that compares the
effect of the law on wages of male relative to female employees. The triple-difference coefficient shows male wage growth is two percentage points lower than female wage growth,
and the effect is statistically significant at the 1% level. In column 4, we additionally
control for interacted firm×year-fixed effects that absorb any time-varying changes at
the firm level that could be driving our results.18 The triple-difference coefficient is not
qualitatively affected.
In columns 5-8, we repeat our estimation, additionally controlling for individual timevarying characteristics (age and experience) and firm size (proxied by logarithm of sales)
to account for the well-documented employer size-wage effect whereby larger firms pay
higher wages (e.g., Brown and Medoff, 1989; Idson and Oi, 1999). Including firm size is
important in our setting given that the treated group includes larger firms by construction. At the same time, acknowledging that firm size is likely an endogenous control that
could potentially bias our estimates is important. The fact that the estimated coefficients
remain virtually unchanged after controlling for firm size is reassuring.
One potential concern with our result is that it could be driven by differential changes
in working hours, with men reducing their hours more than women while the compensation per hour remains the same. Prior literature (e.g., Card, Mas, Moretti, and Saez,
2012; Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2017; Breza, Kaur, and Shamdasani, 2018) show employees change the number of hours worked when they receive feedback about their relative
salary. To address this concern, in Internet Appendix Table IA4 Panel A, we replicate
Table 3 using hours worked as the outcome variable. Indeed, we find a negative and
significant effect on hours worked for both male and female employees in treated firms
relative to controls. The estimated coefficient for female employees is larger than for
males, although the difference is not statistically significant. This result indicates a re18

Firm×year fixed effects subsume the coefficient on T reatedxP ost.

– 16 –

duction in male employees working hours relative to female employees’ working hours
does not explain our results. In addition, in Panel B, we use hourly wages as the dependent variable. We show hourly wages grow by 1.2 percentage points less for male
employees in treated firms as compared to control firms (column 1), whereas the tripledifference coefficient shows male wage growth is 1.3 percentage points lower than female
wage growth (column 3).
Another potential concern is that firms may offset the slower growth of male wages
by an increase in bonuses. We address this issue in Internet Appendix Table IA5, where
we estimate the effect of the law on total compensation (wages and bonus). Because
this effect is only operative for employees who receive performance pay, we split the
sample into employees who never received a bonus in our sample period and those who
did. In the overall sample as well as in the two sub-samples, we find the estimated
triple-difference coefficient is negative and large in magnitude.
Using data at the employee level, our analyses shows the regulation results in a significant drop in male employees’ wage growth and no effect on females wages. Taken
together, these results imply a reduction in the gender pay gap. We confirm this reduction using gender pay gap at the firm level. Table 4 presents estimates from a diff-in-diff
specification in which the dependent variable is the firm-level wage gap measured at
different percentiles of the wage distribution. To control for compositional changes in
the firm-level analysis, we condition this analysis on individuals who work at the same
firm they did in 2005 (as in Table 2). In columns 1 and 2, we use the average wages
of male and female employees to measure the wage gap. We find a 1.9-percentage-point
decline in treated firms’ gender pay gap following the regulation change, as compared to
controls—a similar estimate to our individual-level analysis. This drop is equivalent to
a 13% reduction in the pre-treatment “unexplained” gender pay gap.
We further evaluate whether this average effect is driven by a few employees at the
top of the wage distribution or is more evenly distributed throughout the organization.
We thus compute the ratio of male to female wages at the firm level at the 10th , 50th ,

– 17 –

and 90th percentiles of the wage distribution. We present the results in columns 3-8,
Table 4. When comparing wages by gender at the bottom of the wage distribution, we
find a large and significant decline equal to 3.7 percentage points that is statistically
significant at the 1% level. We also find a 1.9-percentage-point decline when we consider
the gender pay ratio based on median wages, significant at the 5% level. The decline is
weaker and not statistically significant when we instead consider gender pay differences
at the 90th percentile of the wage distribution; however, the estimated magnitude of a
1.4-percentage-point decline is economically large. Overall, this analysis suggests the
regulation affected all levels of the organization, but it is particularly strong toward the
bottom and middle of the wage distribution.
V.1.1

Dynamics

A first-order concern with the diff-in-diff analysis is whether wages follow differential
trends in small and large firms. Differential trends alone, however, would not explain
our results, because our estimated effect on wages is concentrated on male employees
(as opposed to all employees). To drive our findings, an omitted variable would need to
not only be correlated with size, but also differentially affect male and female wages. To
explore this possibility, we analyze the dynamics of male and female wages.
Figure 1 (a) shows year-by-year coefficient estimates for male employees between
2003 and 2008, omitting 2005, the year the law was announced. We find no significant
difference in the evolution of male wages between treated and control groups prior to the
adoption of the law. We observe a sharp drop in the wages of male employees in treated
firms relative to control firms starting in 2006 (0.9 percentage points, significant at the 1%
level), which increasingly persists up to 2008 (1.38 percentage points in 2008, significant
at the 1% level). In Figure 1 (b), we look instead at the year-by-year estimates on
female wages and observe no significant changes. Consistent with our previous findings,
Figure 1 (c) shows the triple-difference coefficient between male and female employees
is insignificant prior to the law, drops in 2006 and 2007 (1.14 percentage points and 2.17

– 18 –

percentage points, respectively), and remains at that level in 2008. These results support
the identifying assumption that wages in treated and control firms were following parallel
trends prior to the law and that the effects only appear after the law was implemented.
A different concern is that some other factor (e.g., another law) differentially affected
the wages of men and women in large and small firms around the same time as the disclosure law. In this case, we would still observe parallel trends, but our main results could
be potentially explained by this factor rather than the disclosure law we are studying.
To address this concern, we perform several placebo tests where the treatment threshold
takes each of the values between 15 and 100 employees, excluding the range of 20-50
employees. We plot the average placebo coefficients in Figure 1, Panels (b), (d), and (f),
together with our baseline coefficient estimates shown in Panels (a), (c), and (e). We
show the average placebo coefficients are close to zero both before and after the law in
all cases, mitigating concerns that a different factor that affected wages around the same
time of this law drives our results, because this factor would need to affect firms exactly
at the 35-employee cutoff.

V.2

Difference-in-Discontinuities estimates

A remaining concern with our diff-in-diff analysis is whether the control group, which
by definition includes smaller firms, is a good counterfactual. To address this concern,
we follow Grembi, Nannicini, and Troiano (2016) and employ a diff-in-disc design.
This approach takes the difference between the pre-treatment and post-treatment
discontinuity at 35 employees. As such, the diff-in-disc allows us to difference out the
effect of any potential pre-existing discontinuity at 35 employees.19 In contrast to a
traditional RDD design, the diff-in-disc design examines whether the gender pay gap
disclosure legislation led to a change in the discontinuity around the 35-employee cutoff.
As such, it can identify the effect of the 2006 regulation on gender pay gap from the
19

For example, since 1986, firms with more than 35 employees are required to have a work council
(a body in which representatives of workers and management discuss issues), which could potentially
affect salaries.

– 19 –

effect of any potential pre-existing regulation that uses the same cutoff. Specifically, we
estimate the following for male and female employees separately:

Log W ageijt = αi + α1 Empjt + Over35jt (β0 + β1 Empjt )
h

i

+ P ostt γ0 + γ1 Empjt + Over35jt (δ0 + δ1 Empjt ) + ijt

(2)

where i indexes employees, j indexes firms, and t indexes years. Emp is the number of
employees minus 35, Over35 denotes the number of employees over the 35 threshold,20
and P ost takes a value of 1 for 2006, 2007, and 2008 and a value of 0 for years 2003,
2004, and 2005. Number of employees is based on t − 1. We include individual fixed
effects (αi ’s) to reduce the residual variance due to unobserved factors affecting wages
(Lee and Lemieux, 2010). The coefficient δ0 is the diff-in-disc estimator and identifies
the treatment effect of the pay-gap disclosure. Standard errors are double clustered at
the individual and firm level.
Table 5 presents the main diff-in-disc results. In column 1, we show the law has
a negative effect on wage growth for male employees for firms above the 35-employee
cutoff. Male employee wages grow less by 1.1 percentage points for firms above the
threshold, and this difference is significant at the 1% level. By contrast, a positive but
not significant change exists for female employee wages following the policy change, as
shown in column 2.
Figure 2 presents the coefficients of year-by-year diff-in-disc regressions for male and
female employee wages. The coefficients shown are estimates of the change in the discontinuity around the 35-employee threshold between a given year and the base year
(2005). In Panel A, no significant change occurs in the discontinuity in years 2003 to
2005 for male employee wages. The discontinuity jumps downwards in 2006 and gradually widens over time (-1.2 percentage points in 2006, -1.5 percentage points in 2007,
20

In Internet Appendix Table IA6, we show qualitatively similar results when we use year t-2 instead
to define the running variable.

– 20 –

and -1.8 percentage points in 2008). In Panel B, we show no significant change in the
discontinuity for female employees.
We present several robustness checks for our diff-in-disc analysis. First, we test
whether firms manipulate employee size to avoid having to comply with the law. In
Internet Appendix Figure IA1, we show the null hypothesis of continuity of the density
around 35 employees cannot be rejected either before or after the policy change, suggesting firms do not systematically manipulate their size. Second, in Internet Appendix
Table IA7, we test for the balancing of covariates at the individual (age, education, gender, work experience, number of children) and firm (female share, profits (in $), assets
(in $), sales (in $)) levels in 2005. None of these characteristics display a statistically
significant jump around the threshold in 2005. Third, we check the sensitivity of the
diff-in-disc estimates to the bandwidth chosen. The results in Table 5 use a bandwidth
of 65 (so that we estimate equation 2 using firms with zero to 100 employees). However,
in Internet Appendix Figure IA2, we show the estimates are very stable along a wide
range of bandwidth choices.21

VI

Joining, Leaving, and Promotions

Our results establish that the law has an effect on wages. However, this effect might
not be the only response by firms. Changes in the way similar employees of different genders are compensated might affect the willingness of firms to hire employees of different
genders or the propensity of employees to seek employment in firms with different gender
pay gaps. These would result in differences in hiring or departure rates. Moreover, the
law mandate for fairer practices may have spillover effects on other firm decisions, such
as employee promotions. We next examine the effect of the law’s passage on each of
these different outcomes.
We start by examining the effect of the law on the joining and leaving rates for
21

We show the stability of the coefficients up to a bandwidth of 110, which is the optimal bandwidth
using the method in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014).

– 21 –

female and male employees separately. To this end, we estimate a diff-in-diff model
at the firm level with the outcome variable defined as the percentage of female (male)
employees joining the firm over total employment and the percentage of female (male)
employees leaving the firm over total employment. We present the results in Table 6
in a specification with firm and year fixed effects. In Panel A, we find a positive and
statistically significant coefficient at the 1% level on female employees joining, but no
significant effect on female employees leaving the treated firms. The magnitudes we
estimate are large. The pre-law average of female employees hiring share is 5%. Our
estimates indicate the law causes female hiring rates to increase by 0.8 percentage points.
One possible interpretation of these results is that firms are able to attract more female
employees because they offer relatively fairer compensation.
By contrast, in Panel B, we find a negative and significant effect on male employees
joining the firm, consistent with the fact that male wage growth in treated firms is lower
following the law, and thus these firms are less attractive to male employees. The results
are significant at the 10% level and economically large. Relative to the pre-treatment
average male hiring share of 8.5%, male hiring rates decrease by 0.8 percentage points.
We continue to find an insignificant effect on male employees’ departures.
In Appendix Table A2, we present the year-by-year coefficient estimates for all four
dependent variables. Across all specifications, we find no significant pre-trends prior
to the legislation. In addition, the estimated coefficients on joining rates for female
employees (Panel A) and male employees (Panel B) in treated firms become significant in
2007. Moreover, we find no significant effects on employees leaving around the regulation
change.22
These results highlight the fact that the composition of employees changes in treated
firms following the regulation. An interesting question is whether firms are “gaming” the
system by hiring more highly paid women and/or firing more highly paid men to report
22

In Appendix Table A3, we report the main diff-in-disc specification for female and male joiners,
and leavers, shares. We find results consistent with the diff-in-diff analysis, albeit the result on female
joiners’ share is not statistically significant.

– 22 –

smaller gender wage gaps. We explore this hypothesis in Internet Appendix Table IA8
and find no support for this hypothesis.
We next examine whether the law affected firm promotion decisions. We define
a promotion to be any transitions from a lower- to a higher-paying occupation code,
where we rank occupation codes based on average wages computed in 2002. Table 7
presents the results. Column 1 shows male employees are less likely to be promoted
to higher-paid positions within the organization, although the effect is not statistically
significant. Column 2 shows instead that female employees in treated firms are more
likely to be promoted after the passage of the law than are female employees in control
firms. Columns 3 and 4 show the triple-difference coefficient is statistically significant
and economically large with a probability of promotion of 1.2 to 1.6 percentage points
higher for females than for males. Columns 5-8 show the coefficient estimates remain
unchanged after controlling for firm size and individual-level controls.
We also present robustness for the promotion results in the Appendix. Table A4
shows the diff-in-diff year-by-year estimates, and presents consistent evidence of no pretrends prior to the law and a significant differential effect in 2007.23 Overall, these results
indicate that the law also improved female employees’ ability to climb up the corporate
ladder.

VII

Firm Performance

In this section, we explore whether the law on gender pay affects firm-level outcomes.
Specifically, we examine its effect on average wage, firm productivity, and profits. We
perform a diff-in-diff analysis at the firm level in a specification with firm and year fixed
effects, and report the results in Table 8.
In columns 1-2, we analyze the effect of the law on average wages of treated firms
23
In Appendix Table A5, we report the main diff-in-disc specification for our promotion results.
We confirm the absence of any statistically significant effect on male promotions, and a positive and
statistically significant effect for female promotions following the legislation.

– 23 –

as compared to the group of control firms. Although our main result is that the law
reduced the growth rate of male wages, the average wage at treated firms may still
remain constant or even increase due to composition effects (e.g., treated firms might
hire high-wage individuals after the passage of the law). We confirm the average wage
per employee (log-transformed) is reduced by 2.8%. We only observe a negative and
significant effect on employee wages and not on other labor costs, such as pensions and
other social security costs, in columns 3-4, because the latter are not directly impacted
by the regulation.
In columns 5-6, we examine the effects of the law on firm productivity. The effect
on productivity is a priori ambiguous. If information on gender pay gap lowers job
satisfaction of female employees, it might negatively affect their productivity (Akerlof
and Yellen, 1990). A similar effect should be observed if male employees are dissatisfied
with lower wage growth relative to their peers. However, if increased transparency and
firms’ responses create a sentiment of fairness among employees, productivity might be
positively affected. Although the law may differentially affect the productivity of male
versus female employees, our estimates capture the average effect of the law on firm
productivity, because we do not have data on productivity at the individual employee
level. We observe that, on average, productivity (measured as the log-transformed sales
per employee) drops by 2.7% in treated firms following the regulation as compared to
control firms, and this reduction is statistically significant at the 5% level.
Lastly, in columns 7-8, we estimate the effect of the law on firm profitability, measured
as profits per employee. Because profits can take negative values and thus cannot be
log-transformed, we estimate a Poisson regression model (after left-censoring profits at
0).24 We find no effect on firm profits, which can be explained by the offsetting effects
of lower employee productivity and wages.
In Appendix Table A6, we present the year-by-year coefficient estimates. We find no
24

In unreported regressions, we find similar results using OLS estimation and using profits as the
dependent variable.

– 24 –

significant effects in any years prior to the legislation across all measures, which provides
evidence in favor of the parallel-trends assumption. Consistent with the individual-level
analysis presented in Figure 1, average employee wages in treated firms start declining in
2006 and continue to do so until 2008. Interestingly, the drop in average wages precedes
the drop in productivity by one year. None of the coefficients of the pension & other
labor cost variable and, most importantly, profits are statistically significant before or
after the law.
We further present results using a diff-in-disc analysis. We thus examine whether
firms above the threshold deferentially respond to the policy change after the law in
terms of average wages, pension & other labor costs, employee productivity, and profits.
We present this analysis in Appendix Table A7. Consistent with the earlier findings, we
find a drop in average wages for firms above the threshold post legislation. Nevertheless,
the drop in productivity is much smaller in economic magnitude and not statistically
significant. Finally, we confirm the result that profits are unaffected.

VIII

Heterogeneity in the Effect of Transparency on
the Gender Wage Gap

Having established the effect of transparency on wage setting in firms, we next discuss
cases where we might expect to find a more pronounced reduction in gender pay gaps.
We start by considering the role of pre-existing gender pay inequality at the firm.
We first estimate the “unexplained” part of the gender pay gap at the firm level over
2003-2005, following the methodology detailed in section IV.2. We next classify firms
into deciles of gender pay gap, and we asses whether firms with higher pre-treatment
gender pay gap inequality exhibit larger effects.
We present the results in Appendix Table A8. In column 1, we find the drop in the
growth rate of male wages gets larger in magnitude for firms with higher pre-treatment
gender pay gaps. Moving from the lowest decile of the pre-treatment gender pay gap

– 25 –

distribution to the highest decile, we observe a 3.8-percentage-point-larger drop in the
wage growth of male employees. By contrast, we find no significant effect of the regulation on female employees across deciles. In column 3, the differential effect is large
in magnitude but not statistically significant, but it becomes significant at the 5% level
after controlling for firm-year fixed effects. In sum, our results suggest firms with higher
gender pay inequality close the gender gap more aggressively. This finding might be due
to the fact that transparency leads to an increase in accountability in these firms.
Note the relation between the pre-treatment gap and the strength of the response is a
priori ambiguous. For example, firms with managers with pro-women preferences might
both have a smaller gender pay gap and react more strongly to the disclosure regulation.
Another example is the relation between the pre-treatment wage gap and the strength
of the response varying by employee characteristics. For example, the fact that having
children penalizes women in terms of wages is well known (e.g., Bertrand, Goldin, and
Katz, 2010; Kleven, Landais, and Søgaard, 2018).25 In Appendix Table A9, we show this
same characteristic also affects the strength of the reaction to the regulation. Specifically,
we show that male employees with children experience a lower decline in wages than men
without children. As a result, the pre-treatment wage gap is higher among employees
with children, and yet it does not close as much for this group.

IX

Conclusion

The gender pay gap has been at the epicentre of a heated debate among academics
and policy-makers. Recently, governments around the world have proposed transparency
as a tool to nudge firms to reduce the wage gap between men and women. This paper is
the first systematic study of the role of disclosure of gender-based statistics on the firm
gender wage gap.
25

In unreported analysis, we confirm in our pre-treatment sample that the gender pay gap is bigger
among the group of employees with children.

– 26 –

Empirically investigating the effect of gender pay transparency as a measure to reduce gender pay discrimination within firms is challenging because it requires finding
both exogenous variation in transparency and detailed information on employee wages.
We overcome these hurdles by exploiting a 2006 regulation in Denmark that requires
certain companies to report gender-segregated wage statistics. Using detailed employeefirm matched administrative data and employing both a difference-in-differences and a
difference-in-discontinuities design, we find changes in compensation within firms. Specifically, male employees experience slower wage growth than female employees. Moreover,
we find that companies subject to the regulation are more likely to hire and promote
more women. We also find a negative impact on firm productivity but no significant
effects on firm profits.
One caveat of our analysis is that our estimates are the local average treatment effect
for firms around the 35-employee-cutoff, and they do not necessarily apply to larger or
smaller firms. Yet the number of firms in the 20-to 50- employees range is significant
(around 20% of firms and 16% of all employees in the private sector belong in this firm
employee size range).
Although the regulation had the effect of reducing the gender wage gap, it also
had the unintended consequence of reducing the average employee wage at the firm.
Policymakers should thus weigh the welfare implications when designing regulation to
reduce the gender wage gap.

– 27 –

References
Adams, R. B., Ragunathan, V., 2017. Lehman sisters. Available at SSRN.
Akerlof, G. A., Yellen, J. L., 1990. The fair wage-effort hypothesis and unemployment.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 255–283.
Babcock, L. C., Laschever, S., 2003. Women Don’t Ask: Negotiation and the Gender
Divide. Princeton University Press.
Baker, M., Halberstam, Y., Kroft, K., Mas, A., Messacar, D., 2019. Pay Transparency
and the Gender Gap. Working Paper 25834, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bertrand, M., Goldin, C., Katz, L. F., 2010. Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young
Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 2, 228–255.
Blau, F. D., Kahn, L. M., 2017. The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and explanations.
Journal of Economic Literature 55, 789–865.
Breza, E., Kaur, S., Shamdasani, Y., 2018. The morale effects of pay inequality. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 611–663.
Brown, C., Medoff, J., 1989. The employer size-wage effect. Journal of Political Economy
97, 1027–1059.
Bureau, R., 2005. ’Venstre lover ligeløn til kvinder’. February 5th.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., Titiunik, R., 2014. Robust Nonparametric Confidence
Intervals for Regression-Discontinuity Designs. Econometrica 82, 2295–2326.
Card, D., Mas, A., Moretti, E., Saez, E., 2012. Inequality at work: The effect of peer
salaries on job satisfaction. American Economic Review 102, 2981–3003.
Cullen, Z., Pakzad-Hurson, B., 2019. Equilibrium Effects of Pay Transparency in a
Simple Labor Market. HBS Working Paper.

– 28 –

Cullen, Z., Perez-Truglia, R., 2017. How Much Does Your Boss Make? The Effects of
Salary Comparisons. NBER Working Paper No. 24841.
Cullen, Z. B., Perez-Truglia, R., 2018. The Salary Taboo: Privacy Norms and the Diffusion of Information. Working Paper 25145, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Duchin, R., Simutin, M., Sosyura, D., 2018. The origins and real effects of the gender
gap: Evidence from CEOs’ formative years. SSRN Electronic Journal.
Egan, M. L., Matvos, G., Seru, A., 2017. When Harry fired Sally: The double standard
in punishing misconduct. Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gallen, Y., Lesner, R. V., Vejlin, R., 2019. The labor market gender gap in Denmark:
Sorting out the past 30 years. Labour Economics 56, 58 – 67.
Goldin, C., 2014. A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter. American Economic
Review 104, 1091–1119.
Grembi, V., Nannicini, T., Troiano, U., 2016. Do Fiscal Rules Matter? American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8, 1–30.
Hall, R. E., Krueger, A. B., 2012. Evidence on the Incidence of Wage Posting, Wage
Bargaining, and On-the-Job Search. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4,
56–67.
Hermalin, B. E., Weisbach, M. S., 2012. Information disclosure and corporate governance.
The Journal of Finance 67, 195–233.
Holt, H., Larsen, M., 2011. Koensopdelt loenstatistik og redegoerelse om lige loen. Det
Nationale Forskningscenter for Velfaerd.
Hospido, L., Laeven, L. A., Lamo, A., 2019. The Gender Promotion Gap: Evidence from
Central Banking. IZA Discussion Paper No. 12306.
Idson, T. L., Oi, W. Y., 1999. Workers are more productive in large firms. American
Economic Review 89, 104–108.

– 29 –

Kleven, H., Landais, C., Søgaard, J. E., 2018. Children and gender inequality: Evidence
from Denmark. Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lee, D. S., Lemieux, T., 2010. Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics. Journal
of Economic Literature 48, 281–355.
Mas, A., 2016. Does disclosure affect CEO pay setting? Evidence from the passage of
the 1934 Securities and Exchange Act. Working Paper.
Mas, A., 2017. Does transparency lead to pay compression? Journal of Political Economy
125, 1683–1721.
NordjyskeStiftstidende, 2007. Statistik kan give et bette nøk. p. January 17th.
Perez-Truglia, R., 2016. The effects of income transparency on well-being: Evidence from
a natural experiment. Available at SSRN.
Politiken, 2005. Folketingsvalg: Ligeløn: Hemmelig løn i små firmaer. Author: I. Methling, February 7th.
Politiken, 2007. Ligeløn: HK kræver åbenhed om løntal. Author: Michael Olsen, March
4th.
Shue, K., 2013. Executive networks and firm policies: Evidence from the random assignment of MBA peers. The Review of Financial Studies 26, 1401–1442.
Tate, G., Yang, L., 2015. Female leadership and gender equity: Evidence from plant
closure. Journal of Financial Economics 117, 77–97.

– 30 –

Figure 1: Diff-in-diff Dynamics and Placebo Estimates
The black solid lines in panels (a) and (b) show the diff-in-diff year-by-year coefficient estimates for
male employee wages. The black solid lines in panels (c) and (d) show the diff-in-diff year-by-year
coefficient estimates for female employee wages. The black solid lines in panels (e) and (f) show the
triple differences year-by-year coefficient estimates on all employee wages. Year 2005 is omitted. In
panels (b), (d), and (f), the solid green lines represent the average coefficient estimates of placebo tests.
The treatment threshold for the placebo tests is defined from 15 to 100 employees, excluding 20-50 and
the green dashed lines represent the 95% confidence interval for the placebo estimates. In panels (a),
(c), and (e), the vertical lines represent 95% confidence intervals.

(a) Male Log(Wage)

(b) Male Log(Wage)

(c) Female Log(Wage)

(d) Female Log(Wage)

(e) All Employees Log(Wage)

(f) All Employees Log(Wage)

– 31 –

Figure 2: Diff-in-Disc Dynamics
The black solid lines show the difference-in-disc year-by-year coefficient estimates for male (panel a) and
female (panel b) employee wages. Year 2005 is omitted. The vertical lines represent 95% confidence
intervals.

(a) Male Log(Wage)

(b) Female Log(Wage)

– 32 –

Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for the employee-level (Panel A) and firm-level (Panel B) variables
for all firms in our sample and for treated and control firms separately. Treated firms are those with
35-50 employees prior to the introduction of the law, and controls are those with 20-34 employees.
The variables are averaged over the pre-law years 2003-2005. The table reports unconditional means,
standard deviations, and p-values of the differences in means between treated and control groups pretreatment. For the conversion from DKK to USD, we use the spot exchange rate at the year-end.
Detailed descriptions of the variables are given in Table A1. Firm-level variables are winsorized at 1%.
For the t-test, standard errors are clustered at the firm level in Panel A.
Panel A - Employee-Level Characteristics
All (Treated & Control)

Treated

Control

t-test

– 33 –

Observations

Mean

S.D.

Mean

S.D.

Mean

S.D.

p-value

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Wage (thous. $)

67,823

53.74

23.72

54.50

23.77

53.17

23.63

0.020

Hourly Wage ($)

67,816

33.90

15.10

34.37

15.38

33.53

14.81

0.014

Bonus (thous. $)

67,575

1.17

3.02

1.13

3.06

1.21

3.00

0.232

Age (years)

67,574

39.79

10.77

39.90

10.63

39.70

10.85

0.326

Male (%)

67,749

0.64

0.48

0.64

0.48

0.64

0.48

0.860

College degree (%)

66,158

0.25

0.43

0.25

0.44

0.24

0.43

0.213

Work Experience (years)

67,824

17.23

10.36

17.34

10.29

17.14

10.40

0.347

Panel B - Firm-Level Characteristics
All (Treated & Control)

Treated

Control

t-test

– 34 –

Observations

Mean

S.D.

Mean

S.D.

Mean

S.D.

p-value

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Assets (mil. $)

3,956

6.26

20.46

7.20

13.23

5.81

23.19

0.016

Sales (mil. $)

3,956

9.03

9.64

11.68

10.74

7.73

8.77

0.000

Employment

4,005

31.12

8.49

41.67

4.37

25.97

4.12

0.000

Profits (mil. $)

3,957

0.25

1.88

0.26

1.49

0.25

2.04

0.960

Total Wages (mil. $)

3,950

1.70

0.70

2.26

0.69

1.43

0.52

0.000

Pension & Soc. Sec. (mil. $)

3,950

0.135

0.082

0.179

0.091

0.114

0.068

0.000

Sales/Employee (mil. $)

3,956

0.28

0.30

0.27

0.25

0.28

0.33

0.156

Profits/Employee (mil. $)

3,957

0.007

0.021

0.006

0.020

0.007

0.022

0.101

Wage/Employee (mil. $)

3,950

0.051

0.017

0.051

0.016

0.051

0.017

0.923

Pension & Soc. Sec./Employee (mil. $)

3,950

0.004

0.002

0.004

0.002

0.004

0.002

0.819

Female Share (%)

3,998

0.30

0.21

0.29

0.21

0.30

0.21

0.153

Gender Pay Gap with controls

2,310

0.154

0.278

0.160

0.245

0.150

0.296

0.409

Gender Pay Gap without controls

2,331

0.187

0.319

0.193

0.270

0.184

0.343

0.458

Table 2: Univariate Test: Change in Compensation Policy around the Disclosure Law
This table reports the difference in average wage around the disclosure law for male
and female employees in treated and control firms. To compute the average wage
before and after the reform, we keep only observations in which the employee works
at the same firm he did in 2005. Treated individuals are employed in firms with
35-50 employees prior to the introduction of the law, and control individuals are
employed in firms with 20-34 employees. Column 3 presents the difference between
column 1 and column 2. The first row reports the difference in average male wage
between the post-law (2006-2008) and pre-law (2003-2005) periods for the treated
(column 1) and control groups (column 2), and the difference between column 1
and column 2 (column 3). The second row similarly reports the first and second
difference for the average female wage. The difference-in-difference-in-differences
result represents the difference between the change in the male wages and female
wages around the disclosure law in treated versus control firms. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond
to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
log Wage

Treated

Control

DD/DD/DDD

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.0885

0.1050

-0.0165***

(3-year avg after – 3-year avg before)

Male

(0.0044)
Female

0.1093

0.1062

0.0031
(0.0055)

DD/DD/DDD

-0.0208***

-0.0012

-0.0196***

(0.0048)

(0.0042)

(0.0063)

– 35 –

Table 3: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Employee Wages
This table reports the effects of gender pay gap disclosure on employee wages. Each column presents coefficients from a different multivariate
regression. Columns 1 and 5 (2 and 6) are estimated using only male (female) employees. All other columns use the entire sample. The
dependent variable is employee annual wage (log-transformed). T reated is a dummy that takes the value 1 for individuals working in firms
with 35-50 employees before the introduction of the law and 0 for employees in firms with 20-34 employees. P ost takes a value of 1 for 2006,
2007, and 2008, and a value of 0 for years 2003, 2004, and 2005. Individual controls include employee work experience and age. Firm controls
include sales (log-transformed). Detailed descriptions of the variables are given in Table A1. Standard errors are double clustered at the individual and the firm level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Treated x Post

Male

Female

All

All

Male

Female

All

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0167***

0.0028

0.0028

-0.0152***

0.0036

0.0036

(0.0039)

(0.0045)

(0.0044)

(0.0037)

(0.0044)

(0.0043)

– 36 –

Male x Post

Treated x Post x Male

-0.0022

-0.0041

-0.0033

-0.0046

(0.0034)

(0.0036)

(0.0034)

(0.0035)

-0.0195***

-0.0148***

-0.0190***

-0.0144***

(0.0052)

(0.0053)

(0.0052)

(0.0053)

Person-Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Firm x Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Firm Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Individual Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R2

0.868

0.827

0.866

0.884

0.868

0.826

0.866

0.883

N

145,852

79,532

225,384

223,624

145,262

79,027

224,289

222,529

Table 4: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Firm Level Gender Pay Gap
This table reports the effects of gender pay gap disclosure on the firm-level gender pay gap. Gender pay gap is defined as the log ratio of male
over female wages at the mean (columns 1-2), the 10th (columns 3-4), the 50th (columns 5-6), and 90th (columns 7-8) percentile of the wage
distribution. T reated is a dummy that takes the value 1 for firms with 35-50 employees before the introduction of the law, and 0 for firms with
20-34 employees. P ost takes a value of 1 for 2006, 2007, and 2008, and a value of 0 for years 2003, 2004, and 2005. Firm controls include sales
(log-transformed). To address composition changes, we keep only observations in which the employee works at the same firm he did in 2005 as in
Table 2. Standard errors are clustered at the the firm level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Mean

Mean

10%

10%

50%

50%

90%

90%

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0188**

-0.0190**

-0.0377**

-0.0373**

-0.0188**

-0.0188**

-0.0139

-0.0143

(0.0076)

(0.0076)

(0.0152)

(0.0153)

(0.0079)

(0.0079)

(0.0088)

(0.0088)

Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

R2

0.701

0.701

0.513

0.514

0.711

0.711

0.742

0.742

N

13,291

13,263

13,291

13,263

13,291

13,263

13,291

13,263

Treated x Post

– 37 –

Table 5: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Employee Wages: Diff-in-Disc Estimates
The table shows the diff-in-disc estimates of the impact of the law on male and female wages. We
include firms between 1 and 100 employees (i.e., bandwidth of 65) for the years 2003-2008. The
dependent variable is wages (log transformed). The table presents estimates of the local linear
regression in equation 2 following Grembi, Nannicini, and Troiano (2016). Employment is measured
in year T − 1. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm and individual level and reported
in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

Diff-in-Disc

Person FE
R
N

2

Male

Female

(1)

(2)

-0.0114***

0.0032

(0.0043)

(0.0052)

Yes

Yes

0.850

0.803

328,659

191,461

– 38 –

Table 6: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Joining and Leaving Rates
This table reports the estimated coefficients from a diff-in-diff model at the firm level with the outcome
variable defined as the percentage of female (male) employees joining the firm over total employment
and the percentage of female (male) employees leaving the firm over total employment. Panel A refers
to female employees, and Panel B to male employees. T reated is a dummy that takes the value of 1
for firms with 35-50 employees before the introduction of the law and 0 for firms with 20-34 employees.
P ost takes a value of 1 for 2006, 2007, and 2008, and a value of 0 for years 2003, 2004, and 2005. Firm
controls include sales (log-transformed). Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported
in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

Panel A: Female
Joiners / Emp

Joiners / Emp

Leavers / Emp

Leavers / Emp

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0084***

0.0083***

-0.0014

-0.0014

(0.0029)

(0.0029)

(0.0033)

(0.0033)

Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.408

0.409

0.369

0.370

20,203

20,159

20,203

20,159

Treated x Post

R

2

N

Panel B: Male
Joiners / Emp

Joiners / Emp

Leavers / Emp

Leavers / Emp

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0072*

-0.0076*

-0.0027

-0.0023

(0.0042)

(0.0042)

(0.0046)

(0.0046)

Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

R2

0.388

0.388

0.363

0.365

N

20,203

20,159

20,203

20,159

Treated x Post

– 39 –

Table 7: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Employee Promotion
This table reports the estimated coefficients from a diff-in-diff model at the individual level with promotion as the outcome variable. We define
promotion to be 1 if an employee transitions from a lower- to a higher-paying occupation code, and 0 otherwise. We rank occupation codes based
on average wages computed in the population of Danish firms with employment between 0 and 100 in 2002. T reated is a dummy that takes
the value 1 for individuals working in firms with 35-50 employees before the introduction of the law and 0 for employees in firms with 20-34
employees. P ost takes a value of 1 for 2006, 2007, and 2008 and a value of 0 for years 2003, 2004, and 2005. Individual controls include employee
work experience and age. Firm controls include sales (log-transformed). Standard errors are double clustered at the individual and the firm level
and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Treated x Post

Male

Female

All

All

Male

Female

All

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0057

0.0103**

0.0102**

-0.0058

0.0104**

0.0104**

(0.0044)

(0.0045)

(0.0045)

(0.0044)

(0.0045)

(0.0045)

– 40 –

Male x Post

Treated x Post x Male

0.0027

0.0046

0.0030

0.0047

(0.0034)

(0.0037)

(0.0034)

(0.0037)

-0.016***

-0.012**

-0.016***

-0.012**

(0.003)

(0.030)

(0.002)

(0.027)

Person-Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Firm x Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Firm Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Individual Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.311

0.314

0.312

0.481

0.312

0.314

0.312

0.481

99,615

51,971

151,586

150,844

99,307

51,707

151,014

150,268

R
N

2

Table 8: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Firm Outcomes
This table reports the effects of gender pay gap disclosure on firm outcomes. The dependent variables are the logarithm of wages per employee
(columns 1-2), the logarithm of pension and social security expenses per employee (columns 3-4), the logarithm of sales per employee (columns
5-6), and profits per employee censored at 0 (columns 7-8). We estimate a diff-in-diff model using OLS (columns 1-6) and a Poisson left-censored
regression (columns 7-8). Firm controls include sales (log-transformed). Detailed descriptions of the variables are given in Table A1. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.

Wages per Employee

Labor Cost per Employee

Sales per Employee

Profits per Employee

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0284***

-0.0281***

-0.0063

-0.0076

-0.0290**

-0.0265**

0.0122

0.0137

(0.0054)

(0.0050)

(0.0215)

(0.0214)

(0.0118)

(0.0110)

(0.0412)

(0.0418)

Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

Censored

Censored

Poisson

Poisson

Treated x Post

– 41 –

Estimation Method

R
N

2

0.851

0.865

0.531

0.534

0.841

0.875

.

.

24,241

24,177

24,178

24,137

24,216

24,177

23,387

23,326

I

Appendix
Figure A1: Log Wage Difference by Firm Number of Employees

Vertical axis shows employee’s log wage difference between 2008 and 2005 for male (a) and female (b)
employees. Horizontal axis shows firm employee size minus 35. The employment number is based on
year T-1. The central line is a third order polynomial fit; the dotted lines represent the 95% confidence
interval. Scatter points are average changes in individual log wages between 2008 and 2005 for firms
with a given employee size.

(a) Log Wage Difference 2008-2005 Male

(b) Log Wage Difference 2008-2005 Female

– 42 –

Appendix Table A1: Variable Definitions
Variable

Definition

Firm-level variables
Firm size

It is the logarithm of sales. Sales are measured in real USD.

Sales per Employee

It is the logarithm of sales per employee. Sales are measured in real
USD. Number of employees is based on employment data provided by
Statistics Denmark (DST).

Wages per Employee

It is the logarithm of the total wage bill divided by number of employees.
The information on wages comes from DST. Number of employees is
based on employment data provided by DST.

Labor Cost per Employee

It is the logarithm of pension and social security expenses per employee.
The source of data for pensions, social security expenses, and number of
employees is DST.

Profits per Employee

It is net income per employee. Number of employees is based on the
employment data provided by DST.

Gender Pay Gap

Measures the gender pay gap at the firm level pre-treatment. To construct the variable, we run the following regression at the individual level
in our baseline sample over 2003-2005:
log wage ijt = αj +

PN

n=1

γn × 1(n = j) × malei + αk + αt + βXi + ijt

where i is an individual, j is a firm, k is an occupation, N is the total
number of firms, and t represents a year. αj , αk , and αt are firm, occupation, and year fixed effects, respectively. Xi consists of individual
controls including age, work experience, education, and number of children. Standard errors are double clustered at the individual and the firm
level. The coefficient γj captures the gender pay gap at the firm-level.
We compute the pay gap with and without including controls. When we
include controls, we capture the “unexplained” part of the gender pay
gap, because we estimate it after controlling for observable characteristics.
Have Children

It is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if an individual has
children, and 0 otherwise.

Pre_Gap

It is an indicator variable that takes values from 1 to 10 that correspond
to the lowest and highest deciles, respectively, of the pre-treatment “unexplained” firm-level gender pay gap.

Joiners/Emp

It is defined as the percentage of female (male) employees joining the
firm in a given year, normalized by total employment. An employee is
considered to have joined the firm in a given year if he/she appears in
the firm’s employment data that year.

Leavers/Emp

It is defined as the percentage of female (male) employees leaving the
firm in a given year, normalized by total employment. An employee is
considered to have left the firm in a given year if it is the last year the
employee appears in the firm’s employment data and the employee does
not remain unemployed for more than one year after that. To capture
voluntary departures from the firm rather than firings, we exclude departures in which–the
remains unemployed for more than a
43 employee
–
year.

Variable

Definition

Employee-level variables
Male

It is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if an individual is male,
and 0 otherwise. The source is the Danish Civil Registration System.

Wage

It is total annual wage of the employee (log-transformed), "measured" on
December 31 of the year. The information on wages comes from DST.

Age

It is the employee age recoded into quartiles. The source is the Danish Civil
Registration System.

Work Experience

It is an employee’s number of years worked recoded into quartiles.

Promotion

It is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if an employee is promoted to a higher-paying occupation code in the firm in a given year, and 0
otherwise. We rank occupation codes based on average wages computed in
2002 for the population of Danish firms with 0-100 employees in 2002 (the
year prior to the start of our sample). The promotion variable is constructed
based on information from IDA.

– 44 –

Appendix Table A2: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Joining and Leaving Rates: Dynamics
This table reports the year-by-year coefficient estimates of the effects of gender pay gap disclosure
on joining and leaving rates. The dependent variables are defined as the percentage of female (male)
employees joining the firm over total employment and the percentage of female (male) employees
leaving the firm over total employment. Panel A refers to female employees, and Panel B to male
employees. Firm controls include sales (log-transformed). Year 2005 is omitted. Detailed descriptions
of the variables are given in Table A1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported
in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

Panel A: Female
Joiners / Emp

Joiners / Emp

Leavers / Emp

Leavers / Emp

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0030

-0.0027

0.0037

0.0034

(0.0042)

(0.0042)

(0.0044)

(0.0044)

0.0013

0.0013

-0.0005

-0.0000

(0.0042)

(0.0042)

(0.0042)

(0.0042)

0.0039

0.0038

-0.0021

-0.0018

(0.0041)

(0.0041)

(0.0048)

(0.0048)

0.0104**

0.0102**

0.0063

0.0063

(0.0047)

(0.0047)

(0.0055)

(0.0055)

0.0098**

0.0102**

-0.0055

-0.0055

(0.0048)

(0.0048)

(0.0055)

(0.0055)

Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

R2

0.409

0.409

0.369

0.370

N

20,203

20,159

20,203

20,159

Treated 2003

Treated 2004

Treated 2006

Treated 2007

Treated 2008

– 45 –

Panel B: Male
Joiners / Emp

Joiners / Emp

Leavers / Emp

Leavers / Emp

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0042

-0.0038

0.0021

0.0015

(0.0063)

(0.0063)

(0.0068)

(0.0068)

0.0034

0.0036

0.0018

0.0014

(0.0062)

(0.0062)

(0.0066)

(0.0066)

-0.0089

-0.0089

-0.0075

-0.0079

(0.0058)

(0.0058)

(0.0066)

(0.0066)

-0.0135**

-0.0137**

-0.0002

-0.0006

(0.0061)

(0.0061)

(0.0075)

(0.0075)

0.0007

0.0002

0.0044

0.0053

(0.0066)

(0.0065)

(0.0080)

(0.0080)

Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

R2

0.388

0.388

0.363

0.365

N

20,203

20,159

20,203

20,159

Treated 2003

Treated 2004

Treated 2006

Treated 2007

Treated 2008

– 46 –

Appendix Table A3: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Joining and Leaving Rates: Diffin-Disc Estimates
The table shows the diff-in-disc estimates of the impact of the law on joining and leaving rates at the
firm level following Grembi, Nannicini, and Troiano (2016). We include firms with 1-100 employees
(i.e., bandwidth of 65) for the years 2003-2008. Employment is measured in year T − 1. The dependent
variables are the percentage of female (male) employees joining the firm over total employment and the
percentage of female (male) employees leaving the firm over total employment. Columns 1-2 refer to
female employees, and columns 3-4 refer to male employees. Detailed descriptions of the variables are
given in Table A1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. ***, **,
and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Female

Diff-in-Disc

Firm FE
R
N

2

Male

Joiners

Leavers

Joiners

Leavers

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0045

0.0051

-0.0095**

0.0080

(0.0036)

(0.0044)

(0.0045)

(0.0059)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.443

0.384

0.445

0.381

46,973

46,973

46,973

46,973

– 47 –

Appendix Table A4: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Promotions: Dynamics
This table reports the year-by-year coefficient estimates of the effects of gender pay gap disclosure on
employee promotions. Promotion is an indicator equal to 1 if an employee transitions from a lower- to a
higher-paying occupation code, and 0 otherwise. Individual controls include employee work experience
and age. Firm controls include sales (log-transformed). Detailed descriptions of the variables are given
in Table A1. Year 2005 is omitted. Standard errors are double clustered at the individual and the firm
level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

All

All

All

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0016

0.0059

-0.0011

0.0067

(0.0078)

(0.0079)

(0.0078)

(0.0079)

0.0118

0.0041

0.0116

0.0039

(0.0087)

(0.0082)

(0.0088)

(0.0082)

-0.0089

-0.0048

-0.0092

-0.0049

(0.0081)

(0.0080)

(0.0081)

(0.0080)

-0.0198**

-0.0172*

-0.0199**

-0.0170*

(0.0095)

(0.0091)

(0.0095)

(0.0091)

-0.0107

-0.0074

-0.0112

-0.0076

(0.0081)

(0.0085)

(0.0081)

(0.0086)

Person-Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm-Year FE

No

Yes

No

Yes

Year FE

Yes

No

Yes

No

Firm Controls

No

No

Yes

No

Individual Controls

No

No

Yes

Yes

0.313

0.481

0.313

0.481

151,586

150,844

151,014

150,268

Male x Treated x Year03

Male x Treated x Year04

Male x Treated x Year06

Male x Treated x Year07

Male x Treated x Year08

R
N

2

– 48 –

Appendix Table A5: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Promotions: Diff-in-Disc Estimates
The table shows the difference-in-discontinuity estimates of the impact of the law on employee
promotions following Grembi, Nannicini, and Troiano (2016). We include firms with 1-100 employees
(i.e., bandwidth of 65) for the years 2003-2008. Employment is measured in year T − 1. The dependent
variable is 1 if an employee transitions from a lower- to a higher-paying occupation code, and 0
otherwise. We rank occupation codes based on average wages computed in the population of Danish
firms with 0-100 employees in 2002. Column 1 refers to male employees, and column 2 refers to female
employees. Detailed descriptions of the variables are given in Table A1. Standard errors are double
clustered at the individual and the firm level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond
to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Male

Female

(1)

(2)

0.0057

0.0112*

(0.0060)

(0.0063)

Yes

Yes

R2

0.314

0.321

N

216,074

119,098

Diff-in-Disc

Person FE

– 49 –

Appendix Table A6: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Firm Outcomes: Dynamics
This table reports the year-by-year coefficient estimates of the effects of gender pay gap disclosure on firm outcomes. The dependent variables
are the logarithm of wages per employee (columns 1-2), the logarithm of pension and social security expenses per employee (columns 3-4), the
logarithm of sales per employee (columns 5-6), and profits per employee censored at 0 (columns 7-8). We estimate a diff-in-diff model using OLS
(columns 1-6) and a Poisson left-censored regression (columns 7-8). Firm controls include sales (log-transformed). Year 2005 is omitted. Detailed
descriptions of the variables are given in Table A1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and *
correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Wages per Employee

Labor Cost per Employee

Sales per Employee

Profits per Employee

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.0029

0.0018

-0.0246

-0.0243

-0.0062

-0.0058

0.0266

0.0483

(0.0063)

(0.0062)

(0.0336)

(0.0337)

(0.0160)

(0.0139)

(0.0528)

(0.0543)

0.0042

0.0036

-0.0076

-0.0050

-0.0036

0.0027

0.0332

0.0367

(0.0056)

(0.0055)

(0.0295)

(0.0295)

(0.0148)

(0.0122)

(0.0462)

(0.0471)

-0.0135**

-0.0137**

0.0090

0.0089

-0.0112

-0.0084

0.0563

0.0691

(0.0057)

(0.0056)

(0.0252)

(0.0251)

(0.0147)

(0.0123)

(0.0440)

(0.0449)

-0.0310***

-0.0327***

-0.0194

-0.0196

-0.0506***

-0.0404***

0.0202

0.0299

(0.0072)

(0.0069)

(0.0288)

(0.0289)

(0.0165)

(0.0149)

(0.0496)

(0.0517)

-0.0350***

-0.0337***

-0.0428

-0.0436

-0.0361**

-0.0351**

0.0105

0.0137

(0.0081)

(0.0074)

(0.0323)

(0.0323)

(0.0178)

(0.0164)

(0.0633)

(0.0647)

Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.851

0.865

0.531

0.534

0.841

0.875

.

.

24,241

24,177

24,178

24,137

24,216

24,177

23,387

23,326

Treated 2003

– 50 –

Treated 2004

Treated 2006

Treated 2007

Treated 2008

R
N

2

Appendix Table A7: Gender Pay Gap Disclosure and Firm Outcomes: Diff-in-Disc Estimates
The table shows the diff-in-disc estimates of the impact of the law on firm outcomes following Grembi,
Nannicini, and Troiano (2016). We include firms with 1-100 employees (i.e., bandwidth of 65) for the
years 2003-2008. Employment is measured in year T − 1. The dependent variables are the logarithm
of wages per employee (column 1), the logarithm of pension and social security expenses per employee
(column 2), the logarithm of sales per employee (column 3), and profits per employee (column 4).
Detailed descriptions of the variables are given in Table A1. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

Employee Number in Year T-1
Wages / Emp.

Labor Cost / Emp.

Sales / Emp.

Profits / Emp.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0083*

0.0356

-0.0022

132.4744

(0.0044)

(0.0241)

(0.0152)

(102.5967)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R2

0.934

0.608

0.864

0.809

N

46,974

46,485

46,862

45,477

Diff-in-Disc

Firm FE

– 51 –

Appendix Table A8: Diff-in-diff Heterogeneity: Firm Gender Pay Gap
This table reports the effects of gender pay gap disclosure on employee wages, depending on the firm
pre-treatment level of the gender pay gap. pre_gap is an indicator that takes values from 1 to 10
for the lowest and highest deciles, respectively, of the firm-level pre-treatment “unexplained” gender
pay gap. Each column presents coefficients from a different multivariate regression. Column 1 (2) is
estimated using only male (female) employees. Columns 3 and 4 use the entire sample. The dependent
variable is employee annual wage (log transformed). Treated is a dummy that takes the value of 1
for individuals working in firms with 35-50 employees before the introduction of the law, and 0 for
individuals in firms with 20-34 employees. Post takes a value of 1 for 2006, 2007, and 2008, and a
value of 0 for years 2003, 2004, and 2005. Detailed descriptions of the variables are given in Table A1.
Standard errors are double clustered at the individual and the firm level and reported in parentheses.
***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Treated x Post

Post x pre_gap

Male

Female

All

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0012

-0.0010

-0.0012

(0.0129)

(0.0144)

(0.0144)

0.0011

0.0041***

0.0041***

(0.0014)

(0.0015)

(0.0015)

Male x Post

Treated x Post x Male

Male x Post x pre_gap

Treated x Post x pre_gap

0.0176*

0.0111

(0.0100)

(0.0094)

0.0026

0.0216

(0.0171)

(0.0153)

-0.0030

-0.0032*

(0.0019)

(0.0018)

-0.0038*

-0.0006

-0.0006

(0.0022)

(0.0024)

(0.0024)

Treated x Post x Male x pre_gap

-0.0033

-0.0053**

(0.0030)

(0.0027)

Person x Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Firm x Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

R2

0.877

0.829

0.869

0.885

N

69,035

44,655

113,690

113,499

– 52 –

Appendix Table A9: Diff-in-Diff Heterogeneity: The Effect of Having Children
This table reports the effects of gender pay gap disclosure on employee wages depending on whether
they have children. Have Children is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if an individual has
children, and 0 if otherwise. Each column presents coefficients from a different multivariate regression.
Column 1 (2) is estimated using only male (female) employees. Columns 3 and 4 use the entire sample.
The dependent variable is employee annual wage (log transformed). Treated is a dummy that takes the
value of 1 for individuals working in firms with 35-50 employees before the introduction of the law, and
0 for individuals in firms with 20-34 employees. Post takes a value of 1 for 2006, 2007, and 2008, and 0
for years 2003, 2004, and 2005. Detailed descriptions of the variables are given in Table A1. Standard
errors are double clustered at the individual and the firm level and reported in parentheses. ***, **,
and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Treated x Post

Post x Have Children

Treated x Post x Have Children

Male

Female

All

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0324***

0.0128

0.0129

(0.0085)

(0.0116)

(0.0116)

-0.1105***

-0.0476***

-0.0469***

-0.0342***

(0.0054)

(0.0078)

(0.0078)

(0.0077)

0.0233***

-0.0126

-0.0127

-0.0120

(0.0085)

(0.0121)

(0.0120)

(0.0112)

0.0428***

0.0404 ***

(0.0085)

(0.0086)

-0.0453***

-0.0399***

(0.0134)

(0.0127)

-0.0638***

-0.0620***

(0.0091)

(0.0091)

0.0359**

0.0339**

(0.0141)

(0.0134)

Male x Post

Treated x Post x Male

Male x Post x Have Children

Treated x Post x Male x Have Children

Person-Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Firm x Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

R2

0.870

0.827

0.867

0.885

N

145,852

79,532

225,384

223,624

– 53 –

II

Law Details
This section provides more information regarding the law. We include a timeline

describing the law introduction and discuss the law implementation and compliance.
We gathered information from several sources, including the original law, news articles,
an evaluation survey conducted by the Ministry of Employment, and a major employer
organization. Finally, we verified the information with a Danish law firm that specializes
in labor law.

II.1

Timeline

Below, we present a detailed timeline of the law introduction:

• January 2005: A snap election was announced on January 18, 2005, one year earlier
than scheduled, and took place on February 8, 2005. Although the governing party
was regarded as the front-runner, uncertainty existed regarding the reelection. The
day before the election, the two main polls predicted reelection with 52.4% and
52.9% of the votes, respectively.
• February 2005: During the campaign for the snap election, the leading governing
party, Venstre, promised to reduce the gender pay gap by introducing a law that
would require firms with more than 35 employees to produce gender-disaggregated
wage statistics.
• October 2005: The re-elected government announced it would introduce a bill to
amend the Equal Pay Act.
• December 2005: Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen presented at his weekly
press conference the government’s bill on gender-disaggregated wage statistics and
also introduced the bill to the Parliament.
• June 2006: The proposal was voted and adopted on June 9, 2006. The proposal

– 54 –

passed by a majority of 24 that voted it through (out of 179 members of parliament).
• January 2007: The new provisions came into force. The first gender-based wage
statistic produced by companies should cover 12 months starting no later than
January 1st , 2007.

II.2

Implementation

The initial announcement related to the legislation took place during the electoral
campaign in February 2005 and was widely reported by news agencies.26 . Although this
announcement emphasized only the 35-employee cutoff, the actual law stated that an
employer with a minimum of 35 employees and at least 10 employees of each gender
within an occupation classification code (six-digit DISCO code) must each year prepare
gender-segregated wage statistics for the purpose of consulting and informing the employees of wage gaps between men and women in the firm. Firms needed to disclose once
per year for every year they met the requirements of the law. The law did not specify
the exact wage measure the firm had to construct (but it specified it had to be at the
occupation and gender level). The firm could decide what wage statistic to compute but
had to explain in a report how the wage statistic was constructed and had to make sure
the wage statistic was transparent to “allow comparison of women’s and men’s wages in
a meaningful way”. Moreover, firms needed to consistently use the same wage statistic
throughout their report to allow comparability.
To obtain information on the wage statistic that firms more commonly used in practice as well as the way firms implemented the policy, we gathered information from two
sources: the Danish Employer Confederation (DA) and an evaluation study that the
Ministry for Employment conducted (SFI report, Holt and Larsen, 2011) in 2009, three
years after the law passage.27 The SFI evaluation report was based on a questionnaire
26

e.g., Politiken (2005); Bureau (2005).

27

The Ministry for Employment commissioned The Danish National Centre for Social Research (SFI)

– 55 –

survey sent to management and employee representatives in 740 companies that, according to Statistics Denmark, were covered by the law.28 We also reached out to one of
Denmark’s largest employer associations, the Danish Employer Confederation (DA), in
order to obtain more information on what statistic firms more commonly constructed.
According to these sources, the most common statistics were the percentage differences
in wages and mean wages for men and women in the same occupation.
The statistics had to be provided by gender and occupation. However, companies
expressed in the SFI evaluation report “that the DISCO codes are difficult to work
with”. To get around the issue that the 10-10 requirement may not be satisfied, one
survey respondent mentioned that firms tend to design their own groups: “What they
[HR] do is that, for example, suppose there is a large IT department with 30 people
-22 men and 8 women. Since there is not 10 of each, they are grouped with another
department (or similar).” Another firm mentioned it reported each individual’s wage
statistics (i.e, not following the DISCO group recommendation).
The gender wage statistics are typically made available to both management and
employee representatives. The management and the employee representatives are then
responsible for informing the employees and giving them the opportunity to express their
views on the statistics. Most companies informed representatives and employees through
the collaboration committee meeting between leaders and employees (Samarbejds Udvalg/ Medbestemmelse og MEdindflydels ) or the HR department.
Finally, in terms of enforcement, according to the law, “If a company does not meet
the legal requirements, the employer can be punishable by a fine. Anyone will be in
the position to report to the police if one thinks that an employer does not comply
with the law. The police are then responsible to investigate and determine if there are
to conduct an evaluation of the law.
28

The collection of data consisted of an online form with phone follow-up. The response rate was 61
percent.

– 56 –

grounds to press charges”. To the best of our knowledge, no company has been fined.29
Nevertheless, according to newspaper articles, employer organizations and their legal
advisors were threatening with lawsuits if firms did not comply with the law (Politiken,
2007).

29

However, a fine is only made public if a business does not accept it, in which case the matter will
be settled in court.

– 57 –

Internet Appendix to
"Do Firms Respond to Gender Pay Gap Disclosure?"

Morten Bennedsen, Elena Simintzi, Margarita Tsoutsoura, and Daniel Wolfenzon

– 58 –

Figure IA1: McCrary Plots before and after the Law
The plots present results of the McCrary (2008) test, which tests for the continuity in the densities of
the running variable at the 35-employee cutoff. Sub-figure (a) presents the plot for years 2003-2005, and
sub-figure (b) for years 2006-2008.

(a) McCrary 2003 - 2005

(b) McCrary 2006 - 2008

– 59 –

Figure IA2: Diff-in-Disc Estimates by Bandwidth
We repeat the main diff-in-disc estimates of Table 5 for bandwidths 15-110 for males (a) and females
(b) separately. The solid line plots the estimated coefficients, and the dotted lines represent the 95%
confidence interval.

(a) RDD Pre Post Bandwidth Stabilization Male

(b) RDD Pre Post Bandwidth Stabilization Female

– 60 –

Table IA1: Diff-in-Diff Sample: Pre-Treatment Industry Distribution
This table reports the industry composition of our diff-in-diff sample based on the unique number of
firms in 2005 (one year prior to the law passage). We classify firms into 9 industries according to the
Statistics Denmark industry classification code: 1. Agriculture, fishing, quarrying; 2. Manufacturing;
3. Electricity, gas and water supply; 4. Construction; 5. Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, restaurants;
6. Transport, post and telecommunications; 7. Finance and business activities; 8. Public and personal
services; 9. Activity not stated.
All
9-Cat Industry

Treated

Control

No. of Firms

%

No. of Firms

%

No. of Firms

%

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1,008

28.83

374

32.13

634

27.19

423

12.10

143

12.29

280

12.01

1,374

39.30

427

36.68

947

40.61

6: Telecom

186

5.32

71

6.10

115

4.93

7: Finance

505

14.45

149

12.80

356

15.27

3,496

100

1,164

100

2,332

100

2: Manufacturing
4: Construction
5: Retail

Total

– 61 –

Table IA2: Diff-in-Diff: Sample Restriction to Control for Employee Composition Changes
This table repeats Table 3, except the sample includes only observations in which the employee works at the same firm as he did in 2005.
Standard errors are double clustered at the individual and the firm level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Treated x Post

Male

Female

All

All

Male

Female

All

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0152***

0.0024

0.0024

-0.0146***

0.0031

0.0031

(0.0039)

(0.0045)

(0.0045)

(0.0038)

(0.0044)

(0.0044)

Male x Post

– 62 –

Treated x Post x Male

-0.0029

-0.0053

-0.0038

-0.0057

(0.0035)

(0.0036)

(0.0034)

(0.0035)

-0.0176***

-0.0131**

-0.0178***

-0.0129**

(0.0052)

(0.0052)

(0.0052)

(0.0052)

Person x Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Firm x Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Individual Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

0.871

0.828

0.869

0.889

0.870

0.827

0.869

0.888

110,034

58,672

168,706

166,865

109,747

58,398

168,145

166,307

R
N

2

Table IA3: Diff-in-Diff: Industry Treatment Intensity
This table reports whether gender pay gap disclosure has spillover effects on control firms. We measure whether control firms operate in
industries with high treatment intensity. We classify industries by the percentage of employees working on firms with more than 35 employees
pre-treatment. We define Industry Treatment Intensity to be 1 if the firm operates in an industry where the percentage of employees treated
in the industry is above the sample median, and 0 otherwise. The sample includes only control firms, those firms with 20-34 employees. The
dependent variable is wages (log-transformed). Columns 1 and 5 (2 and 6) are estimated using only male (female) employees. All other columns
use the entire sample. Post takes a value of 1 for 2006, 2007, and 2008, and 0 for years 2003, 2004, and 2005. Individual controls include employee
work experience and age. Firm controls include sales (log-transformed). We classify firms into 27 industries according to the Statistics Denmark
industry classification code. Standard errors are double clustered at the individual and the firm level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and *
correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Industry Treatment Intensity x Post

– 63 –

Male

Female

All

All

Male

Female

All

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0375*

-0.0388*

-0.0377

-0.0421**

-0.0395*

-0.0370*

(0.0202)

(0.0235)

(0.0234)

(0.0177)

(0.0227)

(0.0225)

Male x Post

Industry Treatment Intensity x Male

Industry Treatment Intensity x Post x Male

-0.0024

0.0000

0.0004

0.0015

(0.0173)

(0.0172)

(0.0164)

(0.0168)

0.0591

-0.0166

0.0316

-0.0376

(0.0695)

(0.0719)

(0.0649)

(0.0723)

0.0001

-0.0070

-0.0049

-0.0094

(0.0293)

(0.0287)

(0.0276)

(0.0281)

Person x Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Firm x Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Individual Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

R2

0.860

0.827

0.860

0.881

0.865

0.829

0.863

0.883

N

81,755

44,773

126,528

125,186

81,399

44,468

125,867

124,526

Table IA4: Diff-in-Diff: Employee Hours Worked and Hourly Wages
This table repeats Table 3, but uses employee hours worked (log-transformed) in Panel A, and hourly wages (log-transformed) in Panel B, as the
dependent variables. The measure of hourly wages comes from a mandated pension scheme—Arbejdsmarkedets Tillaegspension (ATP)—that
requires all employers to contribute on behalf of their employees based on individual hours worked. Standard errors are double clustered at the
individual and the firm level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

Panel A: Employee Hours Worked (log-transformed)

Treated x Post

Male

Female

All

All

Male

Female

All

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0167**

-0.0215**

-0.0215**

-0.0148*

-0.0206**

-0.0206**

(0.0078)

(0.0094)

(0.0094)

(0.0077)

(0.0093)

(0.0093)

– 64 –

Male x Post

Treated x Post x Male

-0.0095

-0.0027

-0.0102

-0.0026

(0.0071)

(0.0041)

(0.0071)

(0.0041)

0.0049

0.0052

0.0058

0.0054

(0.0093)

(0.0063)

(0.0092)

(0.0062)

Person-Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Firm x Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Individual Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

R2

0.419

0.490

0.455

0.640

0.421

0.492

0.456

0.641

N

145,855

79,532

225,387

223,627

145,265

79,027

224,292

222,532

Panel B: Employee Hourly Wages (log-transformed)

Treated x Post

Male

Female

All

All

Male

Female

All

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0116***

0.0018

0.0018

-0.0106***

0.0023

0.0023

(0.0030)

(0.0033)

(0.0033)

(0.0030)

(0.0033)

(0.0033)

Male x Post

Treated x Post x Male

– 65 –

0.0080***

0.0092***

0.0074***

0.0090***

(0.0026)

(0.0025)

(0.0026)

(0.0025)

-0.0133***

-0.0126***

-0.0130***

-0.0125***

(0.0039)

(0.0038)

(0.0039)

(0.0038)

Person x Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Firm x Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Individual Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

R2

0.912

0.892

0.913

0.931

0.912

0.893

0.913

0.931

N

145,720

79,465

225,185

223,424

145,131

78,963

224,094

222,333

Table IA5: Diff-in-Diff: Employee Total Compensation
This table repeats Table 3 for two subsets of employees: those who received bonus compensation at least one year in our sample period (Panel
A) and those who never received a bonus in our sample period (Panel B). In Panel A, the dependent variable is employee total compensation,
wages, and bonuses (log-transformed). In Panel B, the dependent variable is employee wages. The employee bonus variable includes irregular
payments including bonus, grants, commissions, etc. Standard errors are double clustered at the individual and the firm level and reported in
parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Ever Received Bonus

Treated x Post

Male

Female

All

All

Male

Female

All

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0128***

0.0009

0.0008

-0.0099**

0.0032

0.0035

(0.0045)

(0.0054)

(0.0054)

(0.0041)

(0.0051)

(0.0050)

– 66 –

Male x Post

Treated x Post x Male

-0.0004

-0.0014

0.0003

-0.0005

(0.0041)

(0.0042)

(0.0039)

(0.0040)

-0.0137**

-0.0125**

-0.0137**

-0.0129**

(0.0061)

(0.0060)

(0.0058)

(0.0058)

Person-Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Firm x Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Individual Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

R2

0.867

0.834

0.868

0.890

0.872

0.838

0.872

0.893

N

104,484

54,298

158,782

156,175

104,077

53,948

158,025

155,424

Panel B: Never Received Bonus

Treated x Post

Male

Female

All

All

Male

Female

All

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0224***

0.0032

0.0034

-0.0189***

0.0031

0.0031

(0.0071)

(0.0083)

(0.0082)

(0.0063)

(0.0078)

(0.0077)

Male x Post

Treated x Post x Male

– 67 –

-0.0051

-0.0090

-0.0074

-0.0110

(0.0068)

(0.0075)

(0.0065)

(0.0071)

-0.0257**

-0.0158

-0.0223**

-0.0127

(0.0101)

(0.0109)

(0.0095)

(0.0104)

Person-Firm FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Firm x Year FE

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Individual Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firm Controls

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

R2

0.861

0.811

0.855

0.887

0.864

0.812

0.858

0.888

N

48,524

28,773

77,297

74,102

48,323

28,583

76,906

73,732

Table IA6: Diff-in-Disc Robustness: T-1 and T-2
We repeat the main diff-in-disc estimates of Table 5 in columns 1-2. In columns 3-4, we instead define
employment based on years T-2. Standard errors are double clustered at the individual and the firm
level and reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

T-1

T-2

Male

Female

Male

Female

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0114***

0.0032

-0.0133***

-0.0010

(0.0043)

(0.0052)

(0.0046)

(0.0054)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R2

0.850

0.803

0.850

0.805

N

328,659

191,461

330,433

190,904

Diff-in-Disc

Firm FE

– 68 –

Table IA7: Covariate Balance
We estimate an RDD model with individual (panel A) and firm (panel B) characteristics as outcomes.
The model fits a different third-degree polynomial on employment at each side of the discontinuity.
Data are from the period before the implementation of the law (2003-2005). We include firms with
1-100 employees (i.e., bandwidth of 65). Employee number is defined as of year T-1. Standard errors
are double clustered at firm and employee levels for individual covariates in Panel A and clustered at
the firm level for firm covariates in Panel B. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and
* correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Individual-Level Covariate Balance
Age

Education

Gender

Work Experience

Has Child

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.3174

-0.0152

0.0044

-0.2452

-0.0330

(0.3697)

(0.0193)

(0.0161)

(0.3685)

(0.0292)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R2

0.001

0.002

0.001

0.001

0.001

N

290,854

285,349

291,472

291,638

291,639

Over 35 Employees

Year FE

Panel B: Firm-Level Covariate Balance
Profits

Female Proportion

Assets

Sales

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

220.4412

-0.0157

2372.3869

-783.3038

(289.8334)

(0.0160)

(2212.7116)

(1145.1933)

R2

0.000

0.016

0.014

0.122

N

22,777

23,460

23,460

23,460

Over 35 Employees

– 69 –

Table IA8: Diff-in-Diff: Wages of Joiners and Leavers
The table reports the effects of gender pay gap disclosure on whether high- or low-paid employees leave
and join the firm. Each column presents coefficients from a different multivariate regression. Columns
1 and 4 (2 and 5) are estimated using only male (female) employees. Columns 3 and 6 use the entire
sample. The dependent variable in columns 1-3 is the employee annual wage (log transformed) the
year before leaving the firm (T-1). The dependent variable in columns 4-6 is the employee annual wage
(log transformed) the year after joining the firm (T+1). Treated is a dummy that takes the value of
1 for individuals working in firms with 35-50 employees before the introduction of the law, and 0 for
individuals in firms with 20-34 employees. Post takes a value of 1 for 2006, 2007, and 2008 and 0
for years 2003, 2004, and 2005. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm level and reported
in parentheses. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

Leavers

Post

Treated

Treated x Post

Male

Female

All

Male

Female

All

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0353***

0.0409***

0.0409***

0.0432***

0.0690***

0.0690***

(0.0114)

(0.0131)

(0.0131)

(0.0118)

(0.0123)

(0.0123)

0.0371**

0.0095

0.0095

0.0398**

0.0247

0.0247

(0.0160)

(0.0177)

(0.0177)

(0.0164)

(0.0176)

(0.0176)

-0.0058

-0.0049

-0.0049

-0.0206

-0.0337*

-0.0337*

(0.0191)

(0.0214)

(0.0214)

(0.0180)

(0.0197)

(0.0197)

Male

Post x Male

Male x Treated

Treated x Post x Male

Firm FE
R
N

2

Joiners

0.2246***

0.2045***

(0.0118)

(0.0116)

-0.0055

-0.0258*

(0.0152)

(0.0147)

0.0276

0.0151

(0.0191)

(0.0190)

-0.0009

0.0131

(0.0248)

(0.0219)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.003

0.002

0.067

0.004

0.007

0.070

17,933

10,082

28,015

16,515

10,072

26,587

– 70 –

