                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                    CAPITALISTS IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY

                                        Matthew Smith
                                        Danny Yagan
                                        Owen M. Zidar
                                         Eric Zwick

                                     Working Paper 25442
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25442


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 2019, Revised June 2019


This work does not necessarily reflect the views of the US Treasury Department or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Alan Auerbach, Tom Brennan, Jediphi Cabal, Curtis
Carlson, Raj Chetty, Steve Cicala, Michael Cooper, Roger Gordon, John Guyton, Bob Hall,
Barry Johnson, Greg Kaplan, Steve Kaplan, Henrik Kleven, Pat Kline, Adam Looney, Jay
MacKie, John McClelland, Kevin Murphy, Neale Mahoney, James Pearce, Jim Poterba,
Rich Prisinzano, Emmanuel Saez, Jesse Shapiro, David Splinter, Larry Summers, Mike
Weber, Matt Weinzierl, Gabriel Zucman, and anonymous referees as well as seminar and
conference participants for helpful conversations on this draft. We thank Tom Cui, Katie
Donnelly Moran, Clancy Green, Sam Karlin, Stephanie Kestelman, Carl McPherson,
Francesco Ruggieri, Karthik Srinivasan, John Wieselthier, and Caleb Wroblewski for
excellent research assistance. Yagan gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
Laura and John Arnold Foundation. Zidar and Zwick gratefully acknowledge financial
support from Chicago Booth's Initiative on Global Markets (IGM), the Kauffman
Foundation, and the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. Zidar also gratefully
acknowledges support from the Kathryn and Grant Swick Faculty Research Fund at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business and National Science Foundation under
Grant Number 1752431, and Zwick gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
Neubauer Family Foundation, the Polsky Center, and the Hultquist Faculty Research Endowment
at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Matthew Smith, Danny Yagan, Owen M. Zidar, and Eric Zwick. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Capitalists in the Twenty-First Century
Matthew Smith, Danny Yagan, Owen M. Zidar, and Eric Zwick
NBER Working Paper No. 25442
January 2019, Revised June 2019
JEL No. D31

                                         ABSTRACT

How important is human capital at the top of the U.S. income distribution? A primary source of
top income is private “pass-through” business profit, which can include entrepreneurial labor
income for tax reasons. This paper asks whether top pass-through profit mostly reflects human
capital, defined as all inalienable factors embodied in business owners, rather than financial
capital. Tax data linking 11 million firms to their owners show that top pass-through profit
accrues to working-age owners of closely-held, mid-market firms in skill-intensive industries.
Pass-through profit falls by three-quarters after owner retirement or premature death. Classifying
three-quarters of pass-through profit as human capital income, we find that the typical top earner
derives most of her income from human capital, not financial capital. Growth in pass-through
profit is explained by both rising productivity and a rising share of value added accruing to
owners.

Matthew Smith                                   Owen M. Zidar
Office of Tax Analysis                          Department of Economics &
U.S. Department of the Treasury                 Woodrow Wilson School
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW                    Princeton University
Washington, D.C. 20220                          237 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
matthew.smith@treasury.gov                      Princeton, NJ 08544
                                                and NBER
Danny Yagan                                     ozidar@princeton.edu
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley              Eric Zwick
530 Evans Hall, #3880                           Booth School of Business
Berkeley, CA 94720                              University of Chicago
and NBER                                        5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
yagan@berkeley.edu                              Chicago, IL 60637
                                                and NBER
                                                ezwick@chicagobooth.edu
      [The human capital hypothesis] is far less consequential than one might imagine.
      . . . “non-human” capital seems almost as indispensable in the twenty-first century
      as it was in the eighteenth or nineteenth, and there is no reason why it may not
      become even more so. —Thomas Piketty (2014)

    In the last few decades of the twentieth century, the primary driver of rising top incomes
was wage income growth (Piketty and Saez, 2003). Since then, rising capital income has
shifted focus to the role of capital and financial wealth (Piketty, Saez and Zucman, 2018).1
Understanding the nature of top incomes is essential for explaining their evolution and
assessing policy implications. Are America’s top earners financial-capital rich—those who
derive most of their income from non-human capital—or are they human-capital rich—
entrepreneurs and wage earners who derive most of their income from their human capital?
    This paper uses de-identified administrative tax data to characterize top incomes and
their rise in the twenty-first century. Throughout the paper, we measure income using
both directly observed fiscal income from tax returns following Piketty and Saez (2003) and
imputed national income following Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) (henceforth PSZ).2 We
first establish how much top earners make from three broad sources: wage income, business
income, and other capital income such as interest and rent payments. In 2014, most income
at the very top is non-wage income, the primary source of which is business income.
    Most top business income comes from private “pass-through” businesses that are not
taxed at the entity level; instead, income passes through to the owners who pay taxes on their
share of the firm’s income. This feature allows us to build a new dataset linking pass-through
firms (S-corporations and partnerships, defined below) to their owners for 11 million firms
between 2001 and 2014. This dataset enables us to ask whether top pass-through income
should primarily be thought of as human capital income accruing to entrepreneurs or as
financial capital income accruing to investors. We define human capital broadly to refer
to all inalienable factors embodied in business owners, including labor supply, networks,
reputation, and rent-extraction ability. Overall, we find that top earners are predominantly
human-capital rich rather than financial-capital rich, and that 53% of top 1% income accrues
to the human capital of these wage earners and entrepreneurs.
    The first part of the paper describes who earns business income and the salient features
   1
     Piketty (2014) analyzes how capital accumulation can lead to increasing inequality. Karabarbounis and
Neiman (2014) document rising capital shares. Saez and Zucman (2016) use capitalized income flows to show
that wealth concentration in the U.S. has been increasing, in contrast to the flat path of wealth concentration
based on estate tax returns in Kopczuk and Saez (2004). Piketty and Zucman (2014) document rising capital-
output ratios. Rognlie (2016) and Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2017) discuss interpretations.
   2
     Fiscal income equals total tax return income minus realized capital gains and is measured at the house-
hold level. Imputed national income (“Distributional National Accounts”) includes additional imputed
components of national income and is measured at the individual level. Section 1 contains more detail.


                                                      2
of their firms. The data reveal a striking world of business owners who prevail at the top of
the income distribution. Most top earners are pass-through business owners. In 2014, over
69% of the top 1% and over 84% of the top 0.1% earn some pass-through business income.
In absolute terms, that amounts to over 1.1M pass-through owners with fiscal income over
$390K and 140,000 pass-through owners with fiscal income over $1.6M. In both number
and aggregate income, these groups far surpass that of top public company executives,
who have been the focus of much inequality commentary (see Edmans and Gabaix (2016)
for a survey). Typical firms owned by the top 1-0.1% are single-establishment firms in
professional services (e.g., consultants, lawyers, specialty tradespeople) or health services
(e.g., physicians, dentists). A typical firm owned by the top 0.1% is a regional business with
$20M in sales and 100 employees, such as an auto dealer, beverage distributor, or a large
law firm.
    Most pass-through business income accrues to undiversified, working-age owners of mid-
market firms in skill-intensive industries. Specifically, an individual’s pass-through income
typically derives from one firm with one to three owners and amounts to a large share of
her total income. The age distribution of these owners closely mirrors that of high-income
wage earners; in contrast, the owners of more passive forms of capital skew much older. Most
pass-through business income derives from firms with $5M to $500M in sales operating across
diverse geographies and sectors. Despite this diversity, most profits are earned in relatively
labor-intensive industries, especially in those that demand skilled labor. In contrast, non-
pass-through businesses (C-corporations) are more prevalent in manufacturing and capital-
intensive industries, with profits concentrated among firms with more than $500M in sales.
Together, these facts support the notion that most top pass-through earners are human-
capital rich.
    The second part of the paper uses quasi-experimental event studies to quantify the extent
to which pass-through profits reflect returns to owner human capital rather than to non-
human financial capital. The ideal experiment would be to measure the profit impact of
exogenously forcing pass-through owners to withdraw their human capital from their firms.
We approximate this ideal with two natural experiments: one measures the profit impact of
owner deaths and another measures the profit impact of owner retirements.
    In the first natural experiment, we identify non-elderly owners who died 2005–2010 and
who earned over one million dollars in the year before their death. We then match their
firms to similar counterfactual firms that did not experience an owner death. Profits at
owner-death firms track counterfactual firms closely in the pre-period then fall immediately
and persistently upon owner death. The effect is an 82% decline in firm profits.
    In the second natural experiment, we study the event of owner retirement, inferred when


                                              3
the firm transitions from four straight years of paying at least one owner W-2 wages to two
years of paying no owner wages. The presumption is that these owners replace themselves
with non-owner managers whose compensation is entirely reported as wages and bonuses, not
profits. Profits at owner-retirement firms track counterfactual firms closely in the pre-period
then fall immediately and persistently upon owner retirement. The effect is an 83% decline in
firm profits. Our baseline specification is equal weighted. Dollar-weighted approaches deliver
similar estimates, although the standard errors do increase with dollar-weighting. Averaging
our estimates across top 1%, million-dollar-earner, and top 0.1% groups, we conclude that
approximately three-quarters of top pass-through profits are returns to owner human capital.
    Pass-through owners have a tax incentive to receive their compensation as profits rather
than wages and bonuses, while owners of traditional C-corporations do not. We find that
firms that switch from C-corporation form to pass-through form reduce wage bills and in-
crease profits. This result provides evidence consistent with a tax explanation of pass-through
profits reflecting returns to owner human capital.
    We use our three-quarters estimate for the labor (human capital) share of pass-through
income to conduct a person-level analysis of top earners. Is the typical top earner a human
capitalist or a financial capitalist? That is, if you run into a very high earner on the street,
does she likely earn most of her income from labor income or from capital income? When
ignoring pass-through income, a minority of top earners are human-capital rich. However,
when defining labor income as wages plus three-quarters of pass-through income, this as-
sessment reverses: most top earners are human-capital rich, not financial-capital rich. For
example, among million-dollar earners in imputed national income, 67% derive most of their
income from labor income but only 35% derive most of their income from wages alone.
Hence, the human capital component of pass-through income transforms one’s view of the
typical top earner.
    Some individuals with wage and pass-through income may provide little human capital
services, perhaps drawing a salary or ownership share from a family firm as a way to avoid
estate taxes. To address this consideration, we use the parent-child links of Chetty, Friedman,
Saez, Turner and Yagan (2019) to classify whether individuals aged 32-34 are “self-made,”
which we conservatively define as top earners whose parents were not in the top 1%. These
individuals are unlikely to receive large financial inheritances or inter vivos gifts. We find
that more than 75% of top earners in the parent-linked sample are self-made.
    We also use our three-quarters estimate to conduct a novel aggregate analysis of top
income. How much is labor income? How much is entrepreneurial income (pass-through
income plus W-2 wages paid to owners)? And how do these amounts compare to other
income components? While dollar-level aggregates are more uncertain, two findings stand


                                               4
out. First, holding other assumptions constant, our classification of three-quarters of pass-
through income as labor income reduces the top capital share in imputed national income
by eight percentage points from 55% to 47%.3 Second, top entrepreneurial income and
its human capital component are large. In every top income group and income definition,
entrepreneurial income rivals or exceeds both non-owner wage income and non-pass-through
capital income. The human capital component of entrepreneurial income itself exceeds top
public equity income.
    To complement our cross-sectional analysis of top incomes, we conclude by investigating
the evolution of top entrepreneurial income, which has risen substantially over time. We use
our linked firm-owner-worker data to decompose the growth of top entrepreneurial income
and shed light on how it has increased since 2001. Approximately 30% of the growth in
entrepreneurial income reflects businesses reorganizing from C-corporation to pass-through
form. Adjusting for this fact, we find no role for a larger workforce in driving higher en-
trepreneurial income. Instead, both labor productivity and a rising share of value added
accruing to owners account for the growth of top entrepreneurial income. Thus, explain-
ing the rise of top entrepreneurial income requires both a growing pie and an expanding
owner-manager slice.
    This study’s main contribution is to the income inequality literature. Piketty and Saez
(2003) use fiscal income to show that labor drove the rise in top incomes in the second half of
the twentieth century. PSZ use imputed national income to find that capital has been driving
the rise since 2000 in top income and now exceeds labor income at the top. An innovation
of our paper relative to past work is that we use microdata to ask person-level in addition to
dollar-level questions. PSZ’s focus is a dollar-level analysis of top incomes, but their findings
raise the possibility that the financial-capital rich have displaced the human-capital rich
as the typical top earner.4 However, we find that the typical top earner is human-capital
rich. This finding depends crucially on how one treats top pass-through income—a large
component of top “capital” income and 30 to 40% of top 1% income. We classify 75% of
pass-through income as human capital income. In contrast, PSZ assume a labor share of 0%
for one type of pass-through income (S-corporation) and 70% for the rest (partnership and
other pass-through).
  3
     PSZ’s top 1% capital share is 55% in Figure VIIIb (based on data in Online Appendix Table TB2f,
which they use to discuss our paper in their Online Appendix C.2). PSZ also report an alternative top 1%
capital share of 59% in Figure VIIIa, which draws on data in Online Appendix Table TB2d that allocates
more pension income to capital for top earners.
   4
     PSZ occasionally provide person-level interpretations of their results: “[In] the post-World War II
decades, most top earners derived their income from assets. From the 1970s and 1990s, the fraction of
top earners deriving their income from work grew. This process culminated in 2000. . . Since then, the
capital share has bounced back.” (Piketty, Saez, and Zucman, pp.595–597, emphasis added).



                                                   5
    Our approach also affects conclusions about the composition of top incomes (i.e., for
dollar-level questions). Under our approach, the top 1% labor share of imputed national
income in 2014 increases from 45.4% in PSZ to 52.9%. Of the 7.6 percentage point change,
the S-corporation adjustment contributes 5.3 percentage points, the partnership and other
pass-through adjustment contributes 1.2 percentage points, and correcting an inaccurate
extrapolation in PSZ contributes 1.1 percentage points.5 Applied to the time series, our
classification yields qualitatively similar results to PSZ: the top 1% labor share rose from
the 1960s, peaked in 2000, and then returned to 1990 levels.
    Our findings draw attention to a class of entrepreneurs hidden from public view who
prevail among top earners and whose human capital income is key for understanding top
incomes. An important role for human capital is consistent with the view that the demand for
top human capital has outpaced its supply, with the returns to top human capital increasingly
taking the form of business income.6 However, we stress that returns to top owner-managers
need not be socially optimal and can include returns to unproductive behavior like rent-
seeking (Krueger, 1974; Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny, 1991) or returns to elite connections
(Fisman, 2001; Khwaja and Mian, 2005; Zimmerman, forthcoming).
    For the literature on rising firm profitability, we provide evidence on the relative impact of
productivity growth and the distribution of surplus between workers, managers, and owners.
Our finding that productivity explains an important part of entrepreneurial income growth
aligns with recent work emphasizing the role of efficiency improvements in driving firm
profitability (Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson and Van Reenen, 2017; De Loecker and Eeckhout,
2017). Entrepreneurial income is also increasing due to a rising share of value added accruing
to owners. In our data, the owners appear to be managers and key workers, which contrasts
with the separation of ownership and control in public company governance. Thus, our
results point to channels other than zero-sum bargaining between executives and corporate
boards for rising owner pay.7
    Our results inform three other literatures. First, a longstanding literature debates the rel-
ative importance of inherited wealth versus self-made wealth (Kotlikoff and Summers, 1981;
Modigliani, 1986; Piketty, 2011; Piketty, Postel-Vinay and Rosenthal, 2014). We use parent
   5
     In 2014, top 1% total income amounts to $3T in imputed national income, so these three adjustments
amount to $162B, $36B, and $33B, respectively. See Section 1 and Online Appendix D for additional
discussion.
   6
     See Katz and Murphy (1992), Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008), Goldin and Katz (2009), and Murphy
and Topel (2016) for some prominent articulations of this view. Kaplan and Rauh (2013) argue that the
broad-based rise in top incomes reflects market-driven forces, such as an increased return to skill.
   7
     Gabaix and Landier (2008), Piketty, Saez and Stantcheva (2014), and Piketty (2014) highlight the
role of bargaining for the growth of top executive pay among public and other companies with delegated
management. See Edmans and Gabaix (2016) for a survey of executive pay trends.



                                                  6
income to infer whether individuals are likely self-made. Second, we find that firm-level
variation in profitability amplifies measured top income inequality among firm owners, and
much of their human capital returns take the form of profits rather than wages.8 Third, we
contribute to a literature on the impact of taxes on economic measurement, the composition
of top incomes, and corporate organization, which we discuss in the conclusion.9
    Last, we make two methodological contributions that may improve distributional income
and wealth estimates. First, we provide an appendix that explores alternative methods for
imputing retained earnings to individuals. Second, top wealth estimates based on capitalized
income flows and a constant returns assumption can be improved by accounting for the higher
profitability of top-owned firms.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes the institutional background and
data. Section 2 documents the importance of pass-through income for top income inequality,
and then presents descriptive statistics on the prevalence of top pass-through ownership and
the sizes and industries of those businesses. Section 3 presents event studies, which estimate
whether and the extent to which pass-through profits reflect the return to owner human
capital. Section 4 uses these estimates to characterize top earners as human-capital rich or
financial-capital rich, to estimate the share of top earners that are self-made, and to quantify
top income shares by income source. Section 5 analyzes the evolution of top entreprenuerial
income and the contributions of changing labor productivity, scale, and factor shares. Section
6 concludes.


1       Institutional Background and Data
1.1     How U.S. Businesses Are Organized and Taxed
There are three major types of formal businesses: C-corporations, S-corporations, and part-
nerships. All three forms provide limited liability to their owners, but they differ in their
ownership rules, tax treatment, and profit measurement. C-corporations and partnerships
may be owned by individuals, businesses, non-profits, and foreigners, while S-corporations
    8
     An active literature documents firm- and industry-level variation in profitability and links firm perfor-
mance and wage inequality (Hall, 1988; Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson, 2008; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009;
Syverson, 2011; Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis, 1999; Card, Heining and Kline, 2013; Song, Price, Guvenen,
Bloom and von Wachter, forthcoming) as opposed to income inequality, which includes business income.
Fagereng, Guiso, Malacrino and Pistaferri (2016) document heterogeneous and persistent returns in Norway,
finding a key role for closely held firms at the top of the income distribution.
   9
     See, e.g., Gordon and MacKie-Mason (1994), Slemrod (1996), Mackie-Mason and Gordon (1997), Gordon
and Slemrod (2000), Alstadsaeter, Jacob, Kopczuk and Telle (2016), Auten and Splinter (2018), DeBacker
and Prisinzano (2015), Cooper, McClelland, Pearce, Prisinzano, Sullivan, Yagan, Zidar and Zwick (2016),
Clarke and Kopczuk (2017), Prisinzano and Pearce (2017), and Dyrda and Pugsley (2018).


                                                      7
face ownership restrictions. Firms with more than 100 owners, with owners who are not
U.S. individuals, or with more than one class of stock cannot be S-corporations. These re-
strictions bar public companies and corporations with complex ownership structures (such
as venture-capital-financed startups) from being S-corporations. Separate restrictions also
bar almost all partnerships from being publicly traded. Prominent pass-throughs include
the Hobby Lobby corporation, home improvement retailer Menards, Fidelity Investments,
and the U.S. arm of PricewaterhouseCoopers.
    C-corporations pay the corporate income tax on annual taxable income, and taxable
shareholders pay dividend taxes on dividends and pay capital gains taxes on gains realized
from selling shares. S-corporations and partnerships, collectively known as pass-through
businesses, pay no entity-level tax. Instead, taxable business income “passes through” to
shareholders’ tax returns where it is taxed as ordinary income in the year it is earned by
the firm. When actually distributed to owners, pass-through dividends are untaxed. Since
1986, pass-through income typically enjoys a lower tax burden than C-corporation income.10
As a result, most businesses—even those with over $500 million in revenue—are now pass-
throughs and most taxable business income is pass-through income, even though almost no
pass-throughs are publicly traded.11 Among pass-throughs, S-corporations generate more
business income than partnerships.
    Finally, organizational forms differ in how owner compensation is reported on tax returns.
The wages of S-corporation owners are legally required to be “reasonable” and to reflect the
market value of labor services, while profit is supposed to reflect residual earnings. However,
in practice, owner-managers enjoy considerable discretion in how their compensation is cat-
egorized as wages or profits. Owner-managers of C-corporations enjoy a lower tax burden
when paid in wages, but owner-managers of pass-throughs enjoy a lower burden when paid
in profit.12 See Online Appendix A for additional institutional detail.


1.2     Data on Top Incomes
We use two data series on the U.S. income distribution 1962-2014. Piketty, Saez and Zucman
(2018) (henceforth PSZ) assembled these data based on stratified random samples of personal
  10
     In the pre-2018 period we study, pass-throughs were strongly tax-advantaged. The 2017 Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act reduced taxes on both pass-throughs and C-corporations. There remains a clear tax preference for
pass-throughs in some industries and an ambiguous one in others.
  11
     By 2011, 54.2% of U.S. taxable business income was earned by formal pass-throughs and sole propri-
etorships (informal businesses also taxed at the owner level) and only 45.8% by C-corporations (Cooper,
McClelland, Pearce, Prisinzano, Sullivan, Yagan, Zidar and Zwick, 2016).
  12
     Legal rules mandate that most partnership owner compensation be reported as profits even when com-
pensation for labor supply. Owners of C-corporations avoid dividend taxation when paid in wages. Owners
of pass-throughs face no dividend tax and may avoid payroll taxation when paid in profits.


                                                   8
tax returns.
    Fiscal income is directly observed income on personal tax returns. We use the main fiscal
income definition of Piketty and Saez (2003) (henceforth PS), which measures fiscal income
at the level of the tax unit (typically a single adult or a married couple) and equals Form
1040 total income minus realized capital gains, unemployment compensation, and taxable
social security benefits. The series includes synthetic records for individuals who do not file
income tax returns, thereby reflecting the full U.S. adult population.
    Imputed national income (“Distributional National Income” in PSZ, sometimes INI) im-
putes components of national income not observed in personal tax data such as employer-
provided health insurance, rent from owner-occupied housing, and C-corporation retained
earnings (i.e., earnings not distributed to owners as dividends). We use PSZ’s main definition
which measures pre-tax-and-transfer imputed national income at the level of the individual
adult and equally splits each income component between spouses. Imputed national income
aggregates across individuals to equal national income (GDP minus capital depreciation plus
net income received from abroad) in the National Income and Product Accounts. See our
Online Appendix C for a comparison of our top pass-through statistics with PSZ’s Online
Appendix C.2, and Online Appendix D for a quantitively important correction that we make
to the published PSZ data.13 Note that national income includes unrealized capital gains in
the form of corporate retained earnings but not in the form of expectations-induced asset
price growth. Integrating such asset price effects into an analysis of inequality is a useful
direction for future research.
    Our analysis considers top 1% earners and several interesting subgroups, including million-
dollar earners and the top 0.1%. In 2014, the top 1% and top 0.1% thresholds in the fiscal
income series are $390K and $1.58M, respectively and in the imputed national income series
are $420K and $1.88M. We add the million-dollar-earner group as a salient midpoint between
the top 1% and top 0.1% groups.
    For each data series, we follow PS and PSZ in defining income sources. Within each series,
wages plus business income plus other capital income equals total income. For fiscal income,
wage income (sometimes “wages”) includes Form 1040 wages, salaries, and tips; pension dis-
tributions; and annuities. Pass-through income includes S-corporation income, partnership
income, and sole proprietor’s income. Entrepreneurial income equals pass-through income
plus owner wages, defined in the next subsection.14 Business income equals pass-through in-
  13
      Some exhibits and numbers in the published version of PSZ, including those described in their On-
line Appendix C.2 that discusses our paper, used an extrapolation for 2011 through 2014 that materially
underestimated top pass-through income. We have updated their series based on actual, unextrapolated
data.
   14
      We follow earlier work (e.g., Piketty and Saez 2003) in including all pass-through income as en-



                                                  9
come plus C-corporation dividends. Other capital income includes interest, rents, royalties,
and estate and trust income.
    For imputed national income, wages includes Form 1040 wages, salaries, and tips; im-
puted unreported wage compensation; payroll taxes; imputed nontaxable employee benefits
like employer-provided health insurance; a portion of sales and excise taxes; and a portion of
pension income. Pass-through income includes S-corporation income, partnership income,
sole proprietor’s income, imputed unreported income from unincorporated businesses, a por-
tion of sales and excise taxes, and a portion of corporate taxes. Business income equals
pass-through income plus C-corporation dividends, imputed C-corporation retained earn-
ings, a portion of sales and excise taxes, and a portion of corporate taxes. Entrepreneurial
income equals pass-through income plus owner wages, defined in the next subsection. Other
capital income includes interest, imputed underreported interest income, rents, imputed
rental income (including imputed rent from owner-occupied housing), a portion of sales and
excise taxes, and a portion of pension income.15
    Both we and PSZ classify wages as labor income (i.e., a return to human capital) and
classify other capital income as capital income (i.e., a return to financial or physical capital).
An important contribution of our paper is an estimate of the share of pass-through income
that is in fact labor income rather than capital income. PSZ assume that 0% of S-corporation
income is labor income and that 70% of the remainder of pass-through income is labor income.
We estimate below that 75% is labor income.16
    We present our income distribution findings in both fiscal income and imputed national
income. Fiscal income has the advantage of being directly observed on personal income tax
returns, but has the disadvantage of understating top capital income because some compo-
nents do not appear on personal tax returns. Imputed national income has the advantage
that it sums to national income, but has the disadvantage of relying on imputation assump-
trepreneurial income, even though some pass-through income accrues to non-founders. Note that hedge fund
and private equity pass-throughs earn much income in the form of dividends, retained earnings, interest,
and rental income. Such income retains its character as it flows through pass-through firms and is classified
as either C-corporation income or other capital income, not pass-through income which is exclusively an
operating profit concept.
  15
     With reference to PSZ’s top incomes decomposition (their Online Appendix Table TB2f), wages equals
Compensation of Employees plus Labor Component of Pension Income. Pass-through income equals S-
corporation Dividends plus the Capital and Labor Components of Mixed Income. Business income equals
pass-through income plus C-corporation Dividends plus C-corporation Retained Earnings. Other capital
income equals Interest and Rents plus Capital Component of Pension Income.
  16
     More specifically, PSZ assume that 70% of the remainder of pass-through income is labor income, but
tax adjustments under the assumption that business capital bears 100% of the non-housing capital tax yields
a final tax-inclusive labor share of approximately 65% in recent years (see their Figure VIIIb and Online
Appendix Tables TB2b and TB2f). Following their assumptions but using a 75% pretax labor share yields
a tax-inclusive labor share of 70% in our imputed national income analysis.



                                                     10
tions. PSZ employ several assumptions to impute missing national income to individual
adults—a path-breaking prototype to which they encourage ongoing refinement. Relevant
to our analysis, we believe the available evidence suggests that imputed national income may
overstate top capital income. These competing considerations motivate the presentation of
our findings in both series, likely (in our view) bounding the truth. Our qualitative results
hold in both series.
    Top capital income in imputed national income may be overstated because of the following
consideration regarding C-corporation retained earnings. When a C-corporation distributes
less in dividends than it makes in after-tax income, it retains earnings within the firm.17
Those retained earnings ($649B in 2014) are a substantial part of national income but do
not appear on personal tax returns and thus are not in fiscal income. PSZ allocate the
household share of aggregate retained earnings to individuals in proportion to the sum of
the individual’s observed dividends and realized capital gains. The rationale is that when
C-corporation income does appear on personal tax returns, it appears as either dividends or
realized capital gains. However, published IRS reports indicate that at least 25% and as much
as 75% of realized capital gains are not from the sale of C-corporate stock and are instead
gains from real estate and other asset sales or carried interest. This fact can explain how total
realized capital gains ($732B in 2014) vastly exceeds the total household share of retained
earnings ($306B in 2014). Realized capital gains are much larger than dividends and much
more concentrated among top earners. Hence, imputing retained earnings in proportion to
each individual’s sum of dividends and 100% of realized capital gains may allocate too much
retained earnings to top earners and not enough to lower earners.18 See Online Appendix
E for a full discussion and Online Appendix F for retained earnings imputations under
alternative assumptions.19


1.3     Data on Firms Linked to Owners and Workers
We construct a novel dataset on the universe of S-corporations and partnerships linked to
owners and workers using de-identified data from income tax records spanning 2001-2014.
  17
      Pass-throughs are measured as having no retained earnings, with effectively 100% dividends.
  18
      Saez and Zucman (2016) conduct a related analysis and report wealth estimates using dividends only.
Relative to using dividends alone, their Tables B35 and B37 imply that imputing wealth using dividends
and 100% of realized capital gains increases 2012 top 0.1% equity wealth by 28%. This adjustment modestly
increases total top 0.1% wealth, which is the primary focus of Saez and Zucman (2016), by 9.2% (p. 535).
   19
      It is valuable to note that all imputations have imperfections. For example, imputations of retained
earnings based on observed dividends and realized capital gains allocate too little to concentrated owners of
C-corporation stock that pay no dividends and are not sold and therefore too much to other owners. Direct
links of C-corporations to their owners would improve measurement, as in Norway (Alstadsaeter, Jacob,
Kopczuk and Telle, 2016).



                                                     11
Unlike the top incomes data, these data are available on the full population. We construct
these linked firm-owner-worker data as follows.
    We first merge the population of firm-level S-corporation business income tax returns
(Form 1120S) to the population of S-corporation information returns (Form 1120S, Schedule
K-1) that link the firms to their owners.20 We merge the 1120S records onto the K-1 records
by masked EIN to yield linked firm-owner data. We follow similar steps to construct the
partnership linkage to owners. Specifically, we merge the population of firm-level partnership
business income tax returns (Form 1065) to the population of partnership information returns
(Form 1065, Schedule K-1). Unlike S-corporations, partnerships can be owned by business
entities and by non-U.S. individuals. We focus on direct partnership-owner links in which
the partner is a U.S. individual.
    Then, for both S-corporations and partnerships, we further merge on information about
the owners and workers. We use Form 1040 to merge on each owner’s fiscal income. We use
data from W-2 forms to measure owner wages—W-2 wage payments from S-corporations
and partnerships to individual owners—and to calculate firm-level aggregates of the total
number of employees. We merge owner wages onto our top incomes data as mentioned in
the previous subsection.21
    The full sample comprises 158.8M firm-owner-year observations (71.8M S-corporation-
owner-year observations and 87.0M partnership-owner-year observations) on 11.1M firms
with positive sales (7.3M S-corporations and 3.9M partnerships) and with 22.6M owners
(9.8M S-corporation owners and 12.8M partnership owners). In 2014, the sample comprises
10.3M firm-owner-year observations (4.9M S-corporation-owner-year observations and 5.4M
partnership-owner-year observations) on 5.0M firms with positive sales (3.7M S-corporations
and 1.4M partnerships) and with 10.3M owners (4.9M S-corporation owners and 5.4M part-
nership owners).
    No data source systematically links C-corporations to their owners. To compare pass-
through activity to C-corporation activity, we supplement the linked data with the Statistics
of Income (SOI) sample of corporate income tax returns from 1980-2014.22 Together, these
  20
      These information returns list each owner’s share of the corporation’s income. S-corporations are required
to submit to the IRS a K-1 on behalf of each owner of the S-corporation when the corporation submits its
Form 1120S business income tax return. Each owner receives a copy of her K-1, which she uses to report
S-corporation income on her Form 1040, Schedule E, and compute her tax liability. Each 1120S includes the
firm’s masked Employer Identification Number (EIN), and each K-1 includes the firm’s masked EIN as well
as the owner’s masked Social Security Number (SSN).
   21
      Some firms deduct wages from their business tax returns but cannot be linked to any W-2s, for example
because they use a different employer identification number to file taxes and pay workers. We therefore
impute missing owner wages using the owner wages share of individual wages of similar firms’ owners. This
imputation is minor and used only for Figure 8 below. See Online Appendix B for details.
   22
      See Yagan (2015) and Zwick and Mahon (2017) for detail on these weighted, stratified random samples.



                                                      12
data provide a comprehensive account of the major forms of business activity in the United
States. Online Appendix B provides further variable definitions.


2     Business Income and Top Income Inequality
This section shows that business income is the most important source of income at the top of
the income distribution. Most top business income is pass-through income. We then describe
who earns pass-through income and the salient features of their firms: most pass-through
income accrues to working-age owners of mid-market firms in relatively skill-intensive indus-
tries. These descriptive facts are consistent with pass-through income reflecting the returns
to human capital.


2.1    The Sources of Top Income
How much do top earners make from wage income, business income, and other capital
income? Figure 1A plots the share of top earners in each income bin who earn the majority
of their income from each source. Figure 1B plots the share of aggregate income from
each source. Three patterns emerge. First, from the 90th to the 99th percentile of the
income distribution, wage income dominates business and other capital income. At the 90th
percentile of the income distribution, over four out of five people earn mostly wage income.
Wage income represents over 75 cents of every dollar earned by those at the 90th percentile
of the income distribution. Second, business income is much more prevalent higher up in the
income distribution. At the very top of the income distribution, wage income falls to 40%
of fiscal income (19% of INI) and business income accounts for 48% of fiscal income (56% of
INI). Third, other capital income is less important and amounts to 12% to 25% of income
at the very top. Fewer than one in six people in the 99.9th percentile derive most of their
income from interest, rents, and other capital income. Thus, at both the person-level and
dollar-level and regardless of income definition, the main source of income at the very top of
the income distribution is business income.
    Figure 1C decomposes the business income series into contributions from pass-through
business and C-corporation income. Both components’ share of income rises with income
rank, however pass-through income is more important than C-corporation income throughout
the distribution. At the top, pass-through income alone represents nearly forty percent of
total income and rivals or exceeds the size of wage income.
    The importance of business income from C-corporations differs between fiscal income,
which only measures C-corporation dividends, and imputed national income, which includes


                                             13
both dividends and PSZ’s imputation of retained earnings. In fiscal income, 9.1% of top
income comes from C-corporation dividends, whereas in imputed national income, 22.6%
comes from C-corporation dividends and retained earnings. We show that all key results
below hold under both income measures.
    Quantifying top retained earnings inherently presents considerable uncertainty as direct
ownership data for C-corporations is unavailable and estimates are sensitive to imputation
assumptions. Online Appendix F explores PSZ’s method and alternative assumptions for
allocating retained earnings. Regardless of the income measure, these facts indicate that
understanding the nature of business income—and especially the pass-through sector—is
imperative for understanding top incomes.


2.2     The Prevalence and Nature of Top Pass-through Ownership
Figure 2A demonstrates that pass-through income is prevalent within the top 1% in 2014.
For example, among the top 0.1%, 84% earn pass-through income. That is 139,000 taxpayers,
with aggregate pass-through income of $264B.23 For comparison, in Execucomp in 2014, the
top 10,700 executives working at the S&P 1500 earned a combined $33B. The scale of top
pass-through income far surpasses that of top CEOs, who have been the focus of much
inequality commentary.
    Figure 2B compares the age distributions of million-dollar earners who differ in the ma-
jority source of their income. Most top earners whose primary income source is wage income
are between 40 and 59 and very few top workers are older than 70. This distribution contrasts
with the much older distribution of top earners whose primary income source is other capital
income. Fifty-six percent of the latter group are older than 60, and nearly 30% are older
than 70. The age distribution of pass-through owners is much younger—28% are older than
60 and only 7% are older than 70—and nearly identical to the distribution of top laborers.
The population of pass-through owners does not include very many old people or children,
whom one might associate with estates and inherited wealth. C-corporation dividends skew
much older, distributed more similarly to the other capital earners. Overall, pass-through
owners resemble workers, while C-corporation owners resemble other capital earners.24 The
age distributions are consistent with top pass-through earners being human-capital rich.
  23
     Among the top 1%, 69% earn pass-through income. That is 1,140,000 taxpayers, with aggregate pass-
through income of $476B. Among the top 0.01%, 90% earn pass-through income. That is 15,000 taxpayers,
with aggregate pass-through income of $116B. Pass-through prevalence is even higher in imputed national
income, not shown in Figure 2.
  24
     Appendix Figure I.2 shows similar results for the top 1% and top 0.1%.




                                                  14
2.3     Firm Size and Ownership Varies by Organizational Form
Table 1 provides summary statistics from our linked firm-owner-worker data, restricted to
firms with positive sales and non-zero profits. Panel A presents statistics on distinct firm-year
observations, and Panel B presents statistics on distinct owner-year observations.
    In the 2001–2014 pooled sample of all pass-throughs, the average firm earned $31K in
profits on sales of $1.8M in 2014 dollars, employed 13 workers, and had 2.3 owners. Pass-
throughs that have at least one top 0.1% owner are much larger and more profitable—these
firms earned $1.6M in profits on $17.5M in sales with 74 employees—yet they typically
remain closely held, with the median firm having 2 owners. The average number of owners
is skewed by a few partnerships (e.g., a large law firm or consultancy) with many owners:
when restricting focus to S-corporations, the average number of owners of top 0.1%-owned
firms is 3.4.25
    Pass-through businesses are not only closely held but also undiversified: most top owners
own just one firm. If pass-through owners were only contributing financial capital, one
might expect them to hold portfolios with shares of many firms. However, the data suggest
this strategy is uncommon. Moreover, nearly all owners report being active, i.e., materially
participating in the business. For example, the share of top 0.1% owners who report earning
only passive income from their pass-throughs is 7%.26
    Most top-owned pass-through businesses are mid-market in size. Figure 3A explores the
firm size distribution among top-owned pass-throughs and compares it to the distribution for
all C-corporations. The profit distributions are markedly different across corporate forms.
Eighty percent of the pass-through income for million-dollar earners derives from firms with
between $1M and $500M in sales. Moreover, 72% of top-1% owned pass-through profits come
from firms with less than $50M in profits. In contrast, the distribution of C-corporations has
substantially more concentration in the right tail. Ninety-six percent of C-corporation profits
in 2014 come from firms with more than $500M in sales. Only 19% of millionaire-owned
pass-through profits come from firms in this size bin.
    The characteristics of pass-throughs—closely held, undiversified in ownership, and mid-
market in size—supports a narrative of top pass-through income that differs from those
for C-corporation income. The C-corporation profit distribution is so skewed that diffuse
ownership can nevertheless yield significant income to individual owners. In contrast, pass-
through owners tend to earn high incomes via concentrated ownership of one mid-market
firm. The pass-through narrative is consistent with active owner-management.
  25
    Appendix Tables J.1 and J.2 show summary statistics separately for S-corporations and partnerships.
  26
    However, as we describe in Online Appendix B, there is a tax incentive to report oneself as being active
rather than passive.


                                                    15
    An alternative narrative of top incomes emphasizes how managers set their pay by bar-
gaining with a corporate board that represents diffuse shareholders. This story also does not
resonate for explaining pass-through income. Pass-throughs have concentrated ownership,
which minimizes principal-agent failures—especially if the CEO is a majority owner. Agency
explanations may account for more of the growth in CEO and top manager compensation
for public companies, which have thousands of owners.


2.4     The Industry Composition of Business Income
Figure 3B compares the distributions of total profits across 1-digit NAICS sectors for pass-
through firms owned by million-dollar earners to the distributions of C-corporation profits
and of all workers from the Current Population Survey.27 Top pass-through profits are earned
broadly across sectors and are similarly distributed as the overall distribution of workers,
relative to C-corporations.28 Compared to C-corporation profits, pass-through profits are
underrepresented in manufacturing and overrepresented in information, professional services,
and health care. Less than 20% of top pass-through profits are earned in finance.
    Table 2 presents a more granular analysis of the industry composition of business in-
come at the 4-digit NAICS level. The left panel lists the top 30 industries in aggregate
profits earned by million-dollar-owned pass-through firms, along with the aggregate flow
of 2014 profits apportioned pro rata to owners. For each industry, we compare the top
pass-through flow to the flow of C-corporation profits and industry-level profits rank within
the C-corporation sector. The right panel repeats this exercise for the top 30 industries in
aggregate profits earned by C-corporations.
    White-collar, skilled service industries dominate the pass-through sector, whereas more
capital-intensive industries, especially manufacturing, dominate the C-corporation sector.
The five largest industries for millionaire-owned pass-through profits are legal services ($28.6B),
other financial investment activity ($28.2B), other professional and technical services ($8.2B),
offices of physicians ($8.0B), and auto dealers ($6.7B). The five largest industries for C-
corporation profits are petroleum and coal product manufacturing ($98.7B), pharmaceutical
manufacturing ($63.3B), nondepository credit intermediation ($46.6B), other telecommuni-
  27
     We divide the service sector 5 into two subsectors: finance, insurance, and real estate (FIRE); and
information and professional services. In this section, we exclude firms in the residual category NAICS
5511 (Management of Companies and Enterprises). The category refers to firms that often own related but
formally distinct non-financial firms. Among public companies for example, General Electric classifies its
industry as a holding company (based on public 10-K financial filings).
  28
     Appendix Figure I.5 compares the distribution of state population to the distributions across states of
total profits of top-owned pass-throughs and all C-corporations. Pass-through profits are broadly distributed
and comparable to the population distribution.



                                                     16
cations ($35.3B), and computer and peripheral equipment manufacturing ($33.3B).29
     The C-corporation sector includes many well-known listed companies, which are broadly
held both within the household sector and by pensions, non-profits, and foreign investors.
In some industries, such as restaurants, retailers, and wholesalers, firms operate in both
pass-through and C-corporation form (e.g., Menards versus Home Depot (Yagan, 2015)).
Remarkably, certain industries that are prevalent and large for pass-through profits, such
as law firms, doctors, and consultants, have negative or nearly zero aggregate profits in the
C-corporation sector.
     Table 3 presents a disaggregated analysis of pass-through profits for the top industries
in the S-corporation and partnership sectors. We define top industries by the 2014 level
of profits flowing to either top 1-0.1% or top 0.1% owners. This focus on the industries of
top-owned firms complements Bakija, Cole and Heim (2012), who study the occupations of
top earners using personal income tax returns and find a large role for professional services,
finance, and closely held business.
     Top pass-through profits comprise human-capital-intensive service professions and to a
lesser extent non-manufacturing industries that depend on financial and physical capital,
such as real estate and oil and gas. Typical firms owned by the top 1-0.1% are single-
establishment firms in professional services (e.g., consultants, lawyers, specialty tradespeo-
ple) or health services (e.g., physicians, dentists). For example, in the top 1-0.1%, the largest
S-corporation industry is offices of physicians ($9.1B) and the largest partnership industry
is legal services ($21.3B). A typical firm owned by the top 0.1% might be a regional business
with $20M in sales and 100 employees, such as an auto dealer, beverage distributor, or a
large law firm. There is significant overlap between top S-corporations and top partner-
ships. However, partnership profits are more concentrated and skew more toward certain
high-skilled services, especially legal services and other financial investment activity, which
includes private equity, venture capital, and hedge funds.30 Overall, most top pass-through
businesses do not operate in finance and instead actively produce goods or services across
diverse industries.31
  29
      In recent years, the aggregate composition of business income is roughly evenly split between the pass-
through and C-corporation sectors (Cooper, McClelland, Pearce, Prisinzano, Sullivan, Yagan, Zidar and
Zwick, 2016). Adjusting the C-corporation profit figures for the share of C-corporation wealth owned by the
household sector (equal to $11T/$23.4T = 47%) and the top 1% share of C-corporation dividends (49% in
2014), top 1% pass-through profits are roughly double the size of top 1% C-corporation profits.
   30
      These tables only include ordinary business income, not dividends, interest, or capital gains, which we
separately account for in the top incomes data. Appendix Table J.3 presents statistics on the number of
firms and owners for both S-corporations and partnerships in each industry in Table 3.
   31
      Appendix Table J.4 formalizes this observation by presenting a set of correlations at the NAICS 4-digit
level, which relate aggregate profits by corporate form to industry-level measures of human capital and non-
human capital (e.g., physical capital) intensity. Top pass-through profits are most strongly correlated with
measures of human capital intensity, whereas C-corporation profits are less correlated with human capital


                                                     17
2.5     Pass-through Profitability Is Higher for Top Owners
This section explores how profitability of pass-through firms varies with an owner’s position
in the income distribution. While other explanations of heterogeneous returns exist, showing
that top owners generate excess profitability provides evidence that is consistent with profits
reflecting in part the returns to human rather than physical and financial capital. A scale-
limiting factor, like the time or personal relationships of a skilled owner-manager, may lead
higher demand to manifest itself through higher prices (profits per worker), rather than
higher quantities (more workers).
    To test whether top-owned firms generate especially high profitability, we begin by bin-
ning year-2014 owners in the linked firm-owner-worker data by their fiscal income. We
confine attention to the top fiscal income decile, where the vast majority of pass-through
income accrues. The bins are one-percentile wide, except in the top 1% where we consider
bins between the 99th percentile and 99.5th percentile, the 99.5th percentile and 99.9th
percentile, and the top 0.1%.
    We then compute mean profitability—measured as profits per worker—across firms owned
by individuals within each personal income bin, with and without controls, as follows. When
not using controls, we compute the mean profitability across owner-firm observations within
each bin weighting by firm scale (the number of workers). Our main specification controls
for industry (4-digit NAICS), removing profitability variation across owner income bins that
is correlated with industry fixed effects (see the figure note).
    Figure 4A plots the results. Firms owned by top 0.1% earners enjoy profitability ($14K
per worker) that is over twice as large as the profitability ($5K per worker) of firms owned by
individuals in the bottom half of the top decile. The graph displays similar patterns without
controls and when controlling additionally for firm size.
    Figure 4B demonstrates that high firm profitability is a persistent and systematic char-
acteristic of high earners. It replicates Figure 4A in the subsample of pass-through startups,
plotting the profitability-income gradient using owner income ranks from the year before the
owner founded the startup. A firm qualifies as a startup in year t if it filed an income tax
return in year t and did not file an income tax return of any kind before year t. We find all
such owner-startup observations in years 2001-2010 and define the owner’s income rank using
her fiscal income in the year before she founded the startup. Then for each startup year, we
produce a profitability-income gradient net of industry fixed effects, using profitability from
the startup’s fifth year of existence and conditioning on startups that survive for at least
five years. We then average those gradients evenly across years and plot the mean gradient
and most correlated with physical capital intensity at the industry level.



                                                     18
in circles in Figure 4B.
    Startups founded by top earners go on to be much more profitable in their fifth year than
those started by other lower earners.32 The panel also shows that we find similar results
when including all startups regardless of how long they survive, computing each startup’s
profitability as total profits in the startup’s first five years divided by total annual workers in
the startup’s first five years. Hence, superior firm profitability is a persistent and systematic
characteristic of high earners.33


2.6     Summary of Descriptive Evidence
Together, this section’s descriptive statistics show that a large share of top earners are owners
of mid-market firms in skill-intensive industries in the pass-through sector. Pass-through
participation is pervasive among top earners who are working age and own undiversified
positions in closely held firms. Statistics by industry show that many pass-through firms
operate in industries that rely more on human capital than financial capital. That pass-
through activity is in many sectors and in firms that are not especially large is at odds with
passive capital stories that imply that most profitable activity may be concentrated among
a few firms.


3      The Human Capital Share of Pass-Through Income
This section presents three event studies: two to quantify the extent to which pass-through
income reflects the return to owners’ human capital, and a third to test a candidate mech-
anism. We use the term human capital to refer to all factors embodied in the owner, as
opposed to non-human factors such as physical capital, intangible transferable assets (such
as patents or brands), or market position. The return to human capital includes the return
to labor supply, the owner’s network, her retention and recruiting skill, her reputation, and
her ability to extract rents. This distinction between labor income—the flow return to hu-
man capital—and capital income—the flow return to non-human capital—accords with the
definitions in PSZ and elsewhere in the literature. Empirically, the flow return to an owner’s
human capital includes both wages, which are directly observable, and the share of profits
deriving from human capital, which must be estimated.
  32
     Note that these firms have existed for only five years, so the magnitude of performance advantages may
differ relative to the full sample of top-owned firms for firm life-cycle reasons.
  33
     Appendix H.1 addresses the question of whether high profitability at top-owned firms reflects payment
for higher undiversifiable risk. Based on ex post survival probabilities and Sharpe ratio-like risk adjustments,
higher risk does not explain higher profitability among top-owned firms.



                                                      19
3.1     The Profit Impact of Owner Deaths
To estimate human capital’s share of pass-through profits, an experimental ideal would be
to measure the profit impact of exogenously forcing pass-through owners to withdraw their
human capital from their firms. We approximate this ideal with a natural experiment in
which we measure the profit impact of premature owner deaths. We find that the average
premature death of a million-dollar-earning owner causes an 82% decline in firm profits.

Analysis Sample and Variable Definitions. We construct an owner deaths analysis
sample—comprising firms with owner deaths matched to firms without owner deaths—as
follows. We obtain owner year of death from Social Security Administration files housed
alongside tax records. We refer to a firm-owner-year observation in the linked-firm-owner
data as experiencing a year-t owner death when: (a) the owner was aged 64 or younger at
the end of year t, owned at least 20% of the firm in t−1, and had over $1 million in t−1
fiscal income; (b) the owner died in year t ∈ [2005, 2010]; (c) the firm had no other owners
2001-2014 who died; and (d) the firm had $100,000 in sales in t−1, the firm had positive
sales in all years [t−4, t−1], and the firm had positive employment in some year [t−4, t−1].34
    We then match each such owner-death firm-owner-t observation to all “counterfactual”
firm-owner-t observations that satisfy the following criteria: (a) the firm never had an owner
die in the year of or immediately after being an owner; (b) the firm had at least $100,000
in sales in t−1, the firm had positive sales in all years [t−4, t−1], and the firm had posi-
tive employment in some year [t−4, t−1]; and (c) the observation matches the owner-death
observation along five dimensions. Those five dimensions are: (1) the owners were in the
same five-year age bin in year t, (2) the owners were in the same fiscal income bin (99th to
99.5th percentile, 99.5th to 99.9th percentile, or top 0.1%) in t−1, (3) the firm had the same
3-digit NAICS industry code, (4) the firm had the same sales decile (defined after applying
all other sample restrictions) in t−1; and (5) the firm had the same organizational form (i.e.,
S-corporation versus partnership).
    The sample restrictions and matching procedure serve the following purposes. Restricting
to ages below 65 ensures that we examine owner deaths representative of typical owners (who
are working-age) rather than typical dying owners (who skew older). Restricting attention
to deaths in years 2005-2010 allows us to construct a balanced panel of firm observations
between four years before and four years after the death using our 2001-2014 data. Restrict-
ing to firms with substantial pre-period sales and positive employment focuses our analysis
on economically active firms. Restricting to owners who own at least 20% of the firm helps
  34
    Most dying owners have a firm-owner observation in the year of death. We also include owner deaths
that occur one year after the last year the owner appears in our data.


                                                 20
to exclude firms with many owners that typically replace departing owner-managers with
new owner-managers such as large law firms. Such replacement would bias toward zero our
estimates of the dying owner’s human-capital contribution to firm profits, as her human
capital supply is simply replaced by a new owner’s.35 Matching on the various dimensions
assists in identifying counterfactual firms that would plausibly exhibit common trends to
owner-death firms in the absence of the owner death. The matching procedure is similar to
other death-based event studies (Jaravel, Petkova and Bell, 2018; Jäger, 2016) except that
it uses all matched counterfactual observations rather than selecting one at random.
    After conducting the matches, we construct a balanced panel of firm outcomes for each
owner-death firm j and each counterfactual firm j 0 for every year between four years before
and four years after the death. If a firm exits (i.e., no longer files a Form 1120S or Form
1065 income tax return), it is coded as having zero profits and zero sales in exited years,
except for the reorganization correction defined below. Our owner deaths analysis sample
comprises 581,508 matched pair-year observations: nine years of observations on each of 765
firms with a dying million-dollar-earning owner and 64,612 counterfactual firms. We also
report results in a broader sample of top 1% owner deaths (2,609,973 observations with 2,436
owner-death firms) and a narrower sample of top 0.1% owner deaths (194,787 observations
with 435 owner-death firms). Appendix Table J.5 provides a waterfall showing how sample
restrictions yield our analysis sample size.
    Our main outcome is profits per pre-period worker. This quantity in a year s equals
firm profits in s divided by the firm’s mean annual workers across years [t−4, t−1] where t
denotes the owner death year. Scaling profits by the average annual number of pre-period
workers permits comparison across firms of different pre-death size. Because the denominator
is defined using only pre-death observations, post-death changes in the number of workers
do not directly affect the outcome. For example, a firm with constant profits that happens
to replace employees with equally compensated independent contractors would exhibit zero
change in profits per pre-period worker. We also analyze firm survival, equal in a year s to
an indicator for whether the firm has positive sales in s.
    Forty-one percent of the owner-death firms and 17% of counterfactual firms exit the
sample between t and t+4. Some of these exits do not represent firm shutdowns and in-
stead represent firm reorganizations under a different employer identification number either
through bankruptcy or sale. We do not directly observe firm reorganizations. However, we
can infer reorganizations by whether most of the exiting firm’s workers subsequently appear
  35
    This restriction excludes few firms, and the main coefficient estimate is slightly larger in absolute mag-
nitude when including them. Firms with a very large number of owners are excluded by the restriction that
only one owner died 2001-2014.



                                                     21
as coworkers at another firm. Specifically, for every firm that had zero sales in year t+4
and denoting its first year of zero sales (i.e., its first fully exited year) by r, we identify the
largest single employer other than the exiting firm across years r and r+1 of the firm’s r−1
workers excluding the dying owner.36 We find that 22% of exiting owner-death firms and
28% of exiting counterfactual firms with at least two r−1 workers were reorganizations: the
largest single employer following the owner death employed over half of the exiting firm’s
r−1 workers. We account for these reorganizations by simply replacing the firm’s profit in
years [r, t+4] with the firm’s profit in year r−1.37

Estimates. We use our owner deaths analysis sample of matched owner-death and coun-
terfactual firms to estimate difference-in-differences impacts of owner deaths, as follows. Let
j denote an owner-death firm and j 0 denote one of its matched counterfactual firms. For each
matched pair-year observation, we compute the difference in the outcome of interest between
the owner-death firm and the counterfactual firm in the given year, i.e., ∆Yjj 0 s ≡ Yjs − Yj 0 s .
We then regress that difference on event-time indicators in an event study specification:
                                                    X
                                                                         k
                               ∆Yjj 0 s =                            βk Djs + εjs                        (1)
                                            k∈{−4,−3,−2,0,1,2,3,4}


         k
where Djs  is an indicator for owner-death firm j having experienced an owner death k years
in the past. The coefficients of interest βk provide the time path of mean owner-death firm
outcomes relative to the year before the owner death, which is normalized to zero. Note
that because there are no controls, the coefficients βk are raw differences-in-differences of the
outcome means between owner-death firms and counterfactual firms between year t−1 and
other years. We ensure that each owner-death firm carries equal weight in the regression by
weighting each jj 0 s observation by one over the number of counterfactual (j 0 ) firms matched
to the owner-death firm (j). We cluster standard errors by owner-death firm j.
    Figure 5A plots our main owner-death result: point estimates and 95% confidence inter-
vals from equation (1) for the outcome of profits per pre-period worker. The flat pre-period
  36
      We measure employer as the employer identification number (EIN) listed on the W-2. Because we use
W-2 EIN to identify both the owner-death firm’s r−1 workers and the firms subsequently employing those
workers, employer is consistently measured before and after the owner death. We search for the largest single
employer across all of a worker’s r and r+1 employers, not just the highest-paying one.
   37
      This correction is analogous to how Chetty and Saez (2005) correct for firms that de-list from stock
exchanges, thereby exiting Chetty and Saez’s analysis sample. Moreover, we neither observe nor infer
division spinoffs, which would reduce measured profits at the surviving owner-death firm despite no real
reduction in economic activity. However, we believe that spinoffs are likely rare for the medium-sized firms
we study. In order to explain the very large effects we find below, very large shares of most owner-death
firms would have to have been spun off. Online Appendix H.2 tests robustness of punchline calculations to
potential bias.


                                                       22
trend corroborates the common trends assumption underlying our difference-in-differences
analysis—that in the absence of the owner death, profits per pre-period worker among owner-
death firms and among counterfactual firms would have trended similarly. The graph shows
that profits per pre-period worker decline immediately and persistently at owner-death firms
relative to counterfactual firms upon owner death.38 The immediate decline in profits can
derive from a number of mechanisms. The firm could contract (e.g., by closing one of many
store fronts) in response to worse managerial inputs. Owner charisma or connections may
have kept key employees at the firm until her death. Or a firm could replace its dead owner-
manager (compensated in profits) with a hired non-owner manager (compensated in wages),
yielding a decline in measured profits. In each of these cases, the withdrawal of the owner’s
human capital caused profits to decline.
    The graph’s rightmost data point, also reported in Table 4A Column 1, is our main
estimate: the average death of a top-earning owner caused a $20,591 decline in profits per
pre-period worker four years after the owner death. This estimated impact has a t-statistic of
3.5. The bottom rows of the column transform the estimated dollar impact into a percentage
impact as follows. The mean profits per pre-period worker at counterfactual firms in t+4 was
$38, 401. The average dying owner had an ownership share of 65.7% and thus, on average,
may have withdrawn only 65.7% of the firms’ owners’ human capital contributions. Dividing
−$20, 591 by $38, 401 and by 65.7% yields an estimated impact of an effective 100% owner
death of −81.6%, our preferred percentage impact.
    Columns 2-3 separate Column 1’s main effect into extensive and intensive margins. Col-
umn 2 finds that the mean death of a top-earning owner caused her firm to be 19.8 percentage
points less likely to have survived four years after the owner death, relative to counterfactual
firms. This extensive-margin effect size has a t-statistic of 11.6. Column 3 restricts the
sample to firms that survive through t+4, finding an intensive margin effect of −$13, 252
that is marginally significant with a t-statistic of 1.9.39 Comparison of bottom-row values of
Columns 1-3 suggests that most of the Column 1 impact is along the intensive margin.
    Columns 4-7 report heterogeneity and placebo results that corroborate the interpretation
of owner death impacts as reflecting the withdrawal of the owner’s human capital services.
One might expect majority owners to be more likely to actively manage their firms than
minority owners, implying that a majority owner death causes a larger decline in firm profits
  38
     Though the graph shows a flat time series of dollar estimates, percentage estimates scaled by the outcome
of mean of counterfactual firms exhibit a slight downward trend as profits at counterfactual firms secularly
decline over time.
  39
     The analogous t-statistic among top 1% owner deaths is 4.6, as the sample is substantially larger (Online
Appendix Table J.7). While conditioning on survival entails conditioning on an endogenous outcome, we
nevertheless report it for interpretation in combination with Columns 1-2.



                                                     23
than a minority owner death. Columns 4-5 test this prediction by repeating Column 1 on the
subset of owner-death firms with dying minority owners (those with less than or exactly 50%
ownership) and firms with dying majority owners (all others), respectively. Both columns
reveal large and statistically significant profit impacts, but the dying-majority-owner impact
is nearly twice as large as the dying-minority-owner impact. This pattern is consistent with
profit impacts of owner deaths stemming from the withdrawal of human capital services.
    Recall that our owner deaths analysis sample restricts to owners below age 65. Non-
elderly owners are more likely to be active managers than elderly owners. We therefore
construct a sample of elderly owner deaths—exactly analogous to the main owner deaths
analysis sample, except restricting to owners who died at age 75 or greater and to counter-
factual firms with similarly aged owners. Column 6 repeats Column 1 in the elderly owner
deaths sample. We find an insignificant and near-zero impact of an elderly owner death on
firm profits.
    Earlier work has assumed that 0% of S-corporation profits is labor income (Karabarbounis
and Neiman 2014, PSZ) but that 70% of partnership profits is labor income (PSZ). While the
partnership assumption is close to our main estimate, the S-corporation assumption is not.
Column 7 repeats Column 1 while restricting the sample to S-corporations. The resulting
estimate is similar to the main estimate, indicating that the main estimate is not simply
driven by partnerships.40
    Finally, Columns 8-9 repeat Column 1 in our broader and lower-mean-income top 1%
sample and our narrower and higher-mean-income top 0.1% sample.41 Effects are ordered
across our three top groups in both dollar and percentage terms. In particular, we find a
−72.9% impact of top 1% owner deaths and a noisier −92.3% impact of top 0.1% owner
deaths, compared to the −81.6% impact of a million-dollar-earner death.42 See Online
Appendix Table J.7 for full top 1% and top 0.1% owner-death results.


3.2     The Profit Impact of Owner Retirements
A natural concern is that, because an owner death may be unanticipated, the prior sec-
tion’s results may primarily reflect a chaotic disruption rather than the withdrawal of the
owner’s human capital. We therefore complement our owner-deaths analysis by estimating
the impact of inferred orderly transitions of owners out of employment at their owned firms
(“retirement”).
  40
     Our sample is dominated by dying S-corporation owners, due in large part to the 20% ownership share
threshold and to requiring the firm to have had positive pre-period workers.
  41
     The million-dollar-earner sample includes everyone in the top 0.1% sample; the top 1% sample includes
everyone in the million-dollar-earner sample.
  42
     An earlier draft reported a smaller impact for top 1% owner deaths (see Online Appendix H.4 for details).

                                                     24
    Specifically, we follow the owner-deaths sample frame and matching procedure detailed
in Section 3.1, with four amendments. First, rather than defining an owner-death event, we
define an owner-retirement event in year t as the firm transitioning from consecutive years
[t−4,t−1] with at least one owner receiving W-2 wages (perhaps different owners in different
years) to years [t,t+1] with no owner receiving W-2 wages while still having positive sales.
Second, we match owner-retirement firms to counterfactual firms at which at least one owner
received W-2 wages in consecutive years [t−4,t+1]. Third, we allow owners to be any age
because elderly owners working at their firms may nevertheless be representative of typical
owners. Fourth, we require owner-retirement and counterfactual firms to have positive sales
[t−4,t+1] rather than merely [t−4,t−1] because exited firms cannot be classified into owner-
retirement or counterfactual categories. We make no restrictions at all on owner-retirement
or counterfactual firms in years [t+2,t+4]. The owner-retirements sample is substantially
larger than the owner-deaths sample, with 5,312 owner-retirement firms compared to 765
owner-deaths firms. Appendix Table J.6 provides a waterfall showing how sample restrictions
yield our analysis sample size.
    Our owner-retirements research design has strengths and weaknesses relative to our
owner-deaths research design. Its primary strength is that it may identify instances where
an actively participating owner is replaced by a hired non-owner manager, without the dis-
ruption of an unanticipated death. Replacement of an actively participating owner by a
non-owner-manager rather than by another owner is helpful for our analysis. This replace-
ment can induce a change in compensation: profits to the owner-manager replaced by the
salary of a non-owner-manager. In contrast, replacing an active owner with another equally
productive active owner could yield zero change in profits despite profits entirely reflecting
returns to owner human capital. On the other hand, death is measured with almost no
error from vital records, whereas retirement is only inferred. In fact, we find suggestive
evidence that many inferred retirements are not actual retirements: 13% of retirement firms
issued a W-2 in t+4 to at least one of its owners. Thus, our owner-retirement estimates may
understate the true effect of withdrawing owner human capital.
    We estimate our event study specification equation (1) in our owner retirements sample
and report the results in Figure 5B and Table 4B. Figure 5B’s flat pre-retirement trend
corroborates our identifying assumption that, in the absence of retirement, owner-retirement
firms and counterfactual firms would exhibit common trends in profits per pre-period worker.
Profits per pre-period worker decline immediately and persistently in the year of retirement.
    The rightmost estimate in Figure 5B is reported in Column 1 of Table 4B: an estimated
causal impact of −$37, 210 with a t-statistic of 9.3. The bottom row follows the same
calculations used in Panel A to arrive at our preferred owner-retirement percentage impact


                                             25
of −82.5%. This preferred estimate is nearly identical to our owner-deaths estimate of
−81.6%. Columns 8-9 present analogous estimates for top-1%-owner retirements and top-
0.1%-owner retirements: −59.6% and −71.7% respectively (see Online Appendix Table J.8
for full results).

Discussion. Our analysis below requires an estimate of the share of top pass-through
income that is a return to owner human capital. Million-dollar earners are the middle
of the three top groups on which we focus; both the owner-deaths and owner-retirements
specifications for this group suggest an estimate of 82%. The estimated owner-retirement
impacts are monotonic across top income groups in dollar terms but not in percentage terms.
Motivated by the possibility of specification noise and effectively weighting high-earners the
most, the average of the six percentage impacts (top 1%, million-dollar-earners, and top
0.1% across both owner deaths and retirements) is 76.8%.
    To further explore the robustness of these estimates, Appendix Table J.9 compares the
equal-weighted estimates in Table 4 for the top 1% to alternative specifications that weigh
observations using average pre-event profits. Recall that top-owned pass-throughs are much
smaller than public companies: 72% of top-1% pass-through profits accrue to firms with less
than $50M in profits (see Figure 3 and Appendix Figures I.3 and I.4 for distributions by firm
size). Superstar firms such as Amazon are not prominent, even on a dollar-weighted basis,
within the pass-through sector. Thus, equal-weighted estimates within the pass-through
sector are a priori likely to be close to dollar-weighted estimates.
    To explore this point, we consider multiple dollar-weighting schemes and subsample anal-
yses to evaluate how sensitive the overall estimates are to how we treat the largest firms.
First, weighting by the log of pre-period profits increases the estimated percentage impact in
both the owner-death and owner-retirement samples with little loss of precision. Second, we
implement a bounding exercise in which we estimate dollar-weighted treatment effects for
all but the largest firms and bound the overall effect by assuming the full range of treatment
effects from 0% to 100% for the largest firms. For owner deaths, we find a dollar-weighted
treatment effect for firms with less than $50M in pre-event profits of 87.1%. Such firms
generate 72% of total top 1% pass-through profits, so we bound the overall effect from 62.4%
(= 0.72 × 87% + (1 − 0.72) × 0%) to 90.8% (= 0.72 × 87% + (1 − 0.72) × 100%). Owner
retirements deliver larger estimates.
    Overall, dollar-weighted approaches deliver similar if not larger estimates relative to the
equal-weighted analysis, although the standard errors do increase with dollar-weighting.
For the next section’s analysis, we use 75% as a round number robustly supported by all
weighting approaches. We also report analyses using smaller shares in both the person-level


                                              26
and dollar-level calculations.43
    The findings in this and the previous section contribute to a literature on the effect of
managers and CEOs on firm performance using research designs based on retirements, fam-
ily succession, and CEO deaths. Johnson, Magee, Nagarajan and Newman (1985), Pérez-
González (2006), and Bennedsen, Nielsen, Pérez-González and Wolfenzon (2007) find that,
when replacing an outgoing CEO, choosing an external CEO increases firm value and perfor-
mance relative to choosing a within-family CEO. In Danish administrative data, Bennedsen,
Perez-Gonzalez and Wolfenzon (2010) and Bennedsen, Perez-Gonzalez and Wolfenzon (2012)
use CEO deaths and hospitalizations, respectively, to show that these events cause signifi-
cant declines in profitability, with larger effects for CEOs who are younger and more likely
to be actively involved in the firm’s operations.44
    The estimates from our owner death design are considerably larger than estimates from
these studies, which find average effects of professional CEOs between 10 and 25 percent in
terms of operating profitability. Two factors can naturally explain the discrepancy. First,
previous work has tended to estimate the effect of one CEO being replaced by another CEO,
thereby identifying only the difference in human capital returns between two managers. In
contrast, our estimates aim to measure the full human capital return of a manager appearing
in profits, as a firm replaces an owner-manager (whose human capital return may for tax
reasons appear in profits) with a hired manager (who would be compensated in wages).
Second, previous work has often estimated effects among especially large or publicly traded
companies that may be more capital intensive than the typical firm in the economy. Capital
intensive firms like an oil extraction firm may depend less than other firms on managerial
talent. Becker and Hvide (2017) find large effects of entrepreneur deaths on quite small firms
in Norway. Relative to their work, our study broadens the scope of analysis to much larger
firms with high-income owners in a different institutional context that directly informs the
character of top U.S. incomes.45
  43
      We use fiscal income in defining the owners’ groups for Table 4. The top 1% estimates are smaller
than the estimates based on higher-earners, so it is likely that the top 1% estimates defined using imputed
national income—whose thresholds are higher than fiscal income thresholds—would be larger.
   44
      Consistent with our findings, Jäger (2016) uses German data to show that manager deaths cause a
decline of average yearly wages among incumbent workers of approximately 1%. However, his paper does
not estimate effects on firm performance.
   45
      Among our million-dollar-owner-death firms, the mean number of employees is 172 and the median is
41. Among Becker and Hvide’s owner-death firms, the median number of employees is 4. Becker and Hvide
find statistically significant effects of owner deaths on firms in the first four quintiles of firm size but not on
firms in the largest quintile (those with more than 8 employees).




                                                        27
3.3     The Profit and Wages Impacts of Corporate-Form Switching
We have found that most pass-through profits represent the returns to human capital. We
now test a tax-incentive mechanism for these returns being reported on business tax returns
(and thereby recorded in National Accounts) as pass-through profits, rather than as wages
paid to the owner. As discussed in Section 1.1, private firms have considerable leeway in how
they pay owners and face differing tax incentives to use that leeway: C-corporations face tax
incentives to pay owners in wages, while pass-throughs face tax incentives to pay owners in
profits. We investigate the tax-incentive mechanism by testing for a sudden divergence in
profit and wage trends after firms transition from C-corporation form to pass-through form.
    We collect data on the population of businesses that switch from C-corporation to S-
corporation form between 2001 and 2014.46 On average, approximately sixty-seven thou-
sand C-corporations switch each year, corresponding to between 3 and 5 percent of all
C-corporations. We study total wage payments or profits as a fraction of contemporaneous
firm sales in an event study framework:
                                            X
                        Yit =                                   γk Dk + αi + δt + εit ,                  (2)
                                k∈{−5+,−4,−3,−2,0,1,2,3,4,5+}


where γk is the coefficient vector of interest on event time indicators, αi are firm fixed
effects, and δt are calendar-year fixed effects.47 Wage payments equals Salaries and wages
plus Compensation of officers as listed on the business income tax return.48 The analysis
sample includes 157,272 firms that switched from C-corporation form to S-corporation form
between 2001 and 2010. The sample includes all firms that existed for at least 4 years prior
to and 4 years following the switch and generated at least $100K in sales in the year prior
to the switch.
    Figure 6A plots the impacts on profits and wage payments for all firms in the switchers
analysis sample. Despite a pre-period trend in profits, the graph shows a sharp divergence
between profits and wages in the year of the switch. Wage payments fall sharply in the
switching year by 2.29% on average relative to sales, and this decline in wage payments is
offset by an average profit margin increase of 1.70%. In words, nearly two percent of sales are
suddenly paid as profits instead of wages upon switching to S-corporate firm. This pattern is
   46
      Over this time period, the vast majority of transitions were from C- to S-corporation form, rather than
from S- to C- or from C- to partnership. There are few in the former case because of tax preference for the
S-corporation form that began in 1986. There are few in the latter case because of rules requiring the firm
to un-incorporate in the event of these transitions.
   47
      We cannot directly study changes in owners’ wage payments because C-corporations are not linked to
owners, without assuming no changes in ownership before the switch.
   48
      This sum should typically equal total W-2 payments, except for manufacturing firms which deduct
production-worker wages on a separate form unavailable to us.


                                                      28
consistent with the tax-incentive mechanism for pass-through owners’ human capital returns
being paid as profits.
    Figure 6 plots two heterogeneity analyses that further support the tax-incentive mecha-
nism. S-corporation profits must be distributed pro rata to ownership share. A firm with one
active owner-manager supplying human capital and a passive owner supplying none would
therefore be relatively unlikely to characterize human capital returns as profits. Instead, the
active owner-manager would likely insist on being paid in salary or bonus—sacrificing taxes
in order to not share her human capital returns with a passive owner. Non-majority-owned
firms are relatively likely to have at least one passive owner, so we would expect such firms
to exhibit a smaller change in profits and wage payments after a C-to-S switch. Figure 6A
shows that expectation is indeed in the case empirically. When limiting the sample to the
14,600 firms with no owner in the year of the switch having at least a 50% ownership share,
the change in profits and wage payments is markedly less pronounced than in the full sample.
    Human capital is a primary factor of production in high-skilled service-sector firms such
as medical practices and consultancies. Owners of such firms may be especially likely to
also serve as a manager rather than hiring a non-owner manager, and the labor share of
value added tends to be higher at such firms. High-skilled service-sector firms may therefore
exhibit especially large changes in profits and wage payments after a C-to-S switch. Figure
6B shows that that is indeed in the case. When limiting the sample to the 53,220 firms with
2-digit NAICS ∈ {51, 52, 54, 56, 61, 62} in the year of the switch, the change in profits and
wage payments is markedly more pronounced than in the full sample. We conclude that the
data support the tax-incentive explanation for human capital returns being recharacterized
as pass-through profits.


4     Characterizing Top Earners and Incomes
4.1    Most Top Earners Are Human-Capital Rich
This subsection uses our estimates to characterize top earners as human-capital rich or
financial-capital rich. The question is whether a very high earner you might meet on the
street likely earns most of her income from her human capital or her financial capital. The
answer plays a key role in debates about taxation. Kuziemko, Norton, Saez and Stantcheva
(2015) find that survey respondents assess tax policy in part based on how income is earned.
Moreover, traditional models of optimal taxation provide rationales for higher tax rates on
labor income than on capital income (Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1976; Chamley, 1986; Judd,
1985). To the extent that “capital” income is characterized as labor income, higher capital


                                              29
tax rates may be optimal (Piketty and Saez, 2013).
    We classify a top earner as human-capital rich if the majority of her income derives
from her human capital, which we refer to as labor income as in PSZ and elsewhere in the
literature. We measure labor income as the sum of wage income (as defined in Section 1.2)
and 75% of pass-through income (based on our owner-death and owner-retirement event
studies). We use our two measures of personal income—fiscal income and imputed national
income—and report results for three top income groups—the top 1%, million-dollar earners,
and the top 0.1%. Recall that the unit of observation in fiscal income is the tax unit and in
imputed national income is the individual. Because imputed national income uses imputed
C-corporate retained earnings and other passive capital income, labor income is lower when
using the imputed national income measure.
    Figure 7 displays the results for 2014. Figure 7A shows how the results in Figure 1A
change when adding the human capital share of pass-through income within the top decile,
and Figure 7B focuses on our three top income groups. As a benchmark, we first plot the
share of top earners who earn a majority of their income in wages. If 0% of pass-through
income is labor income, the wage-earner share would equal the human-capital-rich share.
Within the top decile, the share of people earning most of their income from wages falls
dramatically at the top. Across five of the six top income groups, a minority of top-earners
are wage earners. For example among million-dollar earners, 46.8% are wage earners in the
fiscal income definition and only 35.4% are wage earners in the imputed national income
definition. Thus, when ignoring pass-through income, a minority of top earners appear to
be human-capital rich.
    That conclusion reverses when classifying 75% of pass-through income as labor income.
The share earning most of their income from human capital falls much less within the top
decile. The figure’s “human-capital rich” series reveal that most top earners are human-
capital rich, not financial-capital rich. For example among million-dollar earners, 88.8%
are human-capital rich in the fiscal income definition and 67.4% are human-capital rich in
the imputed national income definition. Even among the top 0.1% in the imputed national
income series, 56.2% are human-capital rich, relative to only 23.3% being primarily wage
earners. We conclude that the human capital component of pass-through income transforms
one’s view of whether the typical top earner is human-capital rich.
    Online Appendix H.2 provides two robustness analyses. The first uses the minimum
estimate of the labor share of pass-through income by income group in Table 4, rather than
the mean of 75%. The second classifies all private C-corporation wages as capital income.
In each of twelve permutations, a majority of top earners are human-capital rich.
    Finally, we may in fact understate the human-capital-rich share of top owners because


                                             30
pass-through income is not the only form of “capital” income that includes recharacterized
wages. In particular, there are prominent tax-advantaged ways to use C-corporation retained
earnings to compensate entrepreneurs, hired managers, private equity and angel investors
for their human capital services.49 Estimating the human capital content of C-corporation
income is a priority for future work.


4.2     Most Top Earners in the 1980–1982 Cohort are Self-Made
A potential concern with the preceding analysis is that some people with high wages may in
fact be providing little human capital services, even when not earning wages from a private
C-corporation. In particular, drawing a salary from a family pass-through can be an effective
way for a rich family to avoid estate taxes. In such cases, an individual could be erroneously
labeled as human-capital rich.
    We therefore analyze the concept of being self-made, as opposed to being a financial
heir. Analogous to Piketty, Postel-Vinay and Rosenthal (2014), we define an individual as
self-made if she earns most of her income from her human capital or from savings out of
her previous human capital returns, rather than from inherited financial capital. U.S. tax
data lack detailed information on inheritances. However, we can link young top earners to
their parents. In the parent-linked sample, we can therefore compute a likely conservative
estimate of the self-made share of top earners under the assumption that top earners with
sufficiently-low-earning parents almost surely do not have high incomes through financial
inheritance.
    Specifically, we attempt to link all of the individuals born 1980–1982 in our top incomes
data to parent-income percentiles, using parent-child links and parent income percentiles
provided by Chetty, Friedman, Saez, Turner and Yagan (2019). The year 1980 is the first
birth cohort for which parent income can be measured. We match 83% of top 1% individ-
uals born in 1980–1982 to their parents; parent income is unavailable for individuals who
immigrated to the United States after their teenage years. Parent income is defined as mean
adjusted gross income of the child’s parents when the child is aged 15–19. Parent-income
percentiles are defined within birth cohorts, with the top 1% ranging between $511K and
$552K in 2014 dollars. Bottom 99% parents are therefore unlikely to have assets above
  49
    First, private equity managers often receive compensation for their management services via high retained
earnings of portfolio companies. Second, entrepreneurs like Bill Gates are often compensated in “sweat
equity”(Bhandari and McGrattan, 2018), thereby earning a much larger share of C-corporation income
than non-manager investors who contributed identical financial inputs. Third, hired executives at mid-stage
startups can be compensated with special underpriced shares such that the executive receives a large capital
gain if not fired. Fourth, startups permit angel investors and other venture capitalists to invest at discounts
as compensation for the investors’ human capital services, such as operating advice and business connections.



                                                      31
the 2014 estate tax exemption of $5.3 million and unlikely to make large enough financial
bequests to place a child into a top income group. We therefore classify an individual as
self-made if her parents were not in the top 1%. This is a conservative classification, as many
children of the top 1% do not work for their parents’ firms and do not receive especially large
financial inheritances.50
    Figure 7B plots the results. A slightly larger share of the parent-linked sample is classified
as human-capital rich than in the overall sample, but the differences are small. The figure
shows that, across income definitions and top income groups, more than three out of four of
top earners in the parent-linked sample did not have top 1% parents. For example among
million-dollar earners, 85.1% in the fiscal income series and 75.3% in the imputed national
income series are self-made. The remaining bars plot similar statistics for human-capital rich
(i.e., those with majority income from labor) and entrepreneurs (i.e., those with majority
income from pass-throughs). In all cases, at least 74% are self-made. Thus, children of the
top 1% are very disproportionately represented among young million-dollar-earners but do
not constitute a majority. Recall that these self-made statistics are likely lower bounds, as
many adult children of the top 1% are in reality also not dependent on financial inheritance.
While we can measure these outcomes only for the 1980–1982 cohorts, the results support
the conclusion that our human-capital rich statistics are robust to excluding any financial
inheritances recharacterized as labor income.
    Note that Chetty, Hendren, Kline and Saez (2014) (henceforth CHKS) published a 100-
by-100 appendix transition matrix that suggests an even higher self-made share of 90.4%.
Yet because they measure child income within the 1980 birth cohort rather than nationally,
many of their top 1% children were not currently in the overall top 1% and in particular were
not million-dollar earners or in the top 0.1%. Our self-made statistics reach further into the
tail of the income distribution and are computed in both fiscal income (as in CHKS) and in
imputed national income.51


4.3     Top Labor Income and Entrepreneurial Income Are Large
This subsection uses our labor-versus-capital classification of pass-through income to char-
acterize the labor share and the entrepreneurial share of top incomes. One reason the top
  50
     Averaging parent incomes over five years smooths out fluctuations in parental income, for example,
due to temporary business losses. While it is possible that children receive large inheritances from rich
grandparents, it is unlikely that the middle generation (i.e., the parents) would have relatively low income.
  51
     CHKS find that children’s income ranks stabilize by their early 30s, suggesting that most of their top
1% children will eventually lie in the overall top 1% as their incomes grow over the lifecycle. CHKS measure
parent and child incomes using fiscal income. They do not publish their top 1% child income threshold,
but their top 1% child income mean ($423K in 2014 dollars) is nearly the same as our top 1% fiscal income
threshold ($390K), which implies that their top group encompasses substantially lower earners than ours.


                                                     32
1% are of interest is that their earnings constitute a disproportionate share of the economy
and tax base. Therefore, it is useful to conduct a dollar-level analysis of top earners that
complements our person-level analysis.
    We divide top pass-through income into labor and capital portions and then add other
sources of labor and capital income to account for total top income. As above, we allocate
75% of top pass-through income to labor and the rest to capital.52 We also use our linked firm-
owner-worker files to determine how much W-2 wage income accrues to pass-through business
owners, which enables us to quantify total top entrepreneurial income. These contributions
enable a more comprehensive analysis of the nature of top earners’ income—how much is
labor income, how much is entrepreneurial income, and how these amounts compare to
other income components—than has been possible. We find that top labor income and top
entrepreneurial income are substantial and larger than previously documented.
    Figure 8A shows how the results for the top decile from Figure 1B change when combining
wage income and the human capital component of pass-through income. Figure 8B shows
results for our top income groups. We present two findings. First, and despite the fact
that capital income accrues disproportionately to top earners, we find that a large share
of top income is labor income. In particular, 76% of top 1% fiscal income and 53% of
top 1% imputed national income is classified as labor income. Hence, our classification of
three-quarters of pass-through income as labor income reverses the earlier finding in PSZ
that a minority (45%) of top 1% imputed national income is labor income. Even among
million-dollar earners, 70% of fiscal income and 47% of imputed national income is labor
income. In the top 0.1%, labor income shares fall to the still large numbers of 67% and 42%,
respectively.53
    Second, top entrepreneurial income is large. We define entrepreneurial income as the sum
of two components: (a) pass-through income, and (b) W-2 wage payments to pass-through
owners. Figure 1 showed that 32-39% of top 1% and top 0.1% fiscal income is pass-through
income. Adding owner wage payments, which has not been previously possible, increases
top entrepreneurial income to 39-45%. Note that some portion of C-corporation income
also accrues to founders, so a broader definition of entrepreneurial income would yield larger
estimates.54
  52
     See Online Appendix Figure I.8 for results using alternative labor shares. See also Online Appendix
Figure I.10 for alternative results when reclassifying all wages from private C-corporations as capital.
  53
     To demonstrate robustness of these results, we consider two conservative scenarios. Online Appendix
Figure I.8 shows that the top 1% labor share in imputed national income is 48% when classifying only 59.6%
(56% after tax imputations) of pass-through income as labor income. Online Appendix Figure I.10 shows
that the top 1% labor share in imputed national income is 47% when very conservatively reclassifying all
private C-corporation wages as profits.
  54
     A large share of C-corporation income is earned by publicly traded companies and does not accrue to
founders in the year it is earned. For example, Jeff Bezos became 2018’s richest person in the world largely


                                                    33
    Top entrepreneurial income is large relative to all other income components. In ev-
ery top income group and income definition, entrepreneurial income rivals or exceeds both
non-owner wage income and non-pass-through capital income. For example among million-
dollar earners, 44% of fiscal income and 36% of imputed national income is pass-through
entrepreneurial income. In contrast, 37% of fiscal income and 22% of imputed national in-
come is non-owner wage income, and 19% of fiscal income and 43% of imputed national
income is non-pass-through capital income. Notably, entrepreneurial income far exceeds C-
corporation (and therefore public equity) income, which amounts to 8% of fiscal income and
19% of imputed national income. Hence, entrepreneurial income constitutes a large portion
of U.S. top incomes.


5     The Growth of Top Entrepreneurial Income
This section puts the cross-sectional results on top business income in the context of how
top income inequality has evolved over the past five decades. We find that top pass-through
income has grown dramatically over time, even after adjusting for tax-induced organizational
form switching. We then use our linked firm-owner-worker data from 2001–2014 to decom-
pose this growth into three components—labor productivity, redistribution from workers to
owners, and sectoral scale. We find important roles for the growth in labor productivity as
well as redistribution from workers to owners.


5.1     The Sources of Top Income Growth
As in Section 2.1, we decompose top incomes into three sources: wage income, business
income, and other capital income. Figure 9A plots the time series of these sources using
top fiscal income and imputed national income. Figure 9B plots the time series of the two
components of business income: pass-through income and C-corporation income. Figure 9C
plots the time series of the top 1% labor share, defined either with or without the human
capital component of pass-through income.
    Three facts emerge. First, the second half of the twentieth century saw a spectacular rise
in wage income for top earners. However, since the late 1990s, rising top wage income ceded
to rising top non-wage income.
by founding Amazon. He owned 48% of Amazon prior to its 1997 IPO but sold most of that stake by 2018, so
the vast majority of Amazon’s 2018 profits accrued to people other than Bezos. Hence, even if C-corporations
could be linked to owners, the national income concept has limitations in classifying entrepreneurial income.
The Haig-Simons income concept, which includes price-driven capital gains omitted from the national income
concept, could prove fruitful in future work.



                                                     34
    Second, the vast majority of rising top non-wage income came in the form of business
income.55 In both fiscal and imputed national income, the path of top wage income mirrors
the path of top business income, suggesting that some of the observed slowdown in top wage
growth manifested in faster business income growth. Indeed, adding 75% of pass-through
income to wage income in defining the top 1% labor share substantially attenuates the decline
in top labor income since the 1990s. Specifically, the top 1% labor share in fiscal income
exceeds 75% without much of a trend since the late 1980s. In imputed national income, the
top 1% labor share is lower (53%), having surged above 60% in the late 1990s and returned
to its post-1985 average in recent years.
    Third, within business income, most of the growth took the form of pass-through income,
rather than C-corporation income. The enduring impact of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 on
the distribution of business income is clearly visible in these series (Gordon and MacKie-
Mason, 1994; Slemrod, 1996; Mackie-Mason and Gordon, 1997; Gordon and Slemrod, 2000;
Clarke and Kopczuk, 2017). As the reform raised the burden on traditional C-corporations
and lowered top personal income rates, pass-through income jumped and has been steadily
rising ever since, as new and growing businesses are more likely to choose pass-through
form. Pass-through income growth features centrally in both the fiscal income and imputed
national income series, which also includes imputed C-corporation retained earnings.
    In Online Appendix F, we quantitatively evaluate the relative contributions to top income
growth and business income growth over 1990–2014 and 2000–2014 of various business income
sources under alternative approaches for imputing retained earnings. We estimate that pass-
through accounts for 60-73% of the business income growth since 1990 and 38-56% of the
business income growth since 2000.56 Retained earnings account for more than two-thirds
of C-corporation income growth, which underscores the importance of including retained
earnings when studying top income growth. Understanding the rise of retained earnings,
how it contributes to the aggregate capital share, and the rise of superstar firms is an
important topic for ongoing and future research.

Pass-through Growth Is Not Just a Reporting Phenomenon. Rising top pass-
through income partly reflects a type of relabeling of business income, as preexisting busi-
  55
      In both fiscal income and imputed national income, the components of non-wage income not included in
business income are much less consequential. The fiscal income shows essentially no growth in this category,
whereas the imputed national income series shows modest growth, though some disagreement remains about
the size of this increase. See Auten and Splinter (2018), and Bricker, Henriques, Krimmel and Sabelhaus
(2016).
   56
      The year 2000 appears to be a local minimum for C-corporation income, likely driven by business cycle
fluctuations. The more robust fact is the reversal of C-corporation income and pass-through income in the
overall contribution to top income inequality over the past 50 years.



                                                    35
nesses reorganized from C-corporation to pass-through form and entrants increasingly chose
pass-through form following TRA86. Focusing on the period 2001–2014 during which our
linked firm-owner data are available, the pass-through share of total business sales—which
rose from approximately 10% in the mid-1980s to 20% in 1990 to 35% in recent years—
indicates that some share of rising top pass-through income is an artifact of changes in
the organizational form through which business income is reported. We now quantify how
much of the rise in top pass-through income is in fact a real economic phenomenon. Online
Appendix H.3 contains additional detail.
    To correct for the effect of differential net entry into the pass-through sector, we construct
a counterfactual pass-through profit series that assumes the level of pass-through sales re-
mains a constant share of total business sales (including S-corporations, C-corporations, and
partnerships) throughout the time period. In 2014, the share of profit levels due to organiza-
tional form changes is approximately 26%, while 74% of pass-through profits remain under
the constant share assumption. In terms of growth, actual top 0.1% profits increased 240%
between 2001 and 2014 in real terms, while counterfactual profits rose 178%. Thus, most of
the growth in top profits remains after adjusting for organizational form reorganization.57
We note for the next subsection that although we adjust the level of pass-through income of
organizational-form changes, we make no adjustments for any compositional effects.


5.2     How is Entrepreneurial Income Rising? Productivity vs. Re-
        distribution
Investigating the relative contributions of the growth and distribution of income can shed
light on how entrepreneurial income has increased in recent years. Entrepreneurial income
growth can come from two sources: growth in value added and growth in owners’ share of
value added. Value added growth can support explanations that emphasize technological
progress, and owner share growth can support explanations that emphasize zero-sum com-
pensation bargaining. A combination of value added growth and owner share growth could
also reflect, in part, managerial-skill-biased technological change. For example, an increase
in the output elasticity of owner labor or network connections would result in both more
value added and a larger owner share.
    We can decompose the overall growth in entrepreneurial income I into value added growth
  57
    We consider an alternative approach to measuring the role of organizational form switching using the
population of businesses that switch from C-corporation to S-corporation form between 2001 and 2014. We
find that 70% of the growth in S-corporation profits is due to firms that did not switch from C-corporation
form during this time.




                                                    36
and redistribution to owners:
                                        Value Added Growth
                                    z          }|            {    Redistribution
                                           VA                   z }| {
                             ∆I =        ∆                 ∆L + ∆sowner .
                                                         + |{z}                                       (3)
                                         | {zL }          Scale
                                    Labor Productivity


where ∆X denotes the log change in X, value added growth sums growth in labor produc-
tivity and scale, and sowner is the share of value added that accrues to owners in either the
form of owner wages or profits. We measure labor productivity as value added per worker,
where value added equals profits plus W-2 wages and where the number of workers equals
the number of W-2s issued by the firm. We measure scale as the number of workers.58
    Figure 10 presents data on the creation and distribution of income in the pass-through
sector among firms with top owners. Figures 10A and 10B focus on the components of value
added growth. Figure 10A shows how labor productivity (measured as value added per
worker) and entrepreneurial income per worker have evolved since 2001. Figure 10B shows
how the aggregate number of workers employed by top pass-throughs has evolved since 2001.
We also present an adjusted series to account for organizational form switching. Following
the analysis in Section 5.1, the adjusted series scales actual employment by a factor equal to
the pass-through sales share of total business sales in 2001 divided by the contemporaneous
pass-through sales share. For example, in 2014, this procedure reduces employment growth
since 2001 by 24%.
    Labor productivity of top-owned firms has grown substantially from $33K to $43K. This
increase in value added per worker is consistent with explanations of top pay growth that
emphasize technological progress, demand-driven growth in the service sector, or higher
markups. Entrepreneurial income has tracked the evolution of labor productivity closely,
suggesting that an important part of overall top entrepreneurial income growth is due to
these drivers of value added growth. Aggregate pass-through employment has increased more
modestly and fluctuates considerably with the business cycle. Adjusting for organizational
form changes leaves the size of the workforce in top-owned firms essentially unchanged from
2001 to 2014. This pattern contrasts with the strong growth in top-owned profits even
after adjusting for organizational form changes. Increasing profits without commensurate
employment growth is consistent with the recent pattern of “scale without mass” observed in
large public firms (Brynjolfsson, McAfee, Sorell and Zhu, 2008; Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson
  58
    Gabaix and Landier (2008) emphasize firm size of competing firms as an important driver of CEO pay
growth. Online Appendix Table J.10 implements a similar firm-level analysis to theirs. We find that top
entrepreneurial income is increasing in firm size, but own-firm size is more important than the reference
firm. These results suggest that top entrepreneurial income strongly depends on how large their firms are,
but somewhat less on factors that influence the market for CEO pay of the largest firms in the economy.


                                                    37
and Van Reenen, 2017).
    Figure 10C uses equation (3) to divide the total growth in top entrepreneurial income
into contributions from growth in value added per worker, in the entrepreneurial income
share of value added, and in total employment adjusted for organizational form changes. We
measure these changes as the growth from the level in 2001 to the level in 2014. As there
was a recession in 2001 and not in 2014, we also show the growth from the level in 2004.
    For top 1% pass-throughs, value added per worker, employment, and the owner share
increased by 25.3%, −9.7%, and 24.5%, respectively, from 2001 to 2014, after adjusting this
employment growth for organizational form changes.59 Thus, 63% of the growth in top 1%
entrepreneurial income (equal to (25.3%)/(25.3% − 9.7% + 24.5%)) comes from rising labor
productivity, −24% comes from lower employment, and the remaining 61% comes from a
growing owner share of value added. Overall growth for top 0.1% firms was larger, though
the relative contributions from productivity and entrepreneurial income are similar.60 Using
2004 as the reference year modestly increases the importance of labor productivity growth,
but the results are similar.
    Figure 10D shows that the share of value added going to non-owner workers fell substan-
tially among top-owned pass-throughs from 2001 to 2014. Over this period, the owner share
increased from 37% to 48% of value added for top 1% firms and from 40% to 52% for top
0.1% firms. The figure also shows how the composition of entrepreneurial income evolved
over this time period, with owners paying themselves less in wages and more in profits. The
share of value added going to owners in the form of wages fell by 1.9 percentage points for
top-owned firms. Thus, interpreting the fall of wage income in value added as reflecting in-
come lost by workers would overstate the decline in the labor share; some of the fall reflects
the rise of recharacterized owner wages.
    Overall, growth in entrepreneurial income is explained by both rising labor productivity
and a rising share of value added accruing to owners. In contrast, after accounting for the
growth due to organizational form changes, rising firm scale in the form of employment plays
no role in the growth of top entrepreneurial income. Economic explanations that emphasize
growing the pie, rather than zero-sum bargaining over its distribution, are necessary to fit
the facts. Yet such explanations would be incomplete without rationalizing how, as labor
productivity grows, owner-managers appear to capture an increasing share.
  59
    The unadjusted employment growth is 23.1%.
  60
    Specifically, 61% of the overall top 0.1% pay growth comes from rising labor productivity, −16% comes
from lower employment, and 56% comes from owner share growth.




                                                   38
6    Conclusion
We have used de-identified U.S. tax records, including novel linked firm-owner-worker data,
to investigate the importance of human capital at the top of the U.S. income distribution.
The data reveal a striking world of business owners who prevail at the top of the income
distribution. We find that most private business profits reflect the return to owner human
capital. Overall, top earners are predominantly human-capital rich, and the majority of top
income accrues to the human capital of wage earners and entrepreneurs, not financial capital.
    We highlight three directions for future research. First, the presence and growth of
recharacterized labor income mechanically reduces the measured labor share in the U.S.
corporate sector. More broadly, economic measurement of labor and capital income depends
upon the incentives and reporting structure of the tax system. Future research on top
inequality should continue to engage with the role of entrepreneurial income amid a real-
world environment of changing tax policy, including by investigating the human capital
component of other forms of capital income such as C-corporation income and rental income.
To the extent that labor income is characterized as capital income, there may be a rationale
for aligning capital and labor income tax rates (Piketty and Saez, 2013).
    Second, linking C-corporations to their owners would improve measurement of top income
and wealth inequality. We have provided an online appendix that explores various methods
of allocating C-corporation retained earnings, which can be used to improve corporate wealth
estimates in the absence of direct ownership data. Linking unreported profits from unincor-
porated businesses to their owners would also improve measurement. Top wealth estimates
based on capitalized income flows and a constant returns assumption can be improved by
accounting for the higher profitability of top-owned firms.
    Third, much of rising top income inequality remains consistent with rising private returns
to top human capital, but we stress that our findings are silent on the social value of those
returns. For example, private returns to owner-manager factors can exceed social returns
due to rent-seeking, elite connections, and unequal access to the opportunity to enter certain
professions, industries, or markets. Normative conclusions about the social value of top
human capital therefore require data and assumptions beyond the scope of this paper. Future
research should investigate the link between private and social returns, an important next
step in explaining their evolution and assessing policy implications.

US Treasury Department
UC Berkeley and NBER
Princeton and NBER
Chicago Booth and NBER


                                             39
References
Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis. 1999. “High Wage Workers
 and High Wage Firms.” Econometrica, 67(2): 251–333.

Alstadsaeter, Annette, Martin Jacob, Wojciech Kopczuk, and Kjetil Telle. 2016.
 “Accounting for Business Income in Measuring Top Income Shares: Integrated Accrual
 Approach Using Individual and Firm Data from Norway.” National Bureau of Economic
 Research Working Paper 22888.

Atkinson, Anthony Barnes, and Joseph E Stiglitz. 1976. “The design of tax structure:
 direct versus indirect taxation.” Journal of public Economics, 6(1-2): 55–75.

Auten, Gerald, and David Splinter. 2018. “Using Tax Data to Measure Long-Term
 Trends in U.S. Income Inequality.” Treasury Office of Tax Analysis Working Paper.

Auten, Gerald, David Splinter, and Susan Nelson. 2016. “Reactions of High-Income
 Taxpayers to Major Tax Legislation.” National Tax Journal, 69(4): 935.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F Katz, Christina Patterson, and John
 Van Reenen. 2017. “The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms.”
 National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23396.

Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. “The skill content of
 recent technological change: An empirical exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 118(4): 1279–1333.

Autor, David H, Lawrence F Katz, and Melissa S Kearney. 2008. “Trends in
 US Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
 90(2): 300–323.

Bakija, Jon, Adam Cole, and Bradley T. Heim. 2012. “Jobs and income growth of
 top earners and the causes of changing income inequality: Evidence from US tax return
 data.” Working Paper, Williams College.

Becker, Sascha, and Hans Hvide. 2017. “Do entrepreneurs matter?” Working Paper.

Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2010. “Do
 CEOs Matter?”

Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2012. “Es-
 timating the Value of The Boss: Evidence from CEO Hospitalization Events.”

Bennedsen, Morten, Kasper Meisner Nielsen, Francisco Pérez-González, and
 Daniel Wolfenzon. 2007. “Inside the family firm: The role of families in succession
 decisions and performance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2): 647–691.

Bhandari, Anmol, and Ellen R McGrattan. 2018. “Sweat Equity in US Private Busi-
 ness.” National Bureau of Economic Research #24520.

                                          40
Bricker, Jesse, Alice Henriques, Jacob Krimmel, and John Sabelhaus. 2016. “Mea-
 suring income and wealth at the top using administrative and survey data.” Brookings
 Papers on Economic Activity, 2016(1): 261–331.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Andrew McAfee, Michael Sorell, and Feng Zhu. 2008. “Scale
 Without Mass: Business Process Replication and Industry Dynamics.” HBS Working
 Paper 07-016.

Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2017.
 “Rents, Technical Change, and Risk Premia Accounting for Secular Trends in Interest
 Rates, Returns on Capital, Earning Yields, and Factor Shares.” American Economic Re-
 view, 107(5): 614–20.

Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2013. “Workplace heterogeneity and
 the rise of West German wage inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3): 967–
 1015.

Chamley, Christophe. 1986. “Optimal taxation of capital income in general equilibrium
 with infinite lives.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 607–622.

Chetty, Raj, and Emmanuel Saez. 2005. “Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior:
 Evidence from the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3): 791.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny
 Yagan. 2019. “Income Segregation and Intergenerational Mobility Across Colleges in the
 United States.” national bureau of economic research.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where
 is the land of opportunity? The geography of intergenerational mobility in the United
 States.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1553–1623.

Clarke, Conor, and Wojciech Kopczuk. 2017. “Business Income and Business Taxation
  in the United States since the 1950s.” Tax Policy and the Economy, 31(1): 121–159.

Cooper, Michael, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph
 Sullivan, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2016. “Business in the United
 States: Who Owns It, and How Much Tax Do They Pay?” Tax Policy and the Economy,
 30(1): 91–128.

DeBacker, Jason M, and Richard Prisinzano. 2015. “The Rise of Partnerships.” Tax
 Notes, 147(13): 1563–75.

De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroe-
 conomic Implications.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 22822.

Dyrda, Sebastian, and Benjamin Pugsley. 2018. “Taxes, Regulations of Businesses and
 Evolution of Income Inequality in the US.” University of Toronto Working Paper.



                                          41
Edmans, Alex, and Xavier Gabaix. 2016. “Executive compensation: A modern primer.”
 Journal of Economic Literature, 54(4): 1232–1287.
Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, Davide Malacrino, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2016.
  “Heterogeneity and persistence in returns to wealth.” National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search Working Paper 22822.
Fisman, Raymond. 2001. “Estimating the value of political connections.” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 91(4): 1095–1102.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. “Reallocation, Firm
  Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic
  Review, 98(1): 394–425.
Gabaix, Xavier, and Augustin Landier. 2008. “Why has CEO pay increased so much?”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1): 49–100.
Goldin, Claudia Dale, and Lawrence F Katz. 2009. The Race between Education and
 Technology. Harvard University Press.
Gordon, Roger, and Joel Slemrod. 2000. “Are ‘Real’ Responses to Taxes Simply In-
 come Shifting between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases (New York: Russell Sage Foun-
 dation; Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000).” In Does Atlas Shrug? The
 Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich. , ed. Joel Slemrod, Chapter 8, 240–288. Cam-
 bridge:Russell Sage Foundation Books at Harvard University Press.
Gordon, Roger H., and Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason. 1994. “Tax distortions to the
 choice of organizational form.” Journal of Public Economics, 55(2): 279–306.
Hall, Robert E. 1988. “The relation between price and marginal cost in US industry.”
 Journal of Political Economy, 96(5): 921–947.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
 China and India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1403–1448.
Jäger, Simon. 2016. “How Substitutable Are Workers? Evidence from Worker Deaths.”
  Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Jaravel, Xavier, Neviana Petkova, and Alex Bell. 2018. “Team-Specific Capital and
  Innovation.” American Economic Review, 108(4-5): 1034–73.
Johnson, W Bruce, Robert P Magee, Nandu J Nagarajan, and Harry A Newman.
  1985. “An analysis of the stock price reaction to sudden executive deaths: Implications
  for the managerial labor market.” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 7(1-3): 151–174.
Judd, Kenneth L. 1985. “Redistributive taxation in a simple perfect foresight model.”
  Journal of public Economics, 28(1): 59–83.
Kaplan, Steven N, and Joshua Rauh. 2013. “It’s the market: The broad-based rise in
 the return to top talent.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(3): 35–55.

                                           42
Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2014. “The Global Decline of the Labor
 Share.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 61–103.

Katz, Lawrence F, and Kevin M Murphy. 1992. “Changes in relative wages, 1963–1987:
 supply and demand factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 35–78.

Khwaja, Asim Ijaz, and Atif Mian. 2005. “Do lenders favor politically connected
 firms? Rent provision in an emerging financial market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 120(4): 1371–1411.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Emmanuel Saez. 2004. “Top Wealth Shares in the United
 States, 1916-2000: Evidence From Estate Tax Returns.” National Tax Journal, 57(2): 445–
 87.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J, and Lawrence H Summers. 1981. “The role of intergenerational
 transfers in aggregate capital accumulation.” Journal of political economy, 89(4): 706–732.

Krueger, Anne O. 1974. “The political economy of the rent-seeking society.” American
 Economic Review, 64(3): 291–303.

Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael I Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva.
 2015. “How elastic are preferences for redistribution? Evidence from randomized survey
 experiments.” American Economic Review, 105(4): 1478–1508.

Mackie-Mason, Jeffrey K., and Roger H. Gordon. 1997. “How much do taxes dis-
 courage incorporation?” Journal of Finance, 52(2): 477–506.

Modigliani, Franco. 1986. “Life Cycle, lndividual Thrift, and the Wealth of Nations.” The
 American Economic Review, 76(3): 297–313.

Murphy, Kevin M, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny. 1991. “The Allocation
 of Talent: Implications for Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2): 503–530.

Murphy, Kevin M, and Robert H Topel. 2016. “Human capital investment, inequality,
 and economic growth.” Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S2): S99–S127.

Nelson, Susan C. 2016. “Paying Themselves: S Corporation Owners and Trends in S
 Corporation Income, 1980–2013.” OTA Working Paper 107.

Pérez-González, Francisco. 2006. “Inherited Control and Firm Performance.” American
  Economic Review, 96(5): 1559–1588.

Piketty, Thomas. 2011. “On the Long-Run Evolution of Inheritance: France 1820–2050.”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3): 1071–1131.

Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the 21st Century. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University
  Press.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States,
  1913–1998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 1–41.

                                            43
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Optimal labor income taxation.” In
  Handbook of public economics. Vol. 5, 391–474. Elsevier.
Piketty, Thomas, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014. “Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios
  in Rich Countries, 1700-2010.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1255–1310.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. “Distributional na-
  tional accounts: methods and estimates for the United States.” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 133(2): 553–609.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2014. “Optimal Taxa-
  tion of Top Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities.” American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 6(1): 230–71.
Piketty, Thomas, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 2014. “Inher-
  ited vs self-made wealth: Theory & evidence from a rentier society (Paris 1872–1927).”
  Explorations in economic history, 51: 21–40.
Prisinzano, Richard, and James Pearce. 2017. “Tax Based Switching of Business In-
 come.”
Rognlie, Matthew. 2016. “Deciphering the Fall and Rise in the Net Capital Share: Accu-
 mulation or Scarcity?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2016(1): 1–69.
Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. “Wealth inequality in the United States
  since 1913: Evidence from capitalized income tax data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  131(2): 519–578.
Slemrod, Joel. 1996. “High Income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980s: The
  Anatomy of Behavioral Response.” In Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation. Vol.
  118, , ed. Martin Feldstein and James M Poterba, Chapter 6, 169–192. Chicago:University
  of Chicago Press.
Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2017. “Capitalists in
 the Twenty-first Century.” UC Berkeley and University of Chicago Working Paper.
Song, Jae, David Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till von Wachter.
  forthcoming. “Firming Up Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Syverson, Chad. 2011. “What Determines Productivity?” Journal of Economic Literature,
  49(2): 326–65.
Yagan, Danny. 2015. “Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The Effects of the 2003
 Dividend Tax Cut.” American Economic Review, 105(12): 3531–3563.
Zimmerman, Seth D. forthcoming. “Elite Colleges and Upward Mobility to Top Jobs and
  Top Incomes.” American Economic Review.
Zwick, Eric, and James Mahon. 2017. “Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Be-
 havior.” American Economic Review, 107(1): 217–48.

                                           44
                                                                                Figure 1: Income Sources of Top Earners in 2014

                                                                       A. Share of People by Majority Income Source
                                                              Fiscal Income (FI)                    Imputed National Income (INI)
                 100




                                                                                                                                                                    100
                    80




                                                                                                                                                                            80
Share of People (%)




                                                                                                                                                        Share of People (%)
            60




                                                                                                                                                                    60
    40




                                                                                                                                                            40
                 20




                                                                                                                                                                    20
                 0




                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                       P90-91



                                                P91-92



                                                          P92-93



                                                                   P93-94



                                                                               P94-95



                                                                                        P95-96



                                                                                                 P96-97



                                                                                                          P97-98



                                                                                                                   P98-99



                                                                                                                            P99-99.9



                                                                                                                                       P99.9-100




                                                                                                                                                                                    P90-91



                                                                                                                                                                                             P91-92



                                                                                                                                                                                                      P92-93



                                                                                                                                                                                                               P93-94



                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P94-95



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P95-96



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P96-97



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P97-98



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P98-99



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P99-99.9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P99.9-100
                                                                               Fiscal Income Bin                                                                                                                        Imputed National Income Bin

                                                                                                 Other capital income: interest,                                                                                                               Other capital income: interest,
                                                     Wages                  Business                                                                                                              Wages                  Business
                                                                                                 rents, royalties, estates, trusts                                                                                                             rents, royalties, estates, trusts



                                                                              B. Share of Income by Source
                                                              Fiscal Income (FI)                  Imputed National Income (INI)
                                 100




                                                                                                                                                                    100
Share of Bin's Fiscal Income (%)
                           80




                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                                          Share of Bin's INI (%)
                   60




                                                                                                                                                                        60
           40




                                                                                                                                                               40
   20




                                                                                                                                                        20
                 0




                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                       P90-91



                                                P91-92



                                                          P92-93



                                                                   P93-94



                                                                               P94-95



                                                                                        P95-96



                                                                                                 P96-97



                                                                                                          P97-98



                                                                                                                   P98-99



                                                                                                                            P99-99.9



                                                                                                                                       P99.9-100




                                                                                                                                                                                    P90-91



                                                                                                                                                                                             P91-92



                                                                                                                                                                                                      P92-93



                                                                                                                                                                                                               P93-94



                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P94-95



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P95-96



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P96-97



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P97-98



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P98-99



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P99-99.9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P99.9-100
                                                                               Fiscal Income Bin                                                                                                                        Imputed National Income Bin

                                                     Wages                  Business             Other capital income: interest,                                                                  Wages                  Business              Other capital income: interest,
                                                                                                 rents, royalties, estates, trusts                                                                                                             rents, royalties, estates, trusts



                                                                       C. Share of Income by Business Income Source
                                                              Fiscal Income (FI)                   Imputed National Income (INI)
                                 40




                                                                                                                                                                    40
Share of Bin's Fiscal Income (%)




                                                                                                                                                        Share of Bin's INI (%)
                                                                                                                                                                           30
                         30




                                                                                                                                                                 20
               20




                                                                                                                                                         10
     10




                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                    P90-91



                                                                                                                                                                                             P91-92



                                                                                                                                                                                                      P92-93



                                                                                                                                                                                                               P93-94



                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P94-95



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P95-96



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P96-97



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P97-98



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P98-99



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P99-99.9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P99.9-100
                  0
                                       P90-91



                                                P91-92



                                                          P92-93



                                                                   P93-94



                                                                               P94-95



                                                                                        P95-96



                                                                                                 P96-97



                                                                                                          P97-98



                                                                                                                   P98-99



                                                                                                                            P99-99.9



                                                                                                                                       P99.9-100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Imputed National Income Bin
                                                                               Fiscal Income Bin
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Business income from private pass-through firms
                                                         Business income from private pass-through firms                                                                                              Business income from other firms (C-corporation dividends
                                                         Business income from other firms (C-corporation dividends)                                                                                   + retained earnings)




                                                                                                                                                   45
Notes to Figure 1: This figure uses our 2014 top-incomes data to show the relative importance of different
income sources for top earners using fiscal income (i.e., directly observed tax data) and imputed national
income. Panel A plots the share of tax units (fiscal income) or adult individuals (imputed national income) in
each income bin who earned the majority of their income in 2014 from wages, business income, or other capital
income. For fiscal income, wages includes wages-salaries-and-tips, pension distributions, and annuities, as in
Piketty and Saez (2003); business income includes pass-through income (S-corporation income, partnership
income, and sole proprietor’s income) and C-corporation dividends; other capital income includes all other
income sources (interest, rents, royalties, and estate and trust income). For imputed national income,
we use analogous definitions from Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018), which includes imputed employer-
provided health insurance (included in wages), imputed rents from owner-occupied housing (included in
other capital income), and imputed C-corporation retained earnings (included in business income) among
other components of national income that do not appear on tax returns. Panel B plots the share of total
top income in the form of wages, business, and other capital income for each income bin. Panel C separates
the business income series into contributions from pass-through business and C-corporation income.




Figure 2: Working-Age Pass-Through Owners Prevail at the Top of the Income Distribution

 A. Pass-Through Income in Top 1% is Large                                                                 B. Millionaire Pass-through Owners
                                                                                                                     are Working Age
          250




                                                           Number of People (K)
                                                                                                                40




                                                 Execs in Execucomp      10.7
                                                                                        with majority income of this source




                                                 Owners in P99-99.9   1,004.3
                                                                                          Share of million-dollar earners
          200




                                                 Owners in P99.9-99.99 123.5
                                                                                                                    30




                                                 Owners in P99.99-100    14.9
                                        $100.5
             150
     Income (B)




                                                                                                         20




                                                        $61.6
    100




                                                                       $41.6
                                                                                             10




                                       $110.8
          50




                                                        $86.9
                                                                       $74.4
                                                                                                                0




                     $32.7                                                                                          20-29     30-39    40-49      50-59    60-69    70-79     80-89    90+
                                                                                                                                                    Age Group
          0




                   Execucomp         P99-99.9       P99.9-99.99     P99.99-100
                                                                                                                                      Wages                  Pass-through
                         Salary + Options        S-corporation       Partnership                                                      Other capital          C-corporation dividends



Notes: Panel A uses our 2014 top incomes data to plot the aggregate pass-through income within the top
1% by fiscal income bin and compares that quantity to aggregate salary plus options compensation for all
executives in the Execucomp database in 2014. Panel B uses our 2014 top incomes data to plot the share of
tax units with over one million dollars in fiscal income who earn the majority of their fiscal income in 2014
from either wages, pass-through income, C-corporation dividends, or other capital income by age (i.e., the
age of the single tax filer or the mean age of married spouses filing jointly).




                                                                                   46
      Figure 3: Top-Owned Firms Are Mid-Market and Broad-Based across Industries

                                                              A. Profit Distribution by Firm Size




                                       100    80
                     to this corporate form (%)
                      Share of profits accrued

                    20        40      60
                                       0




                                                       $500k-$1m          $1m-$5m                 $5m-$10m            $10m-$50m $50m-$500m                             $500m+
                                                                                                         Sales in 2014
                                                                             C-corporations                           Millionaire-owned pass-throughs



                                                       B. Distribution of Profits Across Industries
                                         50      40
                              Share of total (%)
                           10    20      30
                                         0
                                                         Ag



                                                                      C



                                                                                     M



                                                                                                    R



                                                                                                                 Fi



                                                                                                                                 In



                                                                                                                                                  H



                                                                                                                                                                  En



                                                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                       on




                                                                                                        et




                                                                                                                                                  ea




                                                                                                                                                                                   th
                                                                                        an




                                                                                                                     n,



                                                                                                                                   fo
                                                           ric




                                                                                                                                                                   te
                                                                                                        ai




                                                                                                                                                                                      er
                                                                          st




                                                                                                                                                       lth
                                                                                         uf




                                                                                                                       In



                                                                                                                                      &




                                                                                                                                                                       rtn
                                                              ul




                                                                                                           l
                                                                             ru



                                                                                             ac




                                                                                                                          su




                                                                                                                                                                                        Sv
                                                                                                             &




                                                                                                                                          Pr
                                                              tu




                                                                                                                                                         C



                                                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                c




                                                                                                               W
                                                                                               tu




                                                                                                                            r&
                                                                 re




                                                                                                                                           of



                                                                                                                                                             ar




                                                                                                                                                                                           cs
                                                                               tio




                                                                                                                                                                             t,
                                                                                                  rin



                                                                                                                ho




                                                                                                                                              e



                                                                                                                                                             e



                                                                                                                                                                              Fo
                                                                   &



                                                                                    n




                                                                                                                                                 ss
                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                    g



                                                                                                                 le
                                                                                     &
                                                                      Fo




                                                                                                                                                                                  od
                                                                                                                                 ea



                                                                                                                                                  io
                                                                                                                     sa
                                                                                        M




                                                                                                                                                   na
                                                                        re




                                                                                                                                     lE




                                                                                                                                                                                   &
                                                                                         in




                                                                                                                      le
                                                                          st




                                                                                                                                                     lS
                                                                                                                                      st




                                                                                                                                                                                       H
                                                                                          in




                                                                                                                          Tr
                                                                             ry




                                                                                                                                                                                        ot
                                                                                                                                          at
                                                                                              g




                                                                                                                                                       vc
                                                                                                                             a




                                                                                                                                                                                           el
                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                            de




                                                                                                                                                             s




                                                                                                                                                                                              s




                                                      C-corporation profits                                  Millionaire-owned pass-through firms
                                                      Number of workers


Notes: This figure uses our 2014 linked-firm-owner data and our SOI C-corporation data to plot the distri-
bution of profits by firm size and industry in 2014 by organizational form. Panel A plots the distribution
of aggregate profits by firm sales for C-corporations, and separately for pass-throughs owned by tax units
with at least one million dollars in fiscal income. Panel B plots the distribution of profits generated by
each organizational form across 1-digit NAICS sectors. We split NAICS 5 into two sub-categories: Finance,
Insurance and Real Estate (FIRE), which encompasses NAICS codes 52 and 53; and Information and Pro-
fessional Services, which includes NAICS 51, 54 and 56. Since NAICS 55 (Management of Companies and
Enterprises, i.e., holding companies) includes activity from several industries, we exclude it here. See Online
Appendix Figure I.3 for versions with top 1% and top 0.1% pass-through owners.
                                                                                                         47
                      Figure 4: Profitability Rises with Owner Income Rank

                                      A. Profits per Worker by Owner Income Rank




                                        14      12
                         Profits (000s) per worker
                         6        8     10
                                        4




                                                       90   91   92     93      94      95     96     97       98   99   100
                                                                             Fiscal income percentile

                                                                                No controls
                                                                                Net of 4-digit industry FEs
                                                                                Net of industry-sales FEs



                        B. Profits per worker in Startup’s First Five Years
                                                   8
                         Profits (000s) per worker
                             6         5 7




                                                       90   91   92       93    94      95      96     97      98   99   100
                                                                 Fiscal income percentile in year before founding

                                                                                 Startup's fifth year
                                                                                 Startup's first five years



Notes: Panel A plots firm profitability (profits per worker) by owner fiscal income across owner-firm obser-
vations in the 2014 linked-firm-owner data. The bins are one-percentile-point wide in fiscal income, except
in the top 1% where we consider bins of ranks between the 99th percentile and 99.5th percentile, the 99.5th
percentile and 99.9th percentile, and the top 0.1%. Means are weighted by scale (the firm’s number of
workers). Industry fixed effects denote 4-digit NAICS indicators. Sales fixed effects denote ventile indicators
(i.e., five-percentile-point bins in the firm sales distribution). Panel B plots the equivalent of Panel A’s
within-industry series using the population of pass-through startups 2001-2010. It ranks owners by their
fiscal income in the year before founding a new pass-through. It plots in blue circles profits per worker in
the firm’s fifth year of existence, conditional on the firm surviving five years. It plots in red squares the
startup’s sum of its first five years of annual profits divided by the startup’s sum of its first five years of
annual number of workers, imputing zeros for profits and workers in years after a startup exits. We focus
on firms with positive workers. We winsorize profitability at the 1st and 99th percentiles across the year’s
top-decile owner-firm observations. We apportion profits and workers to owners according to ownership
shares. To take out fixed effects, we compute profitability at the owner-firm level for all owners in the top
personal income decile, regress profitability on industry fixed effects weighted by the number of workers,
compute residuals, add a constant to the residuals such that the sum of the product of the residuals and
the number of workers equals total profits, and then compute the employment-weighted mean of each bin’s
residuals. The addition of the constant ensures that the overall employment-weighted mean profitability is
constant across specifications.                        48
                   Figure 5: Profit Impacts of Owner Deaths and Retirements

                                                                   A. Death of a Million-Dollar-Earning Owner




                                         10
                       Profits Per Pre-period Worker (000s)
                     -30        -20        -10        0




                                                              -4      -3     -2       -1        0      1           2   3   4
                                                                                    Years Since Owner Death

                                                                                       Impact             95% CI


                                                              B. Retirement of a Million-Dollar-Earning Owner
                                         10
                     Profits Per Pre-period Worker (000s)
                      -40      -30    -20-50 -10      0




                                                              -4      -3     -2       -1       0         1         2   3   4
                                                                                  Years Since Owner Retirement

                                                                                       Impact             95% CI


Notes: For Panel A, we identify all 765 “owner-death” firms in our linked-firm-owner-worker data that: (i)
have an owner in a year t ∈ [2005, 2010] who was under age 65, died in year t, and had over $1 million in
t−1 fiscal income; (ii) had no other owner deaths 2001-2014, at least $100,000 in sales in 2014 dollars in t−1,
positive sales in all years [t−4, t−1], and the firm had positive employment in some year [t−4, t−1]; and (iii)
has at least one “counterfactual” firm of the same organizational form that met the same [t−4, t−1] firm
requirements, match the owner-death firm on three-digit industry and t−1 sales decile, and have a year-t
owner who matches the dying owner on t−1 income fractile and five-year age bin. For Panel B, we identify
all 5,312 “owner-retirement” firms that satisfy requirements similar to those for owner-death firms except
that instead of death, we measure retirement as the firm having at least one owner receiving W-2 wages in
consecutive years [t−4, t−1] and no one receiving wages [t, t+1]. Counterfactual firms had at least one owner
receiving W-2 wages [t−4, t+1]. Each panel presents simple difference-in-difference estimates of the event
(death or retirement) impact on annual firm profits ($K) per mean annual pre-period worker. Displayed 95%
confidence intervals are based on standard errors clustered at the firm level. See Online Appendix Figures
                                                       49
I.6 for analogous graphs for top 1% and top 0.1% owners.
      Figure 6: Impact of Organizational Form Switch on Profits and Wage Payments

                                                                        A. All vs. Non-Majority-Owned




                                                          5
                     Outcome as a percentage of sales (%)
                          -2.5        0 -5     2.5




                                                              -4   -3       -2       -1        0       1          2        3         4
                                                                                      Years Since Switch

                                                                    Wages, All Firms                       Profits, All Firms
                                                                    Wages, Non-Majority Firms              Profits, Non-Majority Firms


                                                                           B. All vs. Skilled Service
                                                          5
                     Outcome as a percentage of sales (%)
                           -2.5      0     -5 2.5




                                                              -4   -3        -2      -1        0       1          2        3         4
                                                                                      Years Since Switch

                                                                         Wages, All Firms                  Profits, All Firms
                                                                         Wages, Service Firms              Profits, Service Firms


Notes: This figure uses our linked-firm-owner data to display how wage payments and profits change when
a firm changes organizational form from C-corporation to S-corporation. The sample includes all 157,272 S-
corporations that switched from C-corporate to S-corporate form between 2001–2010; had at least $100K in
sales in year prior to the switch; and were active in the four years before and four years following the switch.
The No Majority series plot changes for the 14,600 firms that had only minority owners (i.e., with less than
50% ownership) in the switch year. The Service series plot changes for switch events for the 53,220 firms
that were in high-skilled service industries, defined as having 2-digit NAICS ∈ {51, 52, 54, 56, 61, 62}. We
study two outcomes: annual profits divided by contemporaneous sales, and annual wage payments (including
officer compensation) divided by contemporaneous sales. Each plotted series comprises difference estimates
for the outcome of interest relative to t−1, conditional on firm and calendar year fixed effects. Displayed
95% confidence intervals are based on standard errors clustered at the firm level.


                                                                                          50
                                                                                 Figure 7: Are Top Earners Human-Capital Rich?

                                                                        A. Share of People by Majority Income Source
                                                               Fiscal Income (FI)                    Imputed National Income (INI)
            100




                                                                                                                                                                                                         100
                      80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   80
    Share of people (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Share of people (%)
               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                            60
         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                20
            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                           P90-91



                                           P91-92



                                                           P92-93



                                                                     P93-94



                                                                                P94-95



                                                                                              P95-96



                                                                                                             P96-97



                                                                                                                           P97-98



                                                                                                                                            P98-99



                                                                                                                                                             P99-99.9



                                                                                                                                                                               P99.9-100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P90-91



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P91-92



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P92-93



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P93-94



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P94-95



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P95-96



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P96-97



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P97-98



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P98-99



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P99-99.9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P99.9-100
                                                                                Fiscal Income Bin                                                                                                                                                                             Imputed National Income Bin

                                               Wages                                                                  Wages + .75 Pass-through                                                                                              Wages                                                                      Wages + .75 Pass-through
                                               Business                                                               Business - .75 Pass-through                                                                                           Business                                                                   Business - .75 Pass-through
                                              Other capital income: interest,                                                                                                                                                              Other capital income: interest,
                                              rents, royalties, estates, trusts                                                                                                                                                            rents, royalties, estates, trusts



                                                               B. Human-Capital Rich and Self-Made Shares of Top Earners
                                                               Fiscal Income (FI)                Imputed National Income (INI)
             100




                                                                                                                                                                                                          100




                                                    96.0                                    93.5
                                           92.3            91.4 93.2 91.8            88.8
                                                                                                                                           92.9             90.2
                                                                                                          88.0                      87.3                                                                                                                      86.6                                                                                           87.6
   Share of People (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                Share of People (%)




                                                                                                   85.1                                              86.6               86.5                                                                                                                               84.9
                                                                                                                 82.8                                                                                                                            81.3 82.6           81.9
                  75




                                                                                                                                                                                                               75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    75.3          75.1                                77.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        73.6                                                                                                                             74.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        67.4 69.8
                                    62.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    62.4
          50




                                                                                                                                                                                                       50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     56.2
                                                                              46.8
                                                                                                                          42.9                                                                                                   40.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 35.4
   25




                                                                                                                                                                                                25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           23.3
             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                    Top 1%                    Million-dollar earners                                  Top 0.1%                                                                                                   Top 1%                          Million-dollar earners                                Top 0.1%

                                                     Wage earners (i.e. has majority income from wages)                                                                                                                                           Wage earners (i.e. has majority income from wages)
                                                     Human-capital rich (i.e. has majority income from labor)                                                                                                                                     Human-capital rich (i.e. has majority income from labor)
                                                     Human-capital rich, parent-linked subset                                                                                                                                                     Human-capital rich, parent-linked subset
                                                     Self-made (i.e. has bottom-99% parent), parent-linked subset                                                                                                                                 Self-made (i.e. has bottom-99% parent), parent-linked subset
                                                     Self-made, parent-linked workers                                                                                                                                                             Self-made, parent-linked workers
                                                     Self-made, parent-linked entrepreneurs                                                                                                                                                       Self-made, parent-linked entrepreneurs



Notes: The left figure in Panel B uses our top incomes data to classify top earners (tax units) in the 2014
fiscal income series. The right figure in Panel B classifies top earners (individual) in the 2014 imputed
national income series. Wage earners are those earning a majority of their income from wages. Human-
capital rich are those earning a majority of their income from labor income, defined as wages plus 75%
of pass-through income. The parent-linked subset comprises 32-34-year-olds who can be linked to parents.
The Self-made bars plot the share of top earners in the indicated subset who had a parent earning in the
bottom 99% of the income distribution. Entrepreneurs are earners who earned a majority of their income
as pass-through entrepreneurial income, defined as pass-through income plus owner wages (i.e., W-2 wages
earned from owned pass-throughs).




                                                                                                                                                                                           51
                                                                                                                        Figure 8: How Do Top Earners Earn Their Income?

                                                                                                             A. Share of Income by Source
                                                                                            Fiscal Income (FI)                    Imputed National Income (INI)
                                  100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100
   Share of Bin's Fiscal Income (%)
                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Share of Bin's INI (%)
                      60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
       20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                        P90-91



                                                                          P91-92



                                                                                        P92-93



                                                                                                 P93-94



                                                                                                                            P94-95



                                                                                                                                      P95-96



                                                                                                                                                 P96-97



                                                                                                                                                                 P97-98



                                                                                                                                                                          P98-99



                                                                                                                                                                                      P99-99.9



                                                                                                                                                                                                   P99.9-100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P90-91



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P91-92



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P92-93



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P93-94



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P94-95



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P95-96



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P96-97



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P97-98



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P98-99



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P99-99.9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P99.9-100
                                                                                                                            Fiscal Income Bin                                                                                                                                                                       Imputed National Income Bin

                                                                                     Wages                                                     Wages + .75 Pass-through                                                                                                                     Wages                                                     Wages + .75 Pass-through
                                                                                     Business                                                  Business - .75 Pass-through                                                                                                                  Business                                                  Business - .75 Pass-through
                                                                                     Other capital income                                                                                                                                                                                   Other capital income



                                                                                                           B. Top Labor and Capital Income
                                                                                            Fiscal Income (FI)                   Imputed National Income (INI)
                   2,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3,000
                                             Entrepreneurial Income=39%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Entrepreneurial Income=36%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Labor Income=53%



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           826.5
                                                                                                   Labor Income=76%
              1,500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           92.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2,000




                                                                                    773.2
   Income (B)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Income (B)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           700.5                                            434.1
     1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            49.9                 47%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             36%




                                                                                    118.3                                                                                                                                                                                                  298.2                                            464.2                                    234.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        42%
                                                                                                                                     339.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       36%
                                                                                                                                                          70%




                                                                                    377.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   197.7                                    336.0
                                                                                                                                     59.4                                     245.8                                                                                                        454.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                 67%
                   500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     143.1
                                                                                                                      44%




                                                                                                                                                                               41.5                                                                                                                                                         374.0
                                                                                                                                     245.7
                                                                                                                                                                 45%




                                                                                    160.9                                                                                     195.2                                                                                                                                                                                                  319.7
                                                                                    108.7                                            104.9                                     83.3                                                                                                        687.2
                                                                                                                                      76.7                                     65.2                                                                                                                                                         479.8                                    351.2
                                                                                    141.6                                            100.4                                     84.0
                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                   Top 1%                               Million-dollar earners                            Top 0.1%                                                                                                        Top 1%                               Million-dollar earners                           Top 0.1%

                                                                                       Pass-through labor                                                       Non-owner wages                                                                                                            Pass-through labor                                                              Non-owner wages
                                                                                       Pass-through capital                                                     Owner wages                                                                                                                Pass-through capital                                                            Owner wages
                                                                                       C-corporation dividends                                                  Other capital income                                                                                                       C-corporation dividends + RE                                                    Other capital income




Notes: This figure uses our top incomes data to quantify sources of top incomes in 2014. Wages, pass-through
income, and C-corporation income (dividends, or dividends and retained earnings), and other capital income
are defined as in Figure 1. Pass-through labor income equals 75% of pass-through income; pass-through
capital income equals the remainder of pass-through income. Owner wages equal W-2 wages paid to owners
from pass-throughs they own; non-owner wages equal the remainder of wages.




                                                                                                                                                                                                               52
                                                       Figure 9: Business Income and Rising U.S. Income Inequality (1960–2014)

                                                                              A. Sources of Top 1% Income
                                                              Fiscal Income (FI)                  Imputed National Income (INI)
                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                         as share of national income (%)
            as share of fiscal income (%)
                                                  8
             Top 1% income in this form




                                                                                                                           Top 1% income in this form

                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                  6




                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                  4




                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                  2




                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                  0




                                                   1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                                                  1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

                                                                             Wage income                                                                                                    Wage income
                                                                             Business income                                                                                                Business income
                                                                             Other capital income                                                                                           Other capital income



                                                                          B. Sources of Top 1% Business Income
                                                              Fiscal Income (FI)                  Imputed National Income (INI)
                                                  8




                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                         as share of national income (%)
            as share of fiscal income (%)
             Top 1% income in this form




                                                                                                                           Top 1% income in this form
                                                  6




                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                  4




                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                  2




                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                  0




                                                   1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                                                  1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

                                                                           Pass-through income                                                                                  Pass-through income
                                                                           C-corporation dividends                                                                              C-corporation dividends + retained earnings



                                                                                 C. Top 1% Labor Share
                                                              Fiscal Income (FI)                 Imputed National Income (INI)
                                             80




                                                                                                                                                           80
   Labor share of top 1% fiscal income (%)




                                                                                                                                                           70
                                             70




                                                                                                                      imputed national income (%)
                                                                                                                         Labor share of top 1%

                                                                                                                                                           60
                                             60




                                                                                                                                                           50
                                             50




                                                                                                                                                           40
                                             40




                                                                                                                                                           30
                                             30




                                                                                                                                                           20
                                             20




                                                                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                            1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                             10




                                              1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                                                                                                                                                           Wage income + .75 Pass-through [SYZZ]
                                                                   Wage income + .75 Pass-through [SYZZ]                                                                   Wage income + .7 (Pass-through - S-corporation) [PSZ]
                                                                   Wage income                                                                                             Wage income



Notes: This figure uses our top incomes data to show the relative importance of different income sources for
the evolution of top income shares. See the notes to Figure 1 for definitions.




                                                                                                                 53
               Figure 10: Why is Entrepreneurial Income Rising? Productivity, Scale, or Redistribution

                  A. Value Added and Entrepreneurial                                                                                                                                                        B. Pass-through Employment
                          Income per Worker                                                                                                                                                                Adjusted for Org. Form Changes
              60




                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                        50
     Thousands of Dollars




                                                                                                                                                                                   Millions of Workers
                                                                                                                                                                                                  30
         30     40




                                                                                                                                                                                      20
   20




                                                                                                                                                                                             10
              10
                             2001

                                     2002

                                            2003

                                                   2004

                                                          2005

                                                                   2006

                                                                          2007

                                                                                   2008

                                                                                            2009

                                                                                                      2010

                                                                                                              2011

                                                                                                                        2012

                                                                                                                                 2013

                                                                                                                                        2014




                                                                                                                                                                                                         2001

                                                                                                                                                                                                                2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2008

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2009

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2010

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2011

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2014
                                            Top 1%                                                 Top 0.1%                                                                                                            Top 1%                                                                                   Top 0.1%
                                            Value Added / L                                        Value Added / L                                                                                                     Number of Workers                                                                        Number of Workers
                                            Entrepreneurial Income / L                             Entrepreneurial Income / L                                                                                          Org.-Form-Changes Adj.                                                                   Org.-Form-Changes Adj.



                                    C. Decomposing Entrepreneurial                                                                                                                                              D. Falling Wages and Rising
                                           Income Growth                                                                                                                                                          Entrepreneurial Income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Top 1%                                                                                           Top 0.1%
                                                                                                                                                                            60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
 Top 1% (2001-2014)                                        -24.1                 63.0                          61.1
                                                                                                                                                 Share of Value Added (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Share of Value Added (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.5
                                                                                                                                                                            45




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9.3
Top 0.1% (2001-2014)                                         -16.4               60.7                        55.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8.9
                                                                                                                                                                                    11.2                        62.5
                                                                                                                                                                            30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   59.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  52.1
 Top 1% (2004-2014)                                        -21.9                   75.5                              46.4                                                                                                                                                                                                           45.5          47.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 38.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               31.2
                                                                                                                                                                            15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15




                                                                                                                                                                                    26.2

Top 0.1% (2004-2014)                                      -32.5                      83.3                              49.2
                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                 Entrep. Inc. Worker Pay                      Entrep. Inc. Worker Pay                                       Entrep. Inc. Worker Pay              Entrep. Inc. Worker Pay
                                             -50                 0               50               100                                      150
                                                            Share of Growth in Entrepreneurial Income (%)                                                                                                2001                            2014                                                              2001                            2014

                                                          Workers                    VA per Worker                             Owner Share                                                                                               Profits                                              Owner Wages


   Notes: Panel A uses our linked-firm-owner data to plot aggregate value added per worker and entrepreneurial
   income (equal to pass-through income plus owner wages) per worker for top 1% and top 0.1% pass-through
   businesses. Panel B plots pass-through employment (the annual number of W-2s) for top 1% and top 0.1%
   pass-throughs. The Org.-Form-Changes Adjusted series reduces the main series’ growth by a factor equal
   to the pass-through sales share of total business sales in 2001 divided by the contemporaneous pass-through
   sales share. For 2014, this procedure reduces growth since 2001 by 24%. Panel C uses equation (3) to
   decompose the total growth in top entrepreneurial income into contributions from growth in value added
   per worker, in the owner share of value added, and in total employment adjusted for organizational form
   changes. Results for total growth from 2001 to 2014 and from 2004 to 2014 are shown. Panel D shows the
   distribution of value added accruing to owners (in the form of profits and owner wages) and to non-owner
   workers (in the form of wages) for top-owned firms in 2001 and in 2014.




                                                                                                                                                 54
                          Table 1: Summary Statistics on Pass-throughs and Their Owners (2001-2014)
     A. Firm Summary Statistics
                                                       A. All Firms           B. Firms with Top 1-0.1% Owner      C. Firms with Top 0.1% Owner
                                               Mean      p10   p50     p90    Mean      p10     p50       p90     Mean     p10     p50      p90
     Sales                                     1,809      13   229 2,487      3,660       20      946     8,309   17,496     19    1,772   34,668
     Profits                                     31      -30    12  194        237       -40       83      717    1,602    -145     127     3,302
     Profit margin                             0.05     -0.29 0.05 0.48        0.12     -0.12 0.08         0.59    0.13    -0.16 0.09        0.71
     Assets                                    1,347       0    51 1,119      1,997        4      291     3,852   17,696     20    1,223   21,314
     Employees                                  12.9      0.0  1.0 23.6        27.7       0.0     3.7      60.7     74.3     0.0     1.6    141.3
     Employees | Employees > 0                  21.9      1.0  5.0 40.1        43.3       1.5    13.0      90.1    140.0     2.5    32.9    249.3
     Number of owners                            2.3      1.0  1.5  3.0         2.8       1.0     2.0       5.0    14.2      1.0     2.0     12.0
     Number of owners, S-corp only              1.6       1.0  1.0  2.4         2.2       1.0     1.2       4.0     3.4      1.0     2.0      6.1
     Number of owners, Pship only               4.4      1.0   2.0  4.0        4.0        1.0     2.0      7.1     27.8      1.0     3.0     21.2
     Sales per worker                          196.1     20.6 86.5 363.3      314.0      26.5 134.1       625.4   761.8     22.9 164.9     1,094.0
     Profits per worker                         16.1     -6.3 3.9 49.1         39.5      -3.5     9.8     113.2    122.0   -10.7     8.8    177.5
     Profits per owner                         -27.6    -19.3 8.0 127.3       131.8     -18.5 42.0        428.2    620.2   -48.7 41.2      1,623.0
     Entrepreneurial income                     144      -19    28  291        338       -23      162      943       .      -96     143        .
     Entrep. income per owner                   77.5    -11.9 18.7 192.3      190.0     -10.2 79.9        569.8   634.2    -31.2 45.7      1,813.0
55




     Entrep. income per worker                 33.8      -2.2 11.8 82.2        65.9      -0.7 21.5        187.3   155.6     -6.0    13.9    246.6
     Entrep. income / profit                    1.50     0.43    1  3.22       1.68      0.57      1       3.01    1.24     0.40      1      1.60
     Entrep. income / sales                     0.12    -0.31 0.11 0.64        0.18     -0.18 0.15         0.78    0.15    -0.36 0.10        0.87
     Number of firm-years                               58,933,472                            7,379,599                       2,464,603

     B. Owner Summary Statistics
                                                       A. All Owners                  B. Top 1-0.1% Owners             C. Top 0.1% Owners
                                               Mean      p10   p50     p90    Mean      p10     p50       p90     Mean     p10     p50      p90
     Income                                    235        13    98     476    655        393     571      1,089   4,687    1,559 2,430     7,879
     Age                                       51.1      34.3 50.7     69.6   52.4       38.9 51.9         67.4    54.5     40.6 53.9       70.4
     Number of firms owned                      1.3       1.0   1.0     2.0    1.5       1.0      1.0      2.8      2.2     1.0      1.0     4.5
     Wage income                                76         0    21     165    203          0     123       537     932       0      226    2,256
     Pass-through income                        51       -12     3     113    166         -6      51       530    1,074     -15     162    2,638
     Entrepreneurial income                     75        -8     8     181    231         -3     108       667       .      -11     258       .
     Pthru income / entrep. income             0.81      0.19    1       1    0.85      0.35       1        1      0.91    0.70       1       1
     Wage income / income                      0.63        0   0.20    0.95   0.32         0     0.21     0.89     0.24      0      0.08    0.89
     Entrep. income / income                   2.07     -0.08 0.12     0.99   0.35      -0.01 0.19         0.97    0.32      0      0.09    0.96
     Entrep. inc. / inc., S-corp owners only   0.73     -0.08 0.39     1.01   0.50         0     0.51       1     0.48       0      0.49    0.98
     Entrep. inc. / inc., Pship owners only    3.85     -0.08 0.01     0.79   0.21      -0.01 0.01        0.90     0.18    -0.01      0     0.87
     Business income / income                  0.22     -0.13 0.10     0.92   0.37         0     0.35      0.91   0.47       0      0.57    0.94
     Only earns passive income                 0.11        0     0       1    0.11         0       0       0.87   0.07       0        0       0
     Number of owner-years                              108,575,625                          11,793,249                       2,329,024
     Notes to Table 1: This table presents summary statistics for our linked-firm-owner data, comprising pass-through firms linked to owners 2001–2014.
     Dollar values are in thousands of 2014 dollars. The main sample comprises 109M firm-owner-year observations with positive sales and non-zero profits.
     Panel A pools distinct firm-year observations. Panel B pools distinct owner-year observations. All statistics are unweighted, unless otherwise specified.
     All variables are annual and are available in all years. Year refers to calendar year, which by law is also each pass-through’s fiscal year. Sales is
     the firm’s operating revenue (gross sales minus returns) as listed on the firm tax return. Passively earned income (e.g., interest on bank deposits)
     is excluded. Profits is the firm’s ordinary business income, equal to operating revenue minus costs as listed on the firm tax return. Profit margin
     equals profits divided by sales. Employees and number of workers equals the number of individuals who received a W-2 from the firm that year. A
     quantity per worker equals the quantity divided by the number of workers. Entrepreneurial income equals pass-through income plus W-2 wages paid
     to pass-through owners. Income is short for fiscal income and is the main income concept used in Piketty and Saez (2003) and equals Form 1040 total
56




     income minus Form 1040 capital gains minus Form 1040 unemployment compensation minus Form 1040 taxable social security benefits. Age is age
     as of December 31, based on year of birth from Social Security records housed alongside tax records. An owner is a top 1-0.1% owner or a top 0.1%
     owner if her fiscal income lies in the top 1% but not the top 0.1% or the top 0.1% of all tax units in the year, respectively. Wage income equals W-2
     income. Pass-through income equals the owner’s share of the profits from all pass-throughs she owns. Business income is total pass-through business
     income and equals total Form 1040, Schedule E income. An owner’s pass-through income is active if the owner reports she materially participates
     in the operations of any of her pass-through businesses and is passive otherwise. For these summary statistics, two variables are winsorized in the
     underlying data at the unweighted first percentile and the unweighted ninety-ninth percentile of the annual distributions: Entrep. income / profit,
     and Business income / income. Two variables are winsorized below at −1 and above at 1: Profit margin, Entrep. income/ sales, and Entrep. income
     / value added. Assets is set to missing for the very few observations in which assets are over one trillion.
                  Table 2: Industrial Composition of Million-dollar-owned Pass-through and All C-corporation Profits (2014)

                                                        Top Passthru          C-corp                                                                    C-corp      Top Passthru
            Industry (NAICS)                             Profit ($M)   Rank    Profit ($M)          Industry (NAICS)                                Profit ($M)   Rank   Profit ($M)
       1    Legal svc (5411)                                  28643     144              477   1    Petroleum/coal products mfg. (3241)                  98696     109          441
       2    Other financial investment actvty (5239)          28207      13            17712   2    Pharmaceutical/medicine mfg. (3254)                  63295     112          403
       3    Other professional/technical svc (5419)            8196     248             -480   3    Nondepository credit intrmd (5222)                   46573      26         1957
       4    Offices of physicians (6211)                       8018     250             -727   4    Other telecommunications (5179)                      35288     254            2
       5    Automobile dealers (4411)                          6712      64             3121   5    Computer/peripheral equipment mfg. (3341)            33250     106          448
       6    Oil/gas extraction (2111)                          6290      12            18375   6    Other general merchandise stores (4529)              27027     139          283
       7    Management/techncl consulting svc (5416)           5940      56             4388   7    Druggists’ goods merch whlsl (4242)                  25191      94          497
       8    Activities related to real estate (5313)           5209     110             1012   8    Aerospace product/parts mfg. (3364)                  22997     136          290
       9    Computer sys design/related svc (5415)             4771     253            -5446   9    Semiconductor/electronic compnt mfg. (3344)          21460      69          709
       10   Other specialty trade cntrctr (2389)               4730     123              769   10   Motor vehicle mfg. (3361)                            20521     179          152
       11   Misc. durable goods merch whlsl (4239)             3853      98             1419   11   Soap, cleaning compound,/toiletry mfg. (3256)        20326     163          189
       12   Other fabricated metal prod mfg. (3329)            3754      37             7636   12   Oil/gas extraction (2111)                            18375       6         6290
       13   Other miscellaneous mfg. (3399)                    3328      76             2300   13   Other financial investment actvty (5239)             17712       2        28207
       14   Accounting/bookkeeping svc (5412)                  3129      59             3741   14   Grocery/related product whlsl (4244)                 15945      35         1519
       15   Insurance agencies/brokerages (5242)               2934      44             6167   15   Software publishers (5112)                           15010      99          472
57




       16   Architectural/engineering svc (5413)               2933      70             2802   16   Ag., constr,/mining machinery mfg. (3331)            14814     105          452
       17   Nonresidential building constr (2362)              2899     140              555   17   Other information svc (5191)                         14684      70          707
       18   Building equipment cntrctr (2382)                  2891      97             1442   18   Activities related to credit intrmd (5223)           14503     142          266
       19   Residential building constr (2361)                 2742      55             4489   19   Restaurants (7225)                                   14137      20         2690
       20   Restaurants (7225)                                 2690      19            14137   20   Basic chemical mfg. (3251)                           14136      86          550
       21   Other heavy constr (2379)                          2669     240             -109   21   Health/personal care stores (4461)                   13448      33         1594
       22   Misc. nondrbl gds merch whlsl (4249)               2440      54             4494   22   Traveler acmdtn (7211)                               12761      45         1229
       23   Security contracts broker (5231)                   2268      30            10530   23   Building material/supp dealers (4441)                12758      61          902
       24   Plastics product mfg. (3261)                       2140     119              799   24   Converted paper product mfg. (3222)                  11287      90          523
       25   Machinery/supply merch whlsl (4238)                1958      33             9022   25   Beverage mfg. (3121)                                 11274      63          871
       26   Nondepository credit intrmd (5222)                 1957       3            46573   26   Motion picture/video industries (5121)               11253      92          507
       27   Indie artists, writers, performers (7115)          1915     229              -25   27   Grocery stores (4451)                                11005      53         1035
       28   Other investment pools/funds (5259)                1854      72             2509   28   Depository credit intrmd (5221)                      10948      55          976
       29   Support actvty for mining (2131)                   1820      41             6480   29   Radio/television broadcasting (5151)                 10920     148          253
       30   Advertising, pr,/related svc (5418)                1792      90             1748   30   Security contracts broker (5231)                     10530      23         2268

     Notes: This table presents statistics on the level of million-dollar-owned pass-through profits and total C-corporation profits in 2014 by 4-digit
     industry. The rows are sorted by the level of top pass-through profits on the left and C-corporation profits on the right. These statistics apportion
     pass-through profits pro rata to owners and then aggregate those apportioned profits by 4-digit industry. Rank columns indicate the rank of that
     4-digit industry within a particular group of firms. Profits columns indicate the level of profits in millions of 2014 dollars.
                           Table 3: Industrial Composition of Pass-through Profits (Top 1-0.1% vs. Top 0.1%, 2014)

            S-corporation Industry (NAICS)                 Top 1-0.1% Profit ($M)        S-corporation Industry (NAICS)             Top 0.1% Profit ($M)
        1   Offices of physicians (6211)                                    9063     1   Other financial investment actvty (5239)                  5786
        2   Other professional/technical svc (5419)                         4778     2   Automobile dealers (4411)                                 5176
        3   Offices of dentists (6212)                                      4317     3   Oil/gas extraction (2111)                                 4820
        4   Other specialty trade cntrctr (2389)                            3893     4   Other professional/technical svc (5419)                   4186
        5   Legal svc (5411)                                                3485     5   Offices of physicians (6211)                              3621
        6   Insurance agencies/brokerages (5242)                            2678     6   Computer sys design/related svc (5415)                    3206
        7   Computer sys design/related svc (5415)                          2662     7   Management/techncl consulting svc (5416)                  3185
        8   Architectural/engineering svc (5413)                            2642     8   Other specialty trade cntrctr (2389)                      3086
        9   Building equipment cntrctr (2382)                               2595     9   Legal svc (5411)                                          2847
       10   Restaurants (7225)                                              2421    10   Misc. durable goods merch whlsl (4239)                    2836
       11   Management/techncl consulting svc (5416)                        2196    11   Other fabricated metal prod mfg. (3329)                   2727
       12   Nonresidential building constr (2362)                           1906    12   Other miscellaneous mfg. (3399)                           2477
       13   Offices of other health practitioners (6213)                    1886    13   Activities related to real estate (5313)                  2286
       14   Misc. durable goods merch whlsl (4239)                          1684    14   Other heavy constr (2379)                                 2248
       15   Other fabricated metal prod mfg. (3329)                         1670    15   Nonresidential building constr (2362)                     1940
            Partnership Industry (NAICS)                   Top 1-0.1% Profit ($M)        Partnership Industry (NAICS)               Top 0.1% Profit ($M)
58




        1   Legal svc (5411)                                               21320     1   Other financial investment actvty (5239)                 20220
        2   Offices of physicians (6211)                                    5923     2   Legal svc (5411)                                         18200
        3   Accounting/bookkeeping svc (5412)                               5316     3   Activities related to real estate (5313)                  2534
        4   Other financial investment actvty (5239)                        3395     4   Other professional/technical svc (5419)                   2254
        5   Other professional/technical svc (5419)                         1641     5   Oil/gas extraction (2111)                                 2035
        6   Outpatient care centers (6214)                                  1449     6   Management/techncl consulting svc (5416)                  1637
        7   Activities related to real estate (5313)                        1357     7   Security contracts broker (5231)                          1485
        8   Management/techncl consulting svc (5416)                        1263     8   Other investment pools/funds (5259)                       1372
        9   Oil/gas extraction (2111)                                       1139     9   Accounting/bookkeeping svc (5412)                         1166
       10   Restaurants (7225)                                               694    10   Offices of physicians (6211)                              1026
       11   Offices of other health practitioners (6213)                     670    11   Automobile dealers (4411)                                  693
       12   Offices of dentists (6212)                                       574    12   Residential building constr (2361)                         689
       13   Insurance agencies/brokerages (5242)                             573    13   Lessors of real estate (5311)                              685
       14   Computer sys design/related svc (5415)                           563    14   Computer sys design/related svc (5415)                     585
       15   Architectural/engineering svc (5413)                             550    15   Fruit/tree nut farming (1113)                              482

     Notes: This table presents statistics on the level of S-corporation and partnership profits for top earners in 2014 by 4-digit industry. We present
     statistics for two groups of firms: firms owned by the top 1-0.1% and firms owned by the top 0.1%. The rows are sorted by the level of firm profits
     for firms owned by the top 0.1% and top 1-0.1%, respectively. These statistics apportion profits pro rata to owners in either the top 0.1% or the top
     1-0.1% and then aggregate those apportioned profits by 4-digit industry. Profits columns indicate the level of profits in millions of 2014 dollars.
                  Table 4: Impact of Owner Deaths and Retirements on Firm Profits
                                                                                                                  Top-1%        Top-0.1%
                                                      Million-Dollar-Earning Owners                               Owners         Owners
                                  Profits per       Firm
                               pre-period worker   survival                                                       Profits per pre-period
                                  ($/worker)         (pp)         Profits per pre-period worker ($/worker)         worker ($/worker)
                                     (1)             (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)         (8)            (9)
A. Owner Deaths
Impact                             -20,591          -0.198     -13,252   -13,843   -25,960    5,205    -23,900    -12,920        -29,543
                                   (5,886)         (0.017)     (7,074)   (6,763)   (9,096)   (4,450)   (6,896)    (1,831)       (10,582)

Surviving firms only                                             X
Minority owner                                                             X
Majority owner                                                                        X
Death before 65                      X               X           X         X          X                  X          X              X
Death after 75                                                                                 X
S-corporations only                                                                                      X

Observations                      581,508          581,508     236,241   208,107   373,401   57,060    519,804   2,609,973      194,787
Owner deaths                        765              765         390       339       426      725        658       2,436          435
R2                                 0.003            0.072       0.001     0.001     0.006    0.000      0.004      0.004         0.005

Mean of counterfactual firms       38,401           0.881      41,813    36,919    39,580    18,494    38,886     27,258         48,221
Dying owners ownership %            65.7%           65.7%       57.7%     39.4%     86.7%    59.6%      68.5%      65.0%          66.4%
Preferred percentage impact        -81.6%          -34.2%      -55.0%    -95.2%    -75.6%    47.2%     -89.7%     -72.9%         -92.3%

B. Owner Retirements
Impact                             -37,210          -0.263     -23,192   -29,483   -40,109             -39,774    -17,150       -45,861
                                   (4,000)         (0.007)     (5,003)   (7,296)   (4,771)             (4,051)    (1,027)       (7,286)

Surviving firms only                                             X
Minority owner                                                             X
Majority owner                                                                        X

S-corporations only                                                                                      X

Observations                      442,566          442,566     214,722   116,064   326,502             422,370   1,432,179      255,897
Owner retirements                  5,312            5,312       2,969     1,449     3,863               4,974     16,548         3,176
R2                                 0.004            0.107       0.002     0.003     0.005               0.005      0.005         0.003

Mean of counterfactual firms       59,996           0.924      67,044     52,344   62,866              60,464     37,780         84,573
Retiring owners ownership %         75.2%           75.2%       75.8%     40.1%     88.3%               76.6%      76.2%          75.6%
Preferred percentage impact        -82.5%          -37.9%      -45.6%    -140.4%   -72.2%              -85.9%     -59.6%         -71.7%


Notes: This table estimates the impact of an owner “exit,” embodied in an owner death or retirement, on
firm performance four years after the event. Panel A uses the owner deaths sample to analyze the impact
of owner deaths on firm performance four years after owner death relative to one year before owner death,
relative to the matched counterfactual firms. Columns 1-2 report the right-most coefficients plotted in
Figures 5A-B. See the notes to that figure for details. Column 3 repeats Column 2 on the subset of matched
pairs of owner-death firms and counterfactual firms that survived four years after the owner death. Column
4 repeats Column 2 on the subset of matched pairs where the dying owner had 50% or less ownership in
the owner-death firm; Column 5 repeats Column 2 on all other pairs. Column 6 repeats Column 2 in an
identically constructed sample of matched owner-death firms that is based on owners who died at age 75
or greater. Column 7 repeats Column 1 in an identically constructed sample of matched owner-death S-
corporations. The outcome mean of counterfactual firms is the weighted mean four years after owner death
(see the text for the weight). The ownership share of dying owners is measured in the year before owner
death. Panel B repeats Panel A for the subset of owner-retirement and counterfactual firms. See Sections
3.1 and 3.2 for more details.



                                                                  59
