                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              A REQUIEM FOR THE FISCAL THEORY OF THE PRICE LEVEL

                                       Roger E.A. Farmer
                                        Pawel Zabczyk

                                       Working Paper 25445
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25445


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 2019, Revised September 2019




The paper's findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the International Monetary Fund, its Executive Directors, or the
countries they represent. We are grateful to Leland E. Farmer, Giovanni Nicolo, Patrick Pintus,
Konstantin Platonov, Herakles Polemarchakis, Thomas Sargent, Jaume Ventura and Jerzy
Zabczyk, along with conference participants at the Bank of England and University of Warwick,
for their comments and suggestions. Any remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Roger E.A. Farmer and Pawel Zabczyk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Requiem for the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level
Roger E.A. Farmer and Pawel Zabczyk
NBER Working Paper No. 25445
January 2019, Revised September 2019
JEL No. E31,E58,H62

                                           ABSTRACT

We demonstrate that the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level (FTPL) cannot be used to determine the
price level uniquely in the overlapping generations (OLG) model. We provide two examples of
OLG models, one with three 3-period lives and one with 62-period lives. Both examples are
calibrated to an income profile chosen to match the life-cycle earnings process in U.S. data
estimated by Guvenen et al. (2015). In both examples, there exist multiple steady-state equilibria.
Our findings challenge established views about what constitutes a good combination of fiscal and
monetary policies. As long as the primary deficit or the primary surplus is not too large, the fiscal
authority can conduct policies that are unresponsive to endogenous changes in the level of its
outstanding debt. Monetary and fiscal policy can both be active at the same time.


Roger E.A. Farmer
UCLA
Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and CEPR
and also NBER
rfarmer@econ.ucla.edu

Pawel Zabczyk
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street
N.W. Washington, D.C., 20431
pawel@zabczyk.com
        A REQUIEM FOR THE FISCAL THEORY OF THE PRICE LEVEL∗

                               ROGER E.A. FARMER† AND PAWEL ZABCZYK‡


                                         This version: September 3, 2019.


          Abstract. The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level (FTPL) is the claim that, in a popular class of
          theoretical models, the price level is sometimes determined by fiscal policy rather than monetary
          policy. The models where this claim has been established assume that all decisions are made
          by an infinitely-lived representative agent. We present an alternative, arguably more realistic
          model, populated by sixty-two generations of people. We calibrate our model to an income
          profile from U.S. data and we show that the FTPL breaks down. In our model, the price level
          and the real interest rate are indeterminate, even when monetary and fiscal policy are both
          active. Our findings challenge established views about what constitutes a good combination of
          fiscal and monetary policies.




                                               1. Introduction

        New Keynesian economists classify monetary and fiscal policies as active or passive. If the
central bank raises the interest rate more than one-for-one in response to inflation, monetary
policy is said to be active. If the central bank raises the interest rate less than one-for-one
in response to inflation, monetary policy is said to be passive. If the fiscal authority borrows
to finance an arbitrary path of expenditure and taxes, fiscal policy is said to be active. If the
fiscal authority adjusts its expenditures and the tax rate to ensure fiscal solvency for all possible
paths of the real interest rate, fiscal policy is said to be passive.1
        In the New Keynesian (NK) model, uniqueness of equilibrium requires either that monetary
policy is active and fiscal policy is passive, or that monetary policy is passive and fiscal policy


†
  Farmer: Professor of Economics: University of Warwick, Research Director: National Institute of Economic
and Social Research and Distinguished Emeritus Professor: University of California Los Angeles.
‡
  Zabczyk: Senior Financial Sector Expert: Monetary Policy Modeling Unit, Monetary and Capital Markets
Department, International Monetary Fund.

∗
  The paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not nec-
essarily represent the views of the International Monetary Fund, its Executive Directors, or the countries
they represent. We are grateful to Leland E. Farmer, C. Roxanne Farmer, Giovanni Nicolò, Patrick Pintus,
Konstantin Platonov, Herakles Polemarchakis, Thomas Sargent, Jaume Ventura and Jerzy Zabczyk, along with
conference participants at the Bank of England, Czech National Bank, International Monetary Fund, London
School of Economics, National Bank of Poland, Society for Economic Dynamics and University of Warwick, for
their comments and suggestions. An earlier version of the paper with the title “The Fiscal Theory of the Price
Level in Overlapping Generations Models” appeared as CEPR Discussion Paper 13432 and NBER Working
paper 25445. Farmer reserves a special thanks for Costas Azariadis, who suggested that he work on this problem
more than thirty years ago. Any remaining errors are those of the authors.

    1
    The terminology of active and passive policies originated with Leeper (1991).
                                                         1
is active. The fact that a passive monetary policy in combination with an active fiscal policy
leads to a unique price level is referred to as the fiscal theory of the price level (FTPL).
       After the 2008 financial crisis, the Federal Reserve System, the European Central Bank and
the Bank of England, maintained passive interest rate policies with a constant nominal interest
rate peg for more than a decade. When the central bank pegs the interest rate, standard
economic theory predicts that the price level is indeterminate (Sargent and Wallace, 1975;
McCallum, 1981). Advocates of the FTPL claim that the price level is nevertheless uniquely
determined even when the interest rate is pegged. Their argument rests on a reinterpretation
of the government’s debt accumulation equation which is seen, not as a budget constraint, but,
as a debt valuation equation. The fact that interest rates have been characterized by a peg at
or close to zero for a decade or more in many developed economies is one reason why the FTPL
has received considerable attention in recent years.2
       The FTPL argument for price-level uniqueness is typically made in the context of an
infinitely-lived, representative agent (RA) model.3 In this paper, we study the implications of
the FTPL in the Overlapping Generations (OLG) model. We provide an algorithm to construct
the steady-state equilibria of a class of T-period OLG models and we study the local properties
of dynamic equilibria around the steady-states of these models. The OLG model is known to
possess an indeterminate steady-state equilibrium where money has value (Samuelson, 1958;
Gale, 1973). Although indeterminacy of a monetary steady-state equilibrium could theoreti-
cally be of arbitrary degree, previous known examples of this phenomenon have been widely
considered to be unrealistic.
       We provide an example of a sixty-two generation OLG model, where people are endowed
with an income profile calibrated to fit U.S. data. We show that our model possesses a steady-
state equilibrium where money has positive value. When monetary policy is passive and fiscal
policy is active, this steady state equilibrium displays two degrees of indeterminacy. It is not
just the initial price level that remains unexplained by economic fundamentals; our sixty-two
generation calibrated model also fails to uniquely determine the real interest rate. If we assume
that monetary and fiscal policy are both active, the degree of indeterminacy is reduced from
two to one. In this case a linear combination of the real interest rate and the price level is



   2
    The FTPL began with papers by Leeper (1991), Sims (1994) and Woodford (1994), and it has been promoted
by Cochrane (2005, 2018, 2019) as a theory of price level determination. Prominent critics of the FTPL include
Buiter (2002, 2017), McCallum (1999, 2001, 2003) and Niepelt (2004).
   3
    Bennett McCallum and Edward Nelson, (2005) survey this literature.
                                                      2
determinate, but the model is still unable to uniquely determine the price level as a function of
economic fundamentals.
        Our model has implications for the constraints placed on the fiscal authority by the dictates
of fiscal sustainability. It is often argued that government should spend less or tax more in a
recession. Proponents of this argument claim that failure to adjust the deficit in response to
endogenous fluctuations in tax revenues could lead to an exploding and unsustainable level of
government debt. In our calibrated example, a fiscal policy that does not respond to endogenous
fluctuations in debt can be pursued without leading to an exploding debt level.4
        In Section 2 we review related literature and in Section 3 we explain the idea behind
the FTPL. In Sections 4 and 5 we establish the conditions for price-level and interest rate
determinacy in the T -generation OLG model and in Section 6 we develop a calibrated sixty-two
generation example. Our example contains a locally stable and dynamically efficient equilibrium
in which government debt converges to a positive number for arbitrary values of the initial price
level and the initial real interest rate.5
        Sections 4 and 5 study the case of an active fiscal policy and a passive monetary policy.
This corresponds to the OLG model with fiat money. In Section 7 we check the robustness of
our results to alternative calibrations for the discount rate and the coefficient of risk aversion
and in Section 8 we explain how our results would change if monetary policy and fiscal policy
were both passive or both active. Finally, in Section 9 we present a brief conclusion.

                 2. The Relationship of our Work to Previous Literature

        Our argument rests on the fact that in OLG models, the local dynamics of prices close to
any given steady-state may be indeterminate of arbitrary degree. This result was established
by Kehoe and Levine (1985) in the context of a two-period-lived model with multiple goods
and multiple agents.6 To map the Kehoe-Levine results into the literature on the FTPL, we

    4
      Within limits that depend on the parameters of the model, a fiscal authority can increase its expenditure
without raising taxes. This is possible in the OLG model because a higher level of initial debt redistributes
resources to current generations from future generations and is associated with a different equilibrium path
of real interest rates. In Farmer and Zabczyk (2018) we showed how this mechanism operates in a tractable
two-generation example. This paper extends our previous analysis to a more realistically calibrated sixty-two
generation model.
     5An equilibrium in which the interest rate is greater than or equal to the growth rate is said to be dynamically
efficient. A steady-state equilibrium in which the interest rate is less than the growth rate is said to be dynamically
inefficient. In the representative agent model, dynamically inefficient equilibria cannot exist because they imply
that the wealth of the representative agent is unbounded. But in the OLG model, dynamically inefficient equilibria
are common, and, in many examples of OLG models, dynamic inefficiency is associated with indeterminacy. In
our sixty-two generation model however, there exist indeterminate equilibria that are dynamically efficient.
     6It follows from the results of Balasko and Shell (1981) that the two-period assumption is unrestrictive as
long as there are multiple agents and multiple goods.
                                                          3
study instead, a model with a single good in each period and a single type of person who lives
for T -periods and discounts the future at a constant rate. We also depart from Kehoe-Levine’s
assumption that the outside asset is a fixed stock of money. We assume instead that the
government issues an interest-bearing nominal liability and we allow the government to create
more of this liability to pay interest on outstanding debt as well as to purchase goods.
     Previous examples of indeterminate equilibria in overlapping generations models have been
restricted to two-generation or three-generation models in which indeterminacy was associated
with the absence of money (Samuelson, 1958), negative money (Gale, 1973; Farmer, 1986),
or unrealistic calibrations generally considered to be empirically irrelevant Azariadis (1981);
Farmer and Woodford (1997); Kehoe and Levine (1983). Our paper is the first to provide a
long-lived example of an economy where the endowment profile is matched to U.S. micro data,
and where there exists an indeterminate steady-state equilibrium when both monetary and fiscal
policy are active. In contrast to Benhabib et al. (2001), our results are not driven by global
or non-linear dynamics since we explicitly restrict attention to the properties of a linearized
system of equilibrium conditions around a monetary steady state.
     An extensive literature uses OLG models to answer questions of political economy (Auer-
bach, 2003; Auerbach and Kotlikoff, 1987; Rı́os-Rull, 1996), but almost all of it either ignores
the possibility of indeterminacy or calibrates models to explicitly rule it out. We suspect this
oversight may be related, at least in part, to an influential paper by Aiyagari (1985) who showed
that, under some assumptions, the OLG model becomes close to the RA model as the length of
life increases. Even though average life expectancy has increased significantly we consider the
limiting case of immortality a theoretical curiosity.7
     A number of authors have studied the wealth distribution in stochastic overlapping gen-
erations models with and without complete securities markets. One branch of this literature
includes papers by Rı́os-Rull and Quadrini (1997), Castañeda et al. (2003) and Kubler and
Schmedders (2011). Our work is peripherally related to that literature but we study a differ-
ent question. A second branch of this literature investigates the existence of non-fundamental
equilibria in overlapping generations models. A non-exhaustive list of papers, following Tirole’s
seminal contribution (Tirole, 1985), would include Martin and Ventura (2011, 2012), Miao and
Wang (2012), Miao et al. (2012) and Azariadis et al. (2015). The model we develop in this
paper contains what Tirole would call ‘bubbly equilibria’ but, unlike these papers, we develop

    7Importantly, the Aiyagari (1985) result requires the endowments of agents to be bounded away from zero.
Pietro Reichlin (1992) has shown that, when one drops that assumption, OLG models display very rich behaviours
even when people live potentially forever, but face a probability of death each period as in Blanchard (1985).
                                                      4
our argument in the context of a complete markets overlapping generations model without the
credit constraints introduced by these authors.
    Bassetto and Cui (2018) revisit the implications of the FTPL in models in which assets
differ in characteristics because of risk, or because debt provides liquidity services. In contrast
to their work, our results do not rely on dynamic inefficiency, risk premia or liquidity effects.
We show that the price level is indeterminate in a model where the steady state equilibrium is
dynamically efficient and where there are no frictions or rigidities of any kind other than the
natural assumption that people are born and die at different dates.
    Eggertsson et al. (2019) study steady-state equilibria in a fifty-six generation overlapping
generations model with sticky prices. They use their model to discuss the idea that a negative
real interest rate may be inconsistent with full employment, a concept that they refer to as
‘secular stagnation’. In one section of their paper, Eggertsson et al. study the transition
path from one steady-state equilibrium to another. Their solution method assumes that this
transition path is unique. This is an assumption that is called into question by the analysis in
our paper.

                        3. The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level

    In this section we outline the idea behind the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level and we
explain why it fails to hold in the overlapping generations model.

3.1. The debt accumulation equation. The government purchases gt units of a consumption
good which it finances with dollar-denominated pure discount bonds and lump-sum taxes, τ t .
Let Bt be the quantity of pure-discount bonds each of which promises to pay one dollar at date
t + 1 and let Qt be the date t dollar price of a discount bond. Further, let pt be the date t
dollar price of a consumption good. Using these definitions, government debt accumulation is
represented by the following equation,


                                     Qt Bt + pt τ t = Bt−1 + pt gt .


    Define it to be the net nominal interest rate from period t to period t + 1, and let Πt+1 , be
the gross inflation rate. These variables are given by,

                                     1                             pt+1
                              it ≡      −1        and,    Πt+1 ≡        .
                                     Qt                             pt




                                                   5
Further, let
                                                     Bt−1
                                              bt ≡        ,
                                                      pt
be the real value of government debt maturing in period t and define the real primary deficit as


                                           dt ≡ gt − τ t ,


where the negative of dt is the real primary surplus. Let Rt+1 represent the gross real return
from t to t + 1, which from the Fisher-parity condition equals

                                                         1 + it
                                          Rt+1 ≡                .                            (1)
                                                         Πt+1

We can combine these definitions to rewrite the government budget equation in purely real
terms
                                      bt+1 = Rt+1 (bt + dt ).                                (2)

Although Equation (2) is expressed in terms of real variables, the debt instrument issued by
the treasury is nominal. It follows that the real value of debt in period 1 is determined by the
period 1 price level through the definition

                                                         B0
                                               b1 ≡         .
                                                         p1

    Advocates of the FTPL argue that Equation (2) is not a budget equation in the usual
sense; it is a debt valuation equation. To understand their argument, let Qkt ,

                                           k
                                           Y      1
                                  Qkt ≡              ,          Qtt = 1,
                                                  Rj
                                          j=t+1

be the relative price at date t of a commodity for delivery at date k. Now, iterate Equation (2)
forwards to write the current real value of debt outstanding as the present value of all future
surpluses,
                                           ∞
                                B0    X
                                   =−   Qt1 dt + lim QT1 bT .                                (3)
                                p1              T →∞
                                          t=1

    If the government were to be treated in the same way as other agents, Equation (3) would
act as a constraint on feasible paths for the sequence of surpluses, −{dt }∞
                                                                           t=1 , that would be

required to hold for all paths of {Qt1 }∞
                                        t=1 and all initial price levels, p1 . In New-Keynesian

models, in which the central bank follows a passive monetary policy, the initial price level
would be indeterminate if the government were constrained to balance its budget in this way.
Advocates of the FTPL argue that government should be treated differently from other agents
                                                     6
in a general equilibrium model. When monetary policy is passive, Equation (3) should, they
claim, be treated as a debt valuation equation that determines the value of p1 as a function of
the specific path of primary surpluses −{dt }∞
                                             t=1 chosen by the treasury. All initial price levels,

other than the specific value of p1 that satisfies Equation (3), are infeasible since they lead to
paths of government debt that eventually become unbounded.
     In contrast, in the example we construct in Section 6, equilibrium real interest rates are
not pinned down uniquely. It follows that Equation (3) may hold for more than one value of
the price level p1 . Our example implies that the logic behind the FTPL cannot be extended to
the overlapping generations model and it suggests that indeterminacy may be more prevalent
in realistically calibrated models than previously believed.

        4. Equilibria in the T-Generation Overlapping Generations Model

     Sections 4 and 5 contain our theoretical results. The reader who is interested in the
practical application of our work is invited to skip ahead to Section 6 where we provide a
sixty-two generation model that illustrates our key findings.
     We study a T-generation overlapping generations model in which the government issues
a nominal liability, Bt , which it uses to finance a real budget deficit, dt , and to pay interest
rate on outstanding debt at a constant rate, ī. The inflation rate can be recovered from the
equilibria of our model through the Fisher-parity condition which implies that,

                                  pt+1   1 + ī
                                       =        ,       t = 1, . . . ∞.
                                   pt    Rt+1

The fact that dt is not responsive to variations in the value of outstanding debt implies that
fiscal policy is active. The fact that the interest rate is constant implies that monetary policy
is passive.
     To characterize equilibria we derive two sets of equations. The first set, which we refer
to as generic equations, characterizes market clearing in period T − 1 and in all later periods.
The second set, which we refer to as non-generic equations, characterizes market clearing in the
first T − 2 periods. In period 1, the model is populated by the members of a young generic
generation who live for T periods and by the members of T − 1 non-generic generations with
horizons that vary from 1 period to T − 1 periods.
     The non-generic generations are people born before the first period of the model. For
example, in a three-generation OLG model there is a generic young person who lives for three
periods, a non-generic middle-aged person who lives for two periods and a non-generic old
                                                    7
person who lives for one period. The T -generation model generalizes this concept and, in
the T -generation overlapping generations model, there are T − 1 non-generic generations. The
existence of non-generic generations gives rise to a set of non-generic equations that characterize
equilibrium in the first T − 2 periods. The non-generic generations begin life with dollar-
denominated financial assets or liabilities. The behaviour of these people is constrained by their
initial wealth positions which influences the market clearing equations in periods 1 through
T − 2.
    T − 1 is the first period in which all market participants are generic. For periods T − 1 and
later we characterize equilibrium as the solution to a difference equation in a vector of economic
variables that includes 2(T − 2) interest rates and the real value of government debt. The non-
generic equations in periods 1 to T − 2 provide the initial conditions for this difference equation
and the issue of determinacy comes down to the question: Do the non-generic equilibrium
conditions in periods 1 through T − 2 provide enough initial conditions to determine a unique
convergent path for the economic variables, close to the steady state?

4.1. The generic consumer’s problem. We refer to a person born in period t as generation
t and we use a superscript on a variable to denote generation and a subscript to denote calendar
time. For example, ctτ is consumption of generation t in period τ . We assume that after-tax
endowments, denoted by ω̃ τ −t+1 , are independent of calendar time and we index them by age. If
τ is generation and t is calendar time, then age is related to t and τ by the identity age ≡ τ −t+1.
    Generation t has a utility function defined over consumption in periods t through t + T − 1
and the members of generation t solve the problem


                                           max              U t (ctt , ctt+1 , . . . , ctt+T −1 ),
                                     {ctt ,...,ctt+T −1 }


such that
                                            X−1
                                           t+T
                                                      Qkt (ctk − w̃k−t+1 ) ≤ 0.
                                              k=t
The solution to this problem is characterized by a set of T excess demand functions, one for
each period of life


            x̃tk (Rt+1 , . . . , Rt+T −2 , Rt+T −1 ) ≡ ĉtk − w̃k−t+1 ,               for k ∈ {t, . . . , t + T − 1}.


We provide an explicit solution to this problem for the case of Constant Elasticity of Substitution
Preferences (CES), in Appendix A, Section A.1.


                                                                    8
     To smooth their consumption, the members of generation t trade in the asset markets by
buying or selling one-period dollar-denominated government bonds. Corresponding to the T
excess demand functions there are T − 1 savings functions {stk }, k ∈ {t, . . . , t + T − 2} which
are computed recursively from the excess demand functions using the following expressions,

                            stt       = −x̃tt ,
                                                                                                          (4)
                            stk+1 = Rk+1 stk − x̃tk+1 ,             k = t, . . . , t + T − 3.

There are T − 1, rather than T of these savings functions because we assume no bequest
motive and hence the optimal amount to save in the T ’th period of life is zero. We express the
dependence of the savings functions on the sequence of interest factors by the notation,


                         stk (Rt+1 , . . . , Rt+T −2 , Rt+T −1 ),     k = t, . . . , t + T − 2.           (5)


4.2. The non-generic consumers’ problem. We index the non-generic generations by their
date of birth which we measure by an index 1 − j where j runs from 1 to T − 1. The financial
wealth of generation 1 − j is represented by a real number λ1−j which may be positive or
negative and which represents the share, owned by generation 1 − j, of the period 1 dollar-
valued government debt.
                                                                    B0
                                                    ν 1−j ≡ λ1−j       .
                                                                    p1
We denote initial government debt by a positive number, B0 , and we refer to the vector of
shares as L ≡ {λ0 , λ−1 , . . . , λ2−T }. These shares sum to 1 as a consequence of asset market
clearing.8
     The non-generic generations solve the problem,
                                                                                         
                                     max            U 1−j c1−j
                                                           1   , c1−j
                                                                  2   , . . . , c 1−j
                                                                                  1−j+T −1 ,
                           {c1−j
                             1   ,...,c1−j
                                       1−j+T −1 }


such that
                                  (1−j)+T −1                         
                                               Qk1 c1−j
                                     X
                                                    k   − w̃ k−(1−j)+1 ≤ λ1−j b1 ,
                                     k=1

where k − (1 − j) + 1 is the age of a member of generation 1 − j in period k. The solution
to this problem is characterized by a set of excess-demand functions, one for each generation
and each period. In Appendix A, Section A.2, we derive explicit functional forms for these
excess-demand functions for the case of CES preferences.


   8We require B 6= 0 for the shares λ to be well-defined. See Niepelt (2004) for a discussion of a conceptual
                0
issue associated with non-zero values of B0 .
                                                             9
    In Section 4.3 we use the generic asset demand functions to characterize equilibria as
solutions to a vector valued difference equation in a vector of economic variables. These variables
include 2(T − 2) real interest rates and the value of government debt. In Section 4.4, we use
the non-generic asset demand functions to derive a set of initial conditions to this equation.

4.3. The generic equilibrium equations. There are two components to the difference equa-
tion that characterizes equilibrium sequences. The first component is an expression for asset
market equilibrium. The second component is the government’s debt-accumulation equation.
    We characterize asset market clearing by defining a function f (·) that we equate to gov-
ernment borrowing in period t,

                                                                            −1
                      f (Rt−T +3 , Rt−T +4 , . . . , Rt+T −2 , Rt+T −1 ) = Rt+1 bt+1 .          (6)


f (·) is the sum of the savings functions, defined in Equation (5), of generations 1 to T − 1.
                             −1
This is equated to the term Rt+1 bt+1 which represents the government borrowing requirement
at date t. Government borrowing is financed by issuing discount bonds bt+1 that sell for price
 −1
Rt+1 in units of current consumption.
    The second component to the equilibrium equation is government asset accumulation, which
we reproduce below,
                                         bt+1 = Rt+1 (bt + dt ).                                (2)

4.4. The non-generic equilibrium equations. Asset market equilibrium in periods 1 through
T − 2 is characterized by a family of functions, gtT (·), one family for each value of T . These
functions are different at each date t, because the asset demand functions of the non-generic
generations depend on the initial wealth distribution and the initial price level as well as on real
interest rates. To cut down on notation, we have suppressed the dependence of gtT (·) on L.
    To understand the structure of non-generic asset demand equations it helps to build intu-
ition by considering the case of T = 4. This is the simplest example where we must keep track
of the debt-accumulation equations in the T − 2 initial periods. For the case of T = 4, there
are two non-generic asset demand equations and one non-generic debt accumulation equation.
These equations are described by the expression
                                                                                
                                    g14 (R2 , R3 , R4 , b1 )   −     (b1 + d)
                                                                                
                   G4 (Z04 ) ≡  g24 (R2 , R3 , R4 , R5 , b1 ) −                  = 0,
                                                                                
                                                                  (b2 + d)
                                                                                
                                             b2                − R2 (b1 + d)


                                                      10
where the vector Z04 , is a set of variables that are determined, in equilibrium, by asset market
clearing and government asset accumulation in the initial T − 2 periods of the model. For the
case of T = 4, the equation G4 (·) = 0 places 3 restrictions on the 6 elements of Z04 .


                             Z04 ≡ [R5 , R4 , R3 , R2 , b2 , b1 ]> ≡ [XT −2 , YT −2 ]> ,


where YT −2 is the vector
                                                    YT −2 ≡ [b1 ]> ,

and XT −2 is a vector of initial conditions to the vector-valued difference equation characterized
by equations (6) and (2).
    This example can be generalized. For the T -generation model, Z0T contains 3T −6 elements,
equal to the union of the terms in the over-braces of the following expression,
                                      2T −3                          T −3
                      z             }|                   { z          }|           {
             Z0T   ≡ [R2T −3 , R2T −4 , . . . , R2 , bT −2 , bT −3 , . . . , b2 , b1 ]> ≡ [XT −2 , YT −2 ]> .


The function G(·) contains 2T − 5 rows,
                                                                                                       
                             g1T (R2 , . . . , R1+T −2 , R1+T −1 , b1 ) −             (b1 + d)
                                                                                                       
                                                 ..                                      ..            
                    
                                                  .                                       .            
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
                     g T (R2 , . . . , R2T −4 , R2T −3 , b1 )              −       (bT −2 + d)         
           T  T      T −2
          G (Z0 ) ≡                                                                                     = 0,   (7)
                                                                                                        
                    
                                       b2                                  −       R2 (b1 + d)         
                                                                                                        
                                        ..                                              ..             
                                          .                                               .
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                       bT −2                                − RT −1 (bT −3 + d)

and the equation GT (·) = 0 places 2T − 5 restrictions on the 3T − 6 elements of the unknown
vector Z0T . Subtracting the number of these restrictions from the number of initial variables
leaves T − 1 non-predetermined elements of XT −2 . In Section 5 we describe how the non-generic
equilibrium equations may be combined with the assumption that equilibrium sequences must
remain bounded to characterize the determinacy properties of equilibria.

                         5. The Determinacy Properties of Equilibria

    Blanchard and Kahn (1980) derived a set of conditions on linear rational expectations
models that guarantee the uniqueness of a solution. In this section we derive these conditions
for our model in the neighbourhood of a steady-state equilibrium.



                                                            11
5.1. Steady state equilibria. A steady-state equilibrium is a non-negative real number R̄ and
a (possibly negative) real number b̄ that solve the equations,


                                 f (R̄, R̄, . . . , R̄) = b̄ + d,      b̄ (1 − R̄) = R̄ d.


This system of non-linear equations has at least two solutions and in the important special
case when d = 0, one of these solutions is given by R̄ = 1 and the others are solutions to the
equation f (R̄, R̄, . . . , R̄) = 0. Following Gale (1973) we refer to the first of these solutions as
the golden-rule and to the others as autarkic.

5.2. Local dynamic equilibria. Let {R̄, b̄} be a steady state equilibrium and let


                                         R̃t ≡ Rt − R̄,         and b̃t ≡ bt − b̄,


represent deviations of bt and Rt from their steady state values. Define a vector


                                  Xt ≡ [Rt+T −1 , Rt+T −2 , . . . , Rt−T +4 , bt ]> ,


and a function F (·),


                                                                                                                
                              f (Rt−T +3 , Rt−T +4 , . . . , Rt+T −2 , Rt+T −1 ) −                 bt + dt
      F (Xt , Xt−1 ) ≡                                                                                          ,
                                                          bt                            − Rt (bt−1 + dt−1 )

and let J1 and J2 represent the partial derivatives of this function with respect to Xt and Xt−1 .
    Using these definitions, consider the following matrix expressions,

                                                          J                                              X̃t
               z                                          }|1                                     {z     }|      {
                                                                                                              
                   ft+T −1 ft+T −2 · · ·            ft+1 · · ·         ft−T +5 ft−T +4 −1             R̃t+T −1
                                                                                                              
                     0              1        ···     0          ···      0         0         0      R̃t+T −2
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                              
                    ..             ..       ..      ..          ..      ..        ..        ..         ..     
               
                     .              .          .     .           .       .         .         .   
                                                                                                         .     
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
                    0              0        ···     1          ···      0         0         0      R̃t+1      
       J1 Xt ≡                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                              
                     ..             ..        ..     ..         ..       ..        ..        ..          ..
               
                     .              .         .      .            .      .         .         .   
                                                                                                          .    
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
                     0              0        ···     0          ···      1         0         0      R̃t−T +5
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                    0              0        ···     0          ···      0         1         0      R̃t−T +4   
                                                                                                              
                     0              0        ···     0          ···      0         0         1           b̃t




                                                                12
                                                            J                                       X̃t−1
                             z
                                                           }|2                            { z     }|       {
                                                                                                              
                                0 ···        0          ···      0 −ft−T +3          0           R̃t+T −2
                                                                                                           
                                 1 ···        0          ···      0           0       0           R̃t+T −3
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
                                 .. . .       ..          ..      ..          ..       .. 
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                     ..     
                             
                                 .     .      .           .       .           .        . 
                                                                                           
                                                                                                        .     
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
                                 0 ···        1          ···      0           0       0            R̃t
                                                                                                             
                             
                  J2 Xt−1   ≡                                                                              ,
                                                                                                              
                                .. ..       ..           ..      ..          ..        ..          ..
                                 .  .            .        .       .           .         .           .      
                                                                                                           
                                                        ..        ..                                       
                                 0 ···        0              .      .         0       0           R̃t−T +4
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                             
                                0 ···        0          ···      1           0       0         R̃t−T +3   
                                                                                                           
                                 0 ···      b̄ + d · · ·          0           0       R̄            b̃t−1
where fk is the partial derivative of the function f with respect to Rk evaluated at the steady
state {R̄, b̄}. Using this notation, the local dynamics of equilibrium sequences close to the steady
state can be approximated as solutions to the linear difference equation


                                      J1 X̃t = J2 X̃t−1 ,               t = T − 1, . . .                           (8)


with initial condition
                                                      X̃T −2 = X̄T −2 .                                            (9)

The local stability of these equations depends on the eigenvalues of the matrix


                                                        J ≡ J1−1 J2 .



     If one or more roots of the matrix J is outside the unit circle there is no guarantee that se-
quences of interest factors and government debt generated by Equation (8) will remain bounded.
To ensure stability, we must choose initial conditions that place X̃T −2 in the linear subspace
associated with the stable eigenvalues of J. In Appendix B we derive the conditions that guar-
antee local boundedness of equilibrium sequences and we combine them with the non-generic
market clearing equations to find a set of conditions under which an equilibrium is determinate.
     Our results can be summarized in the following proposition.9

Proposition 1 (Blanchard-Kahn). Let K denote the number of eigenvalues of J with modulus
greater than 1.

    9 An updated solution method for rational expectations models that allows either J or J or both to be
                                                                                      1     2
singular can be found in Sims (2001). Solution methods for models with indeterminacy are provided in Farmer
et al. (2015).
                                                                 13
      • If K > T − 1 there are no bounded sequences that satisfy the equilibrium conditions in
        the neighbourhood of X̄. In this case equilibrium does not exist.
      • If K = T − 1 there is a unique bounded sequence that satisfies the equilibrium equations.
                                                                                   
        Further, this sequence converges asymptotically to the steady state R̄, b̄ . In this case
                                           
        the steady state equilibrium R̄, b̄ is determinate.
      • If K ∈ {0, . . . , T − 2} there is a T − 1 − K dimensional subspace of initial conditions
        that satisfy the equilibrium equations. All of these initial conditions are associated with
                                                                          
        sequences that converge asymptotically to the steady state R̄, b̄ . In this case the steady
                                
        state equilibrium R̄, b̄ is indeterminate with degree of indeterminacy equal to T −1−K.

Proof. See Appendix B.                                                                                       

     In our model fiscal policy is active but monetary policy is passive. According to the FTPL
this policy mix should lead to a unique initial price level. In Section 6 we provide an example
of an economy with a steady-state equilibrium where money has value and where the FTPL
fails to hold. In this example, it is not only the initial price level that is indeterminate; it is
also the initial real interest rate. In Section 7 we show that our example is robust to alternative
parameterizations and in Section 8 we discuss the behaviour of our model under alternative
monetary and fiscal policy regimes.

                             6. A Sixty-Two Generation Example

     In this section we construct a sixty-two generation model where each generation begins its
economic life at age 18 and in which a period corresponds to one year. Our sixty-two generation
example is inspired by Kehoe and Levine (1983) who provide a three-generation OLG model
with CES preferences, an endowment profile of [3, 15, 2] and utility weights on the three periods
of life of [2, 2, 1]. Their example displays four steady-state equilibria, two of which display one
degree of indeterminacy, one of which is determinate and one of which displays two degrees of
indeterminacy.10
     To see if the Kehoe-Levine example might provide a plausible explanation of a real-world
economy, we calibrated the income profile of a representative generation to U.S. data and we
modified the preference weights to allow for a constant discount rate. We found that the key
features of their example are the hump-shaped income profile and a coefficient of relative risk
aversion of 6 which is well within the bounds of calibrated models in the macro-finance literature.

  10The code used to generate all of our results is available online and is documented in an accompanying online
document “Numerical Recipes”. Our code also replicates the findings reported in Kehoe and Levine (1983).
                                                      14
    In our sixty-two generation example, people maximize the utility function,
                                                                   62
                                                                                       [ctt+i−1 ]α − 1
                                                                   X                                    
                                    ctt , . . . , ctt+61                     i−1
                                                           
                                u                              =         β                                   .
                                                                                              α
                                                                   i=1

Explicit formulas for the excess demand functions for this functional form are provided in
Appendix A.
    We graph our calibrated income profile in Figure 1. Our representative generation enters the
labour force at age 18, retires at age 66, and lives to age 79. We chose the lifespan to correspond
to current U.S. life expectancy at birth and we chose the retirement age to correspond to the age
at which a U.S. adult becomes eligible for social security benefits. For the working-age portion
of this profile we use data from Guvenen et al. (2015) which is available for ages 25 to 60. The
working-age income profiles for ages 18 to 24 and for ages 61 to 66, were extrapolated to earlier
and later years using log-linear interpolation. For the retirement portion we used data from the
U.S. Social Security Administration.

                 5


                 4
     Endowment




                 3


                 2


                 1


                 0
                     20        30                  40                         50                  60             70
                                                                         Age

                 Figure 1. Normalized Endowment Profile. U.S. Data in Solid Red: Interpo-
                 lated Data in Dashed Blue.


    U.S. retirement income comes from three sources; private pensions, government social se-
curity benefits, and Supplemental Security Income. We treat private pensions and government
social security benefits as perfect substitutes for private savings since the amount received in




                                                                     15
retirement is a function of the amount contributed while working. To calibrate the available re-
tirement income that is independent of contributions, we used Supplementary Security Income
which, for the U.S., we estimate at 0.137% of GDP.11
       For the remaining parameters of our model we chose a budget deficit of dt = 0, an annual
discount rate of 0.953 and an elasticity of substitution of 0.17. This corresponds to α = −5 and
a corresponding measure of Arrow-Pratt risk aversion of 6. For the calibrated income profile
depicted in Figure 1 and for this choice of parameters, our model exhibits four steady-state
equilibria. In Section 7 we explore the robustness of the properties of our model to alternative
choices for the discount parameter and for the risk aversion parameter.

                                          Excess Demand for Goods

100

  50

   0

 -50

              -0.6        -0.5        -0.4         -0.3       -0.2         -0.1         0          0.1
                                        Log of Real Interest Factor
                                 Government Debt as a Percentage of GDP
300

200

100

   0

-100
              -0.6        -0.5        -0.4         -0.3       -0.2         -0.1         0          0.1
                                             Log of Real Interest Factor

                     Figure 2. Steady States in the Sixty-Two Generation Model


       In Figure 2 we graph the steady-state equilibria of our model. The upper panel of this
figure plots the logarithm of the gross real interest rate on the horizontal axis and the steady-
state excess demand for goods on the vertical axis. The lower panel plots government debt as
a percentage of GDP at the steady state. We see from the upper panel that the excess demand
function crosses the horizontal axis four times. And we see from the lower panel that three
  11 From Table 2 of the March 2018 Social Security Administration Monthly Statistical Snapshot we learn that
the average monthly Supplemental Security Income for recipients aged 65 or older equalled $447 (with 2,240,000
claimants), which implies that total monthly nominal expenditure on Supplemental Security Income equalled
$1,003 million. This compares to seasonally adjusted wage and salary disbursements (A576RC1 from FRED) in
February 2018 of $8,618,700 million per annum, or $718,225 million per month. Back of the envelope calculations
suggest that Supplemental Security Income in retirement equalled 0.137% of total labour income.
                                                       16
of these crossings are associated with steady-state equilibria in which steady-state government
debt is equal to zero.
    The three steady-state equilibria in which debt equals zero are examples of what Gale
(1973) refers to as autarkic steady-state equilibria. In these equilibria there is no trade with
future unborn generations. The fourth steady-state equilibrium is what Gale refers to as the
golden-rule. This steady-state equilibrium always exists in OLG models and in models with
population growth it has the property that the real interest rate equals the rate of population
growth. But although the golden-rule steady-state equilibrium always exists, it is not true that
the golden-rule value of b̄ is always non-negative.
    The golden-rule steady state occurs when the logarithm of the real interest factor equals
zero. By inspecting the lower panel of Figure 2, it is apparent that government debt is positive
at the golden rule steady-state and, since debt is denominated in dollars, the price level is
also positive in the golden-rule steady-state equilibrium. This is important because it is the
empirically relevant case in most western democracies. For example, in the United States,
government debt in the first quarter of 2019 exceeded $22 trillion.
    The values and properties of all four steady-state equilibria are reported in Table 1. We
refer to the autarkic steady-state equilibria as Steady-State A, Steady-State C and Steady-State
D and to the golden-rule steady-state equilibrium as Steady-State B. We see from this table
that Steady-States B, C and D are associated with a non-negative interest rate and are therefore
dynamically efficient. Steady-State A is associated with a negative interest rate of −47.5% and
is therefore dynamically inefficient.

                                 Equilibrium Real Interest Rates
    Type                 Value     Value      # Unstable # Free Initial     Degree of
                         of R̄      of b̄         Roots        Conditions Indeterminacy
    Steady-State   A     0.525       0              60           61             1
    Steady-State   B       1   53.7% of GDP         59           61             2
    Steady-State   C     1.022       0              60           61             1
    Steady-State   D      1.13       0              61           61             0
                  Table 1. Steady States of the Sixty-Two Generation Model



    The sixty-two generation model with a calibrated income profile is similar in many respects
to Kehoe-Levine’s (1983) three generation model. In both examples, the golden-rule steady-
state equilibrium displays second degree indeterminacy. And in both examples, the steady-state
price level is positive and the initial price level is indeterminate even when fiscal policy is active.


                                                  17
Importantly, because the monetary steady-state is second-degree indeterminate, indeterminacy
of the price level can hold even when both monetary and fiscal policy are active.
                                          The Real Interest Factor (gross)
 1.01


1.005


   1


0.995


 0.99
                20       40        60         80        100        120       140       160        180       200
                                                    Years
                                Government Debt as a Percentage of SS Real Debt
 115

 110

 105

 100

  95

                20       40        60         80        100        120       140       160        180       200
                                                       Years

          Figure 3. The Impact of the Initial Price Level Exceeding Its Steady State
          Value by 3%


        In Figure 3 we show the result of an experiment in which we perturb the initial value of b1
by 3% and we perturb the real value of the initial wealth of all of the non-generic generations
by the same amount. We refer to this perturbation as a 3% shock to the initial price level. We
restrict R2 to equal its steady state value but all other elements of Z0 are allowed to respond
to the shock to keep the path of interest rates and debt on a convergent path back to the
steady state. Figure 3 demonstrates that the return to the steady state from an arbitrary initial
condition is extremely slow.12
        We also see from Figure 3 that our model can endogenously generate prolonged periods
of negative real interest rates. The upper panel of this figure plots the path by which the real
interest rate returns to its steady-state value and the lower panel plots the return path of the
real value of government debt expressed as a percentage of GDP. The figure demonstrates that
small deviations of initial conditions from the steady state can have long-lasting effects, and
that during the convergence process the real interest rate may be negative for periods well in
excess of ten years.
   12Note that our choice of 3% is entirely arbitrary and that this is one of many admissible equilibrium paths.
In particular, since we endow the non-generic cohorts with steady state asset shares, therefore the steady state
equilibrium with ∀t ≥ 1 : bt ≡ b̄ and Rt+1 ≡ R̄ would have also been feasible.
                                                       18
                                                                        FIGURE 1
                                                           G7 long-run real interest rates
                percent
                8


                6


                4


                2


                0


               −2


               −4


               −6
                 1955            ’60        ’65      ’70       ’75        ’80        ’85        ’90     ’95       2000       ’05       ’10

                                  United States      United Kingdom      Canada            Germany    France        Italy     Japan

                         Notes: G7 means the Group of Seven. Long-run real interest rates are 11-year centered moving averages of annual
                         real Figure
                              interest rates.
                                           4. (See
                                               G7 the   appendix for
                                                     Long-Run        further
                                                                   Real      details onRates.
                                                                           Interest     the construction of the real
                                                                                                  Long-Run      Real interest rates.)Rates
                                                                                                                        Interest
                         Sources:
                              are 11-Year Centered Moving Averages of Annual Real Interest Rates. Financial
                                    Authors’  calculations based on  data from  the International Monetary   Fund, International
                         Statistics; and Haver Analytics.
                             Source: Figure 1 in Yi and Zhang (2017)

         Evidence  onquestion
              One may long-run     real
                              whether     interest
                                      the high degree ofrates
                                                         real interest rate persistence implied by our

         Heremodel    is excessive. Have such long swings in real interest rates actually ever been observed?
               we present     our estimates of long-run real interest rates for (up to) 20 countries between 1955 and the
         present. 6
                    The listthis
              To address      of countries
                                   question,(given
                                               Figurein4,thereproduced
                                                              appendix) comprises
                                                                         from Yi and  theZhang
                                                                                           largest(2017),
                                                                                                   economies      in the world
                                                                                                              compares             as
                                                                                                                            long run
3        measured by gross domestic product (GDP) in 2014 dollars.7 We broadly follow the approach used in
              real interest
         Hamilton             rates in
                     et al. (2015)      the G7 and
                                     to compute    realdocuments     thatWherever
                                                        interest rates.   low-frequency      realwe
                                                                                     possible,    rate
                                                                                                     usecycles,   similar
                                                                                                          the policy         to those
                                                                                                                        interest  rate as
         our measure
              generated of by
                            the our
                                short-run
                                     model,nominal   interest rate, and
                                              have characterized      thewe  use the then-current
                                                                           evolution                  inflation
                                                                                        of real interest    ratesrate
                                                                                                                    in as
                                                                                                                        allour
                                                                                                                             of measure
                                                                                                                                these
         of the expected13inflation rate the following year to derive the short-run real interest rate (details are in the
              economies.
         appendix).   To compute long-run real interest rates, we calculate 11-year centered moving averages of
         annual real interest rates.8 Hereafter, we will refer to the 11-year centered moving averages of annual real
         interest rates as long-run real7.interest    rates. Economists
                                               Robustness                   are typically
                                                                 to Different               interested in long-run real interest
                                                                                    Calibrations
         rates because they reflect the trends in the fundamental forces underlying them. Indeed, movements in real
         interest rates
                    We owing     to frictionsansuch
                        have presented              as “sticky”
                                                 example          prices and generation
                                                             of a sixty-two   wages9 and OLG to short-run
                                                                                                   modelshifts     in productivity,
                                                                                                             in which     there is a oil
         prices, monetarysteady-state
              golden-rule     or fiscal policy, and other forces
                                             equilibrium            “wash
                                                             with two      out” over
                                                                       degrees         long periods ofTo
                                                                                 of indeterminacy.        time,  leaving
                                                                                                             explore    theonly   trends
                                                                                                                              robust-
         in the fundamentals driving real interest rates over the long run.
              ness of our findings to alternative calibrations, in Table 2 we record the properties of our model
         Figure  1 presents long-run real interest rates for the G7 (Group of Seven) countries—namely, Canada, France,
              for different values of the annual discount rate and the coefficient of relative risk aversion. The
         Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Two patterns are apparent. First, G7 real
         ratesexample
               are quitewe
                         close  to oneinanother,
                            featured     Sectionespecially
                                                  6 had twoindegrees
                                                                 recent years. Second, broad
                                                                        of indeterminacy  andtrends in long-run
                                                                                               positive         real rates
                                                                                                        valued debt  at
         are discernible during three subperiods of the sample: 1) a decline from the early 1960s until the mid-1970s,
              the monetary steady state. Table 2 demonstrates that that property is not particularly special.
         followed by 2) an increase until the late 1980s and then 3) another decline through the present day.10

         Figure 2 shows the median of the long-run real interest rates across our full sample of 20 countries for
         each year.11 It also presents the interquartile range of these rates across our full sample (that is, the range


                    13
                      See Yi and Zhang (2017) for a discussion of why long-run moving averages are likely to characterize trends
              in  fundamental
Economic Perspectives     2 / 2017forces underlying real interest rates.                                         Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
                                                                                19
                                                    Annual Discount Factor
                                                     0.91 0.92 0.93 0.94 0.95 0.96 0.97 0.98
  Risk Aversion
                      # Steady States                   4       4      4       4      4      2       2      2
     RA = 5           Degree of Indeterminacy           1       1      1       1      1      2       0      0
                      Value of Debt                    -2.8   -2.2   -1.5    -0.8   -0.2    0.5     1.1    1.8
                      # Steady States                   4       4      4       4      4      4       2      2
     RA = 6           Degree of Indeterminacy           1       1      1       1      2      2       0      0
                      Value of Debt                    -1.9   -1.3   -0.7    -0.2   0.4     0.9     1.5    2.0
                      # Steady States                   3       3      3       3      3      3       1      1
     RA = 7           Degree of Indeterminacy           1       1      1       2      2      0       0      0
                      Value of Debt                    -1.2   -0.7   -0.2    0.3     0.8    1.2     1.7    2.2
                      # Steady States                   3       3      3       3      3      3       3      1
     RA = 8           Degree of Indeterminacy           1       1      2       2      2      0       0      0
                      Value of Debt                    -0.6   -0.2    0.2     0.6   1.0     1.5     1.9    2.3
                      # Steady States                   3       3      3       3      3      3       3      3
     RA = 9           Degree of Indeterminacy           1       2      2       2      2      0       0      0
                      Value of Debt                    -0.2    0.1    0.5    0.9    1.3     1.6     2.0    2.4
         Table 2. Robustness of Indeterminacy to Alternative Calibrations, Focusing
         Only on Steady States with R̄ ∈ [0.5, 1.5]


     Table 2 provides 40 different parameterizations of our model with risk aversion parameters
ranging from 5 to 9 and discount rates ranging from 0.91 to 0.98. In all of these parameteriza-
tions we maintained the calibrated income profile illustrated in Figure 1. For each calibration
Table 2 displays the number of steady-state equilibria in the interval R̄ ∈ [0.5, 1.5], and the
number of degrees of indeterminacy at the golden-rule steady-state equilibrium. There are
fifteen parameterizations in which the golden-rule steady state displays one degree of indeter-
minacy and twelve in which it displays two degrees of indeterminacy. In all twelve of these
parameterizations, debt has positive value in the steady state.
     In Section 6, we focused on the golden-rule steady where β = 0.953 and ρ = 6. An example
with two-degrees of indeterminacy is interesting because it is not only the price level that is
free to be determined by the beliefs of market participants; it is also the real rate of interest.
We want to reiterate, however, that only one degree of indeterminacy is required for violations
of the FTPL. And that occurs more frequently in our model than second degree violations.14


  14If we hold constant the degree of risk aversion and increase the discount rate, the number of unstable
eigenvalues decreases initially from 60 to 59 and then changes abruptly to 61. We see this behaviour in Table 2
by moving along a typical row and observing that we pass from one degree of indeterminacy to two degrees of
indeterminacy and then jump abruptly to 0 degrees of indeterminacy. At this last transition, a pair of complex
roots crosses the unit circle, a phenomenon associated with a Hopf Bifurcation and the creation of a limit
cycle. See Guckenheimer and Holmes (1983) for a discussion of the Hopf Bifurcation. We have not explored the
phenomenon in this paper, but it is likely that for discount rates close to 1, this model displays endogenous limit
cycles that are second-degree indeterminate.
                                                        20
                              8. Fiscal and Monetary Policy

    In Sections 4 and 5, we characterized conditions under which the real interest rate and
the real value of government debt remain stable when fiscal policy is active and the monetary
authority operates an interest rate peg. While the assumption of active fiscal policy played a
key role in our argument, the assumption of an interest rate peg was used only to show that
inflation remains bounded. The boundedness of inflation follows directly from the Fisher parity
condition,
                                                        1 + ī   1 + ī
                                  lim ΠT = lim                 =        .
                                 T →∞               T →∞ RT        R̄
    In this section we discuss what would happen if we were to relax either the assumption
that fiscal policy is active or the assumption that monetary policy is passive. We first show
that passive fiscal policy makes indeterminacy more likely. We then demonstrate that ensuring
bounded inflation under an active Taylor rule requires an additional restriction on the set of
equilibrium paths. This additional restriction reduces the degree of indeterminacy by one.

8.1. Passive fiscal policy. Consider first what happens when fiscal policy is passive. To model
a passive fiscal policy we assume that the treasury raises taxes, τ t , in proportion to the real
value of outstanding debt to ensure that the primary deficit dt satisfies the equation


                                                dt = −δbt ,


where δ ≥ 0 is a debt repayment parameter. Combining this assumption with the definition of
the government debt accumulation equation leads to the following amended debt accumulation
equation,
                                        bt+1 = [Rt+1 − δ]bt .

For values of [R̄ − δ] < 1 the effect of making fiscal policy passive is to introduce an additional
stability mechanism that increases the degree of indeterminacy at each of the four steady states
whenever δ is large enough. Passive fiscal policy makes indeterminacy more likely.

8.2. The case of a Taylor Rule. We next assume that fiscal policy is active and the central
bank follows a Taylor rule (Taylor, 1999),
                                                   
                                               R̄
                               1 + it =                 Π1+η
                                                         t   ,   t = 1, ...∞.                 (10)
                                              Π̄η

Because this equation begins at date 1, the nominal interest rate in period 1 depends on p0
through the definition, Π1 = p1 /p0 . We treat p0 as an initial condition that has the same status

                                                        21
as the initial value of nominal debt, B0 . Π̄ is the inflation target, and R̄ is the steady state real
interest rate: the Taylor Rule is passive if −1 ≤ η ≤ 0 and active if η > 0.
     When the central bank follows a Taylor Rule, the real interest rate and the real value
of government debt continue to be determined by the bond market clearing equation and the
debt accumulation equation. It follows that the conditions we have characterized in previous
sections continue to ensure that the real interest rate and the real value of government debt
remain bounded.

8.2.1. A passive Taylor Rule. When the central bank follows a passive Taylor Rule, (see Appen-
dix C.1) the following equation characterizes the asymptotic behaviour of the future inflation
rate,
                                                                   T
                                                                         (1 + η)T −s R̃T +1 ,
                                                T
                                                                   X
                    lim Π̃T +1 = lim (1 + η) Π̃1 − lim                                               (11)
                   T →∞           T →∞                      T →∞
                                                                   s=1

where κ ≡ Π̄/R̄ and the tilde denotes deviations from the steady state. The limit of the first
term on the right side of Equation (C2) is zero because 1 + η < 1 and the second term is finite
as a consequence of the boundedness of Rt . It follows that inflation is bounded whenever Rt is
bounded. This is a generalization of the argument we made for the boundedness of the inflation
rate when the central bank follows an interest rate peg and it does not impose any additional
restrictions on the equations of the model for an equilibrium to be determinate.

8.2.2. An active Taylor Rule. When the central bank follows an active Taylor Rule, (see Ap-
pendix C.2), the initial price level is determined by the forward-looking equation
                                             +∞      s            !
                                             X     1              
                           p1 = p0    Π̄ + κ             R1+s − R̄ .                                 (12)
                                                  1+η
                                             s=1

Importantly, this restriction on the set of equilibrium paths is additional to the restriction

                                                         B0
                                              p1 =          ,
                                                         b1

that we used to generate the equilibrium sequence of interest rates. It follows that we are
no longer free to pick R2 and p1 independently of each other. This establishes that an active
monetary policy eliminates one degree of indeterminacy.
     If a model has one degree of indeterminacy when the policy combination is passive-active,
an active-active policy combination would now admit a unique solution. When the steady-state
equilibrium displays second-degree indeterminacy, as in our sixty-two generation example, it is
not just the initial price level that is indeterminate; it is also the initial real interest rate.

                                                    22
    For any given choice of the initial interest rate, R2 , active monetary policy removes nominal
indeterminacy. Once we have specified the initial real interest rate, the initial price level cannot
be freely chosen. If we seek an equilibrium path in which inflation is bounded then p1 is uniquely
determined by the formula in Equation 12. Crucially, however, active monetary policy does not
remove real indeterminacy and there continue to be many possible choices for the initial real
interest rate, each of them associated with a different initial price level and a different equilibrium
path for all future real interest rates and all future inflation rates.

                                          9. Conclusions

    We have demonstrated an important difference between the infinitely lived representative
agent model and the overlapping generations model. In the RA model, government debt is both
an asset and a liability of the representative agent. Because these two aspects exactly offset
each other, the representative agent is indifferent about the quantity of debt she holds and in
the simplest case the real interest rate in the corresponding model reflects time preferences and
the evolution of the endowment.
    In the OLG model, the situation is different. When the stock of government debt is not
paid off during the lifetime of any single generation, the assets and liabilities of the treasury
do not cancel each other out as they would in the representative agent model. As a conse-
quence, changes in real interest rates are redistributive across generations, and they may lead
to fluctuations in the demand for government bonds that are self-stabilizing. It is because of
these underlying wealth effects that the golden-rule steady-state equilibrium of our calibrated
model can be both dynamically efficient and second-degree indeterminate. Since wealth effects
can be very persistent, the propagation mechanism of our model generates prolonged periods
of negative real interest rates, similar to those we have observed in recent data.
    Our findings challenge established views about what constitutes a good combination of fiscal
and monetary policies. Our agents are rational and have rational expectations. Nevertheless, the
price level and the real interest rate are not uniquely determined by what most economists would
recognize as economic fundamentals, even when the central bank pursues an active monetary
policy and the treasury pursues an active fiscal policy. These features of our model lead to
very different conclusions from those of the representative agent model. If the FTPL holds, a
benevolent monetary policy maker who pursues an interest rate peg might rely on fiscal policy
to anchor the price level. In the OLG model we study here that is no longer possible.



                                                  23
    Our model also leads to non-standard advice to fiscal policy makers. In an RA model,
when monetary policy is active, the fiscal policy maker must raise taxes or lower expenditures
in response to recessions, however they are caused. In Farmer and Zabczyk (2018) we showed,
in a two-generation OLG model, that equilibrium debt dynamics can be self-stabilizing. In this
paper we have extended our previous analysis to a calibrated sixty-two generation OLG model.
We have shown that an active fiscal policy can safely be pursued without the fear of causing
explosive debt dynamics even when monetary policy is active.




                                              24
                 Appendix A. Analytic Solutions for Excess Demand

A.1. The generic optimization problem. Consider a person with Constant Elasticity of
Substitution (CES) preferences who lives for T periods and has perfect foresight of future
prices. This person solves the problem,

Problem 1.
                                               a1 (ctt )α + a2 (ctt+1 )α + . . . + aT (ctt+T −1 )α
                              max                                                                  ,     (A1)
                   {ctt ,ctt+1 ,...,ctt+T −1 }                          α
subject to the lifetime budget constraint
                                    T
                                    X                          T
                                                               X
                                          Qt−1+i
                                           t     ct−1+i =             Qt−1+i
                                                                       t     w̃i .                       (A2)
                                    i=1                         i=1

    Here, cts is consumption in period s of a person born in period t, i ∈ 1, . . . T is age, and
w̃i is after-tax endowment. The parameters ai are utility weights and α ≤ 1 is a curvature
parameter which is related to intertemporal substitution, η, by the identity

                                                          1
                                                   η≡        .
                                                         1−α

The term Qkt , defined by the expression

                                                 k
                                                 Y      1
                                       Qkt ≡               ,          Qtt = 1,
                                                        Rj
                                                j=t+1

is the relative price at date t of a commodity for delivery at date k.
    This optimization problem includes the case of a constant discount factor β for which


                                    [a1 , a2 . . . , aT ] = 1, β, . . . , β T −1
                                                                                


and logarithmic preferences which is the limiting case when α → 0. We permit the discount
factor to vary with age to nest the Kehoe and Levine (1983) example which we use to cross-check
our results.

Proposition 2. The solution to Problem 1 is given by

                                        aηk
                                        PT        t−1+i
                                                            
                                           i=1 Qt       w̃i
                   ĉtt−1+k   =        η P                     ,                   k = 1, . . . , T.   (A3)
                                              T      t−1+i 1−η η
                                 Qt−1+k
                                                            
                                  t           i=1 Qt          ai

where ĉtt−1+k denotes the consumption, at time t − 1 + k, of an agent born at time t.

Proof. The result follows directly from substituting the first-order conditions into the budget
constraint and rearranging terms.                                                                          
                                                         25
A.2. Non-generic optimization problems. Let j be an index that runs from 1 to T − 1.
Consider a non-generic person born in period 1 − j with real assets ν 1−j ≡ λ1−j b1 who lives for
T − j periods. This person solves Problem 2

Problem 2.

                            aT −j+1 (c1−j α           1−j α              1−j
                                      1 ) + aT −j+2 (c2 ) + . . . + aT (c1−j+T −1 )
                                                                                   α
            max                                                                        ,   j = 1...,T − 1
   {c1−j
     1   ,...,c1−j
               1−j+T −1 }
                                                          α
                                                                                                        (A4)
subject to the lifetime budget constraint

                                  (1−j)+T −1                          
                                               Qk1 c1−j
                                     X
                                                    k   − w̃ k−(1−j)+1   ≤ λ1−j b1 ,                    (A5)
                                     k=1

Proposition 3. Let k ∈ {1, . . . , T − j}. The solution to Problem 2 is given by
                                      P −j i         
                     aηk+j ν 1−j + Ti=1      Qt w̃j+i
             ĉ1−j
               k   =           η P                    , k = 1 . . . 1 − j + T − 1.                    (A6)
                      Qt+k−1          T −j  i 1−η aη
                                             
                        t             i=1 Qt        j+i


Proof. The problem above is identical to a generic one solved by an agent who has T − j periods
to live, whose endowments are {w̃j+1 + ν 1−j , w̃j+2 , . . . , w̃T }, and whose preference parameters
in the utility function are {aj+1 , aj+2 , . . . , aT }.                                                    

               Appendix B. Conditions for local uniqueness of equilibrium

     To find conditions under which equilibrium sequences remain bounded, we exploit the
properties of the Jordan decomposition of J, which we write as


                                                     J = QΛQ−1 ,                                        (B1)


where Λ is an upper triangular matrix with the eigenvalues of J on the diagonal and Q is the
matrix of left eigenvectors of J. The restrictions that prevent Xt from becoming unbounded are
found by premultiplying X̃T −2 by the rows of Q−1 associated with the unstable eigenvalues of
J and equating the product to zero. We refer to the matrix that contains these rows as Q−1
                                                                                        u .
                                                                                           15


     Let K be the number of eigenvalues of J that lie outside the unit circle. The requirement
that equilibrium sequences remain bounded places K linear restrictions on the initial vector


  15 In practice, the Jordan decomposition is numerically unstable but there are several good computational
methods to compute Q−1 u that are implemented in all modern programming languages. The reader is referred to
Golub and VanLoan (1996) for a description of the algorithms used to solve problems of this kind and to Farmer
(1999) for an accessible introduction to solution methods for rational expectations models with indeterminate
equilibria.
                                                           26
XT −2 which we express with the matrix equation


                                               Q−1
                                                u XT −2 = 0,                                            (B2)


where Qu is a K × 2T − 3 matrix.
     The function GT (·) depends not only on Z0T but also on the initial nominal wealth dis-
tribution L. To ensure that our local analysis remains valid we first compute the steady state
distribution of wealth from the equation16


                            ν 1−j = R̄s2−j
                                       1 (R̄, R̄, . . . , R̄),        j = 1, . . . , T − 1,             (B3)


and we use the identity,
                                                            ν 1−j
                                                λ1−j ≡            ,                                     (B4)
                                                               b̄
to recover the steady-state values of λ1−j . In what follows we set the initial asset shares to
these steady state values.
     Let GX , GY be the Jacobians of the function GT (·) with respect to XT −2 and YT −2 eval-
uated at the steady-state equilibrium {R̄, b̄} and let X̃T −2 , ỸT −2 be deviations of these vectors
from their steady-state values. Using this notation, the predetermined equilibrium conditions
place the following 2T − 5 restrictions on the 3T − 6 unknowns Z0T ≡ [XT −2 , YT −2 ].


                                         GX X̃T −2 + GY ỸT −2 = 0.                                     (B5)


     The uniqueness of equilibrium then comes down to the question of the number of solutions
to the equations
                           (2T −5+K)×(3T −6) (3T −6)×1 (2T−5+K)×(3T−6)
                                 GX GY            X̃              Ḡ
                                              T −2  =             ,                               (B6)
                                Qu−1   0          ỸT −2          0

where Ḡ 6= 0 represents the perturbations of the initial wealth distribution L from its steady-
state value. It follows immediately that a sufficient condition for the existence of a unique
equilibrium is that the matrix                                        
                                                      GX       GY
                                           M≡                         ,                               (B7)
                                                      Q−1
                                                       u         0
is square and non singular.




   16Here, s1−j is the savings function defined in Equation (5) evaluated at the steady state sequence of real
            1
interest rates.
                                                       27
    If K > T − 1 then M has more rows than columns and, except for the special case where
the rows of M are linearly dependent, Equation (B6) has no solution.
    If K = T − 1 then M is square. If M also has full row rank, there exists a unique solution
to this equation given by the expression
                                                                         
                                         XT −2                         Ḡ
                                                   = M−1                 .                       (B8)
                                           YT −2                        0

    Finally, if K ≤ T − 1 then M has fewer rows than columns. In this case we are free to
append a (T − 1 − K) × (3T − 6) matrix of linear restrictions to Equation (B6). For example,
if T − 1 − K = 1 we can append a row that sets


                                                     b1 = b̄1 .                                      (B9)




               Appendix C. Appendix: Inflation Under a Taylor Rule

    In this Appendix we derive equations that characterize the behaviour of the inflation rate
when the Taylor Rule is passive and when it is active.

C.1. The case of a passive Taylor Rule. Using the Taylor rule to substitute for 1 + it in
the Fisher parity condition yields the following difference equation for inflation
                                                  η
                                     R̄         Πt
                       Πt+1 =                             Πt ,     for all      t = 1, . . . ∞       (C1)
                                    Rt+1        Π̄

which we linearize around a steady state to obtain


                      Π̃t+1 = (1 + η) Π̃t − κR̃t+1 ,              for all     t = 1, . . . , ∞.      (C2)


Here, κ ≡ Π̄/R̄ and the tilde denotes deviations from the steady state. Iterating Equation (C2)
we obtain
                                                                        T
                                                                              (1 + η)T −s R̃T +1 .
                                                                        X
                   lim Π̃T +1 = lim (1 + η)T Π̃1 − lim                                               (C3)
                  T →∞          T →∞                             T →∞
                                                                        s=1

This is Equation (11) in Section 8.2.

C.2. The case of an active Taylor Rule. To find conditions under which inflation is bounded
when the Taylor Rule is active, we use Equation C2 to write the inflation rate at date t as a




                                                          28
function of all future real interest rates and all future inflation rates,
                                   +∞      s                   T
                                   X     1                    1
                           Π̃t = κ             R̃t+s + lim           Π̃t+T .               (C4)
                                        1+η           T −→∞ 1 + η
                                 s=1

If inflation is bounded, and if the Taylor Rule is active, the second term on the right side of
Equation (12) is zero. Evaluating Equation (C4) at t = 1, we arrive the following expression
for the initial gross inflation rate.
                                                   +∞      s
                                                 X     1
                                Π̃1 ≡ Π̃1 − Π̄ = κ             R̃1+s                       (C5)
                                                        1+η
                                                    s=1

Using the definition of inflation in period 1, Equation (C5) places the following restriction on
the initial price level,
                                               +∞      s            !
                                               X     1              
                              p1 = p0   Π̄ + κ             R1+s − R̄ .                     (C6)
                                                    1+η
                                             s=1

This is Equation (12) in Section 8.2.
     




                                                   29
                                       References

Aiyagari, S. R. (1985): “Observational Equivalence of the Overlapping Generations and the
  Discounted Dynamic Programming Frameworks for One-sector Growth,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory, 35, 202–221.
Auerbach, A. and L. Kotlikoff (1987): Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.
Auerbach, A. J. (2003): “Fiscal Policy, Past and Present,” Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 34, 75–138.
Azariadis, C. (1981): “Self-fulfilling Prophecies,” Journal of Economic Theory, 25, 380–396.
Azariadis, C., J. Bullard, A. Singh, and J. Suda (2015): “Optimal Monetary Policy at
  the Zero Lower Bound,” Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis WP Series, 1–47.
Balasko, Y. and K. Shell (1981): “The overlapping-generations model. II. The case of pure
  exchange with money,” Journal of Economic Theory, 24, 112–142.
Bassetto, M. and W. Cui (2018): “The fiscal theory of the price level in a world of low
  interest rates,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 89, 5–22.
Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2001): “The Perils of Taylor Rules,”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 96, 40–69.
Blanchard, O. J. (1985): “Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons,” Journal of Political Economy,
  93, 223–247.
Blanchard, O. J. and C. M. Kahn (1980): “The Solution of Linear Difference Models
  Under Rational Expectations,” Econometrica, 48, 1305–1311.
Buiter, W. H. (2002): “The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level: A Critique,” The Economic
  Journal, 112, 459–480.
——— (2017): “The Fallacy of the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level Once More,” CDEP-CGEG
  Working Paper Series.
Castañeda, A., J.-D. Giménez, and J. V. Rı́os-Rull (2003): “Accounting for the US
  Earnings and Wealth Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, 111, 818–857.
Cochrane, J. (2005): “Money as Stock,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 501–528.
——— (2018): “Stepping on a Rake: The Fiscal Theory of Monetary Policy,” European Eco-
  nomic Review, 101, 354–375.
Cochrane, J. H. (2019): The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level, Unpublished: Retrieved
  3/10/2019.
Eggertsson, G. B., N. R. Mehrota, and J. A. Robbins (2019): “A Model of Secular
  Stagnation: Theory and Quantitative Evaluation,” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, 11, 1–48.
Farmer, R. E. A. (1986): “Deficits and Cycles,” Journal of Economic Theory, 40, 77–88.
——— (1999): The Macroeconomics of Self-Fulfilling Prophecies, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
  second ed.
Farmer, R. E. A., V. Khramov, and G. Nicolò (2015): “Solving and Estimating Indeter-
  minate DSGE Models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control., 54, 17–36.
Farmer, R. E. A. and M. Woodford (1997): “Self-fulfilling Prophecies and the Business
  Cycle,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1, 740–769.


                                             30
Farmer, R. E. A. and P. Zabczyk (2018): “The Household Fallacy,” Economics Letters,
  169, 83–86.
Gale, D. (1973): “Pure exchange equilibrium of dynamic economic models,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory, 6, 12–36.
Golub, G. H. and C. F. VanLoan (1996): Matrix Computations, Baltimore, Maryland: The
  Johns Hopkins University Press, third ed.
Guckenheimer, J. and P. Holmes (1983): Nonlinear Oscillations, Dynamical Systems and
  Bifurcations of Vector Fields, Springer.
Guvenen, F., F. Karahan, S. Ozkan, and J. Song (2015): “What Do Data on Millions
  of U.S. Workers Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Risk?” Working Paper 20913, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Kehoe, T. J. and D. K. Levine (1983): “Indeterminacy of Relative Prices in Overlapping
  Generations Models,” Unpublished MIT Working Paper no. 313.
——— (1985): “Comparative Statics and Perfect Foresight in Infinite Horizon Economies,”
  Econometrica, 53, 433–453.
Kubler, F. and K. Schmedders (2011): “Lifecycle Portfolio Choice, the Wealth Distribution
  and Asset Prices,” University of Zurich, mimeo.
Leeper, E. M. (1991): “Equilibria Under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal Policies,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 129–147.
Martin, A. and J. Ventura (2011): “Theoretical Notes on Bubbles and the Current Crisis,”
  IMF Economic Review, 59, 6–40.
——— (2012): “Economic Growth with Bubbles,” American Economic Review, 102, 3033–3058.
McCallum, B. T. (1981): “Price Level Determinacy With an Interest Rate Policy Rule and
  Rational Expectations,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 8, 319–329.
——— (1999): “Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules,” in Handbook of Macroeco-
  nomics, Vol. 1C, ed. by J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 1483–
  1530.
——— (2001): “Indeterminacy, Bubbles, and the Fiscal Theory of Price Level Determination,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 47, 19–30.
——— (2003): “Is the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level Learnable?” Scottish Journal of Political
  Economy, 50, 634–639.
McCallum, B. T. and E. Nelson (2005): “Monetary and Fiscal Theories of the Price Level:
  The Irreconcilable Differences,” Oxford Review of Economic Poicy, 21, 565–583.
Miao, J. and P. Wang (2012): “Bubbles and Total Factor Productivity,” American Economic
  Review: Papers and Proceedings, 102, 82–87.
Miao, J., P. Wang, and Z. Xu (2012): “Stock Market Bubbles and Unemployment,” Boston
  University mimeo.
Niepelt, D. (2004): “The Fiscal Myth of the Price Level*,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 119, 277–300.
Reichlin, P. (1992): “Endogenous Cycles with Long-Lived Agents,” Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control, 16, 243–266.
Rı́os-Rull, J. V. and V. Quadrini (1997): “Understanding the US Distribution of Wealth,”
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 21, 22–36.

                                              31
Rı́os-Rull, V. (1996): “Life-Cycle Economies and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 63, 465–489.
Samuelson, P. A. (1958): “An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest With or Without
  the Social Contrivance of Money,” Journal of Political Economy, 66, 467–482.
Sargent, T. J. and N. Wallace (1975): “’Rational’ Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
  Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,” Journal of Political Economy, 83, 241–
  254.
Sims, C. A. (1994): “A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price Level and
  the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Economic Theory, 4, 381–399.
——— (2001): “Solving Linear Rational Expectations Models,” Journal of Computational Eco-
  nomics, 20, 1–20.
Taylor, J. B. (1999): “An Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in Monetary Policy
  Rules, ed. by J. B. Taylor, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 319–341.
Tirole, J. (1985): “Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations,” Econometrica, 53, 1499–
  1528.
Woodford, M. (1994): “Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-in-Advance
  Economy,” Economic Theory, 4, 345–380.
Yi, K.-M. and J. Zhang (2017): “Understanding Global Trends in Long-run Real Interest
  Rates,” Economic Perspectives, 1–20.




                                            32
